1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 11-01093
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The action is based on foreign
influence security concerns raised by Applicant’s ties or connections to India, the
country of his birth. Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns. Accordingly, as discussed below, this case is decided for
Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense
Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to
the Directive. 
 Appellate Exhibit I. 2
 Exhibit 3. 3
 Tr. 29–34. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on June 8, 2011. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint, and it detailed the
factual basis for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline B for foreign
influence.   
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel then exercised his prerogative
under the Directive and timely requested a hearing.  The case was assigned to me2
August 12, 2011. The hearing took place October 19, 2011. The hearing transcript (Tr.)
was received October 27, 2011.
Procedural Matters
I took administrative or official notice of certain facts concerning the country of
India per Department Counsel’s written request.  At hearing, I deferred ruling on3
Applicant’s relevance objection to certain parts of the request.  The relevance objection4
is now overruled. Although the contested matters are not relevant to Applicant’s
particular ties to India, the matters are relevant to the general or overall security
situation in India, which is relevant in foreign influence cases such as this one. The facts
taken notice of are set out below in the findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact
As alleged in the SOR, Applicant admitted the following facts: (1) his parents and
brother are citizens and residents of India; (2) his parents-in-law and brother-in-law are
citizens and residents of India; and (3) he has a bank account in India valued at
approximately U.S. $25,000. His admissions are accepted and adopted and
incorporated herein as findings of fact. In addition, the following findings of fact are
supported by substantial evidence.  
 Exhibit 1. 5
 Exhibit 2. 6
 Exhibit 1. 7
 Tr. 71–72. 8
 Tr. 72. 9
3
Applicant is a 37-year-old information technology (IT) consultant for a
multinational technology and consulting corporation headquartered in the United States.
He is seeking an industrial security clearance for the first time, completing an
application in August 2010.  A native of India, he immigrated to the United States in5
1999 on a work visa, he obtained resident alien status in about 2004, and he became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2010. He has surrendered his Indian passport to an Indian
Consulate in the United States, and the passport was cancelled and returned to him.6
He obtained a U.S. passport a few months after his naturalization.  7
Applicant married his wife in 2000, and they have two children, ages seven and
nine, both native-born U.S. citizens. His annual salary is about $112,000. His wife is
also a native of India. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2010. She is employed
as an elementary school teacher for a public school district. She earns an annual salary
of about $47,000 teaching math and science. They own a rental property that generates
an income of about $5,000 to $6,000 annually. Their long-term plans are to remain in
the United States, which is the decision they made when they became U.S. citizens.8
Their desire is to raise and educate their children here, and they have done their
financial planning with that goal in mind.9
Outside of work, both Applicant and his wife are “soccer parents” and are also
active in their church. They have taught Sunday school classes for two-year-old children
and participated in volunteer activities. Applicant has served as a deacon for the past
two years, which involves him in the church’s decision-making process. 
Applicant’s educational background includes a bachelor’s degree from an Indian
technology institute. Employed as an IT consultant, he came to the United States in
1999 on assignment for his then employer, an Indian consulting company that was
providing services to a U.S. telecom company. He changed jobs about a year later in
2000, when he accepted a position as a software consultant with another firm. He
worked for that firm and then its successor in interest until March 2006, when he began
his current job. As an IT consultant, he works as a member of a business development
team, and his primary customers are the military departments (e.g., Air Force, Army,
etc.). In addition to his employment history, Applicant pursued graduate education in the
United States. He earned an MBA from a U.S. technical university in 2006.  
Concerning Applicant’s family ties to India, his mother and father are both
citizens and residents of India. His father is a retired nurse and has been retired for
 Tr. 50–51. 10
4
several years. His mother has always been a homemaker. Applicant has regular
telephone calls with his parents about two to three times monthly. He has two brothers,
one of whom is a citizen and resident of India. That brother is employed as a project
manager for an IT company in India. His other brother lives in the United Kingdom and
is employed in the healthcare field. His contact with both brothers is about three
telephone calls annually. 
Applicant’s parents-in-law and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of India
as well. His father-in-law is employed as a dean of a management college. His mother-
in-law has always been a homemaker. His brother-in-law is employed as an IT
consultant for an Indian company. Applicant has little contact with his parents-in-law, but
his wife has regular (one to two per month) telephone calls with her parents. His contact
with his brother-in-law is more frequent, perhaps 8 to 15 telephone calls annually. 
In addition to telephone calls, Applicant has traveled to India for family visits. He
made trips in 2000 (for his wedding), 2004, 2005, and 2009, for which the primary
purpose was to visit family. 
None of Applicant’s family members in India are employed by or affiliated with
the Indian government or military. His practice is to never mention that his work involves
the U.S. military departments or the Defense Department. None of his family members,
aside from his wife, know that he has applied for a security clearance. 
Applicant has maintained a savings account with an Indian bank since about
1999. The account is held jointly with his father. Initially, he established the account to
provide some financial assistance to his parents. He stopped making deposits into the
account in about 2003, and his father has since repaid the money. There were no
transactions on the account for the last several years, and he has never used the
account on his trips to India. He disclosed the account in his security clearance
application. He indicated in his reply to the SOR that he intended to close the account
and move the money to the United States. At hearing, he explained that he has not
closed the account for two main reasons: (1) he assessed the tax implications of moving
the money from India to the United States as too costly; and (2) he considers the money
an emergency fund for his parents in the event they would need such assistance.  The10
present value of the account is about U.S. $25,000. His long-term plan is to close the
account and bring the money to the United States upon the passing of his parents. 
Other than this bank account, neither Applicant nor his wife has business,
financial, or property interests in India, as all such matters are in the United States.
Their U.S. financial interests consist, in general terms, of the following: a primary
residence, owned since 2006, with a market value of about $250,000 and equity of
about $90,000; a rental property (a duplex) with a market value of about $150,000 and
equity of about $40,000; cash accounts worth about $80,000; retirement and other
investment accounts worth about $220,000; and about $20,000 in college savings
 Tr. 46–50. 11
 Tr. 75. 12
 Exhibits A and B. 13
 Exhibit B. 14
 The facts about India have been gleaned from Department Counsel’s request to take administrative notice15
and decisions from other judges in cases involving foreign influence and India. E.g.,  ISCR  Case No. 09-
04312 (Foreman, J., Apr. 20, 2011). 
5
accounts for their children.  Including the home equity and the Indian bank account,11
their financial assets total about $475,000, of which $450,000, about 95 percent, is
located in the United States.12
Applicant presented letters of recommendation from two coworkers, both of
whom are retired field grade U.S. military officers.  Both letters are highly favorable and13
both assess Applicant as a suitable candidate for a security clearance. For example, a
retired Air Force colonel, who has worked closely with Applicant for the past two years,
believes that Applicant possesses the necessary attributes to properly handle and
safeguard classified information, and he has seen nothing to suggest that Applicant’s
allegiance lies somewhere other than with the United States.14
Concerning Applicant’s country of birth,  India is a multiparty, federal,15
parliamentary democracy with a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Its political
history, since gaining independence from Great Britain in 1947, has included several
armed conflicts with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic
outbreaks of religious riots, and violent attacks by several separatist and terrorist groups
in different parts of the country. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout
the country, including attacks on targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known
to congregate or visit.
India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in
international affairs. India has always been an active member of the United Nations.
India is a nonpermanent member of the Security Council, and it seeks a permanent seat
on the Security Council.
The United States and India have differences over India’s nuclear weapons
programs, the pace of India’s economic reforms, and India’s bilateral strategic
partnership with Iran. Nevertheless, the United States recognizes that India is important
to U.S. strategic interests. The strategic partnership between the United States and
India is based on shared values such as democracy, pluralism, and the rule of law.
Since 2002, the United States and India have held a series of substantive combined
exercises involving all military services.
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to16
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.17
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 18
6
The United States is India’s largest foreign investment partner. Since December
2006, direct civilian nuclear commerce with India has been permitted. The two countries
have a common interest in the free flow of commerce and resources, including through
the vital sea lanes of the Indian Ocean.
The United States and India share a common interest in fighting terrorism and in
creating a strategically-stable Asia. They are seeking to foster bilateral relations by
establishing working groups to address five areas of mutual interest: (1) strategic
cooperation; (2) energy and climate change; (3) education and development; (4)
economics, trade, and agriculture; and (5) science and technology, health, and
innovation.
In the past, India had long-standing military-supply relationships with the Soviet
Union, and Russia remains India’s largest supplier of military systems and spare parts.
India is one of many countries engaged in economic intelligence collection and industrial
espionage directed at the United States. The United States has long-standing economic
issues with India regarding protection of intellectual property rights and trade in dual-use
technology. There have been numerous incidents of international businesses illegally
exporting, or attempting to export restricted, dual-use technology from the United States
to India.
The Indian Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but there are
serious problems involving abuses by police and security forces. Corruption in the police
force is pervasive, and police officers often act with impunity. Abuses by police and
security forces have occurred primarily in criminal investigations and efforts to suppress
separatist and terrorist groups. There is no evidence that India uses torture or abuse
against its citizens to extract economic intelligence.
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As16
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt17
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An18
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 19
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.23
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 24
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).25
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.26
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 27
7
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  19
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting20
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An21
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate22
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme23
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.24
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.25
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it26
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
The central issue here is does Applicant’s family ties to and financial interest in
India, his country of birth, disqualify him from eligibility for a security clearance. Under
Guideline B for foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or27
 AG ¶ 6. 28
8
put into doubt due to an applicant’s foreign connections and interests. The overall
concern under the guideline is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.28
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the undisputed
evidence of Applicant’s family ties to and financial interest in India, I have especially
considered the following disqualifying conditions: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business, or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information; and
AG ¶ 7(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or
exploitation. 
The guideline also provides the certain facts and circumstances may mitigate
foreign influence security concerns. Given the evidence here, I have especially
considered the following mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States;
 AG ¶ 6.29
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).30
9
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
AG ¶ 8(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the
individual.
Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult who is enjoying success as an IT
consultant with a large, well-known multinational corporation headquartered in the
United States. He was articulate, serious, candid, and credible at the hearing. He has
lived and worked in the United States since 1999, a period of 12 years, which is a
substantial period for 37-year-old man. He married in 2000, and his wife works as an
elementary school teacher for a public school district. Together, they are involved in
their local community and are raising their children here. The $25,000 in the Indian bank
account is not a minor or trivial sum, but it is a small percentage of their financial assets
and does not result in a conflict of interest. He has the wholehearted support of two
coworkers—both retired field grade U.S. military officers—who vouched for his security
suitability. He exercises discretion in not discussing the nature or details of his work with
his Indian family members. Naturally, he and his wife still have cultural and family ties to
India, which is the world’s largest electoral democracy. But it is evident that they see the
United States as their home, both for their careers and family. Considering the evidence
as a whole, this is not a case of “divided loyalties”  with an applicant who has one foot29
in the United States and one foot in his native country. On the contrary, the evidence
shows Applicant has both feet firmly rooted in the United States. These facts and
circumstances are unlikely to change, they weigh in his favor, and they lead me to
conclude that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential foreign influence or
pressure by either coercive or non-coercive means in favor of the U.S. interest.  
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and
evaluating the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,  I conclude Applicant has30
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Accordingly, I conclude he has met
his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. This case is decided
for Applicant. 
10
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c:  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.       
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
