                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01688 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations concern. He was unable to pay 
his student loans and some smaller debts because he was unable to find a full time job 
for four years. After securing a full time job, he consolidated and paid his student loans 
on time, paid some of his smaller debts, and put his financial house in order. His past 
indebtedness no longer raises a security concern. Clearance is granted. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On July 18, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made a 
preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The basis 
for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which alleges the security 
concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Applicant submitted a response 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
on August 11, 2011 (Answer). He admitted the debts alleged, provided significant 
information in mitigation, and requested a hearing. 
 
 On November 1, 2011, Department Counsel filed its ready-to-proceed. On 
November 8, 2011, the parties agreed to hold the hearing on December 6, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on November 16, 2011, scheduling this matter via video 
teleconference on the previously agreed upon date.2  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel also 
submitted a demonstrative aid, setting forth each of the debts and their current status, 
that was marked and accepted into the record without objection as Hearing Exhibit III. 
Applicant appeared at the hearing and testified on his own behalf. He offered 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. I kept the record open to provide him the opportunity to submit additional 
matters for my consideration. He timely submitted AE D and E, which were also 
admitted without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 14, 2011.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old and has been working since he was 15. He graduated 
from high school in 2000 and attained his associate’s degree in criminal justice in 2009. 
He has been working as a pipefitter for his current employer, a government contractor, 
since October 2010. His current salary is approximately $30,000 per year.4 
 
Applicant was unemployed or underemployed for four years before securing his 
current job. From July 2006 to November 2008, he was only able to find part time work 
as a carpenter. He was then unemployed from December 2008 to September 2010.5  
 
 Applicant has been living with his fiancé since 2008. She has a full time job and 
they are raising their two children, 1 and 2 years old, together as a family. Applicant’s 
fiancé assisted him financially as best she could while he was underemployed and 
unemployed from July 2006 to September 2010.6 
 
2 Applicant did not receive the NOH until a week or so before the hearing. He was prepared to 
proceed and waived the 15-day notice requirement. As a time management tool, on November 21, 2011, 
I issued a prehearing order requiring the parties to serve one another and me their anticipated exhibits 
prior to the hearing. Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
3 I made pen-and-ink changes at 15, 17, 40, in order to correct some minor typographical errors. 
 
4 GE 1; Answer; Tr. at 33-34, 36. 
 
5 GE 1; GE 3, Subject Interview at 3. 
 
6 GE 1; GE 3; Tr. at 36, 42-43. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 The lack of full time employment left Applicant unable to pay his student loans. 
He took out about $30,000 in student loans for his two-year associate’s degree. He 
listed this delinquent student loan debt on his security clearance application and 
discussed it with the investigator during his background interview. He consolidated his 
student loans and has been paying $308 per month for the last seven months. He 
submitted documentary proof of payment.7 This is the major debt alleged in the SOR.8 
 
 Applicant’s non-student loan debts are an old cell phone bill for $612 (¶1.a) and 
two delinquent medical bills for a combined total of about $2,000 (¶¶ 1.j and 1.r). 
Applicant contacted the creditor regarding the old cell phone bill, established a payment 
plan of $120 per month for six months, and paid off this debt. He submitted 
documentary proof regarding the satisfaction of this debt.9  
 
Applicant incurred the two medical bills about four years ago when he broke his 
fibula and had to go to the emergency room. He did not have health insurance at the 
time. He has had a difficult time tracking down the creditor holding these debts. He 
submitted a hardship waiver to the hospital, but the hospital never acted on it. He then 
decided to call the hospital directly in order to pay these bills. The hospital was recently 
able to locate one of the bills. Applicant settled this bill, agreed to a payment plan, and 
submitted documentary proof of payment. He is using the money that was recently freed 
up, after paying his old cell phone bill, to pay his medical debts.10 
 
 Applicant’s outlook on life has changed dramatically with the recent birth of his 
children. He realizes that he has to responsibly handle his finances, in order to provide 
for them and put himself in a position to purchase a home for the family.11 He took over 
the family’s finances from his fiancé, because he discovered that he was better at 
paying their bills on time than his fiancé. He has all their monthly expenses, including 
his student loans, deducted from their bank account each month automatically. He did 
this in order to make sure that the family did not spend any of the money set aside to 
pay their bills on other matters. He has paid off his car loan and convinced his fiancé to 
trade in her vehicle to purchase an older model car outright. This move alone has saved 
the family about $800 a month. He has an additional $20 to $35 in taxes taken out of his 
weekly paycheck, with the expectation that he will receive a large income tax refund that 
7 AE C. See also GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; Answer; Tr. at 30-31, 37.  
 
8 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts, 15 of which are Applicant’s student loans. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 
1.i and 1k – 1q). Applicant has consolidated his student loans. See Answer, Student Loan Statement.  
 
9 GE 2 (payment plan); AE B (proof of payments); GE 5 (new credit report reflects this account is 
paid); Answer; Tr. at 37. See also Tr. at 19-20 (Government stipulates debt has been paid).  
 
10 AE D; AE E; Tr. at 40-42, 53-55; GE 2; GE 3; Answer.  
 
11 See Tr. at 58 (“After becoming a father a lot of things, well basically life started to come into 
play. And how to provide for a family . . . And I’ve kind of got that sense, looking into my kids’ eyes plenty 
of times . . . And I guess it just struck me from there that I have to change and do something for myself to 
provide for my family. And I’ve been, and as you can see, that I’ve been trying my best.”). 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
he will use to satisfy any remaining debts. He has paid his taxes on time, does not have 
credit cards, and has not incurred any additional bad debt.12 
 
Applicant’s fiancé recently suffered a serious medical emergency that resulted in 
increased medical bills for the family. Applicant was able to pay these new medical bills 
and continue paying their monthly expenses on time, including his student loan 
obligation. This recent medical emergency and resulting medical bills did impact 
Applicant’s ability to satisfy his old medical debts.13  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.14 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. “A 
clearance adjudication is an applicant’s opportunity to demonstrate that, prior to being 
12 Tr. at 43-63. See also GE 2, Personal Financial Statement (car expenses use to cost the family 
$855 per month); GE 4 and GE 5 (only bad debts listed on credit reports are those reflected in SOR).  
 
13 Tr. at 59-60.  
 
14 ISCR Case No. 11-00391 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (“Once an applicant’s SOR admissions 
and/or the Government’s evidence raise a security concern, the burden of persuasion shifts to the 
applicant to mitigate the concern.”).  
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
awarded a clearance, he actually possesses the judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness essential to a fiduciary relationship with this country.”15 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18, as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially irresponsible 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s past indebtedness raises this concern 
and establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”16 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. I have considered all the mitigating 
conditions, and find that the following were established by the evidence:  
15 ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011). 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were due to matters beyond his control. He 
incurred medical expenses when he suffered a broken leg and had to go to the 
emergency room. He did not have health insurance at the time and incurred large 
medical bills as a result. He was unable to pay the medical bills and his student loans 
because he was unemployed or underemployed for four years until September 2010. 
Since securing his current full time job, Applicant has responsibly handled his financial 
affairs. He has consolidated his student loans and has been consistently paying them 
for seven months. He satisfied an old cell phone bill and is using the money that was 
freed up from paying this bill to pay his old medical bills. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) apply. 
 
 Applicant has taken several concrete steps to put his financial house in order. He 
has placed his monthly expenses on automatic deduction, which prevents the family 
from spending beyond their means. He has also slashed the family’s living expenses, 
notably their car expenditures. These fiscally responsible steps have provided the family 
additional income to meet unexpected contingencies and satisfy old debts. He is also 
setting aside additional money through his taxes to satisfy his old medical debts.  
 
 Applicant’s newfound sense of fiscal responsibility was recently tested when his 
fiancé suffered a medical emergency. He was able to meet the added financial burdens 
and continued paying the family’s monthly expenses, including his student loans, on a 
timely basis. This unexpected medical emergency did impact Applicant’s ability to 
satisfy his old medical bills. However, he is resolving these debts and has not 
accumulated any other bad debt. He now has the financial means to satisfy his old 
medical bills and, more importantly, a proven track record of fiscal responsibility. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) applies.17 Applicant’s past financial problem no longer raises a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
17 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 09-08108 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2011) (application of mitigating 
conditions not warranted because applicant’s financial trouble due to voluntary decision to switch jobs 
and, as of the close of the record, he had paid only one debt, and only after being sued by the creditor).  
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).18 I incorporate my Guideline F analysis herein and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors. Applicant’s delinquent debts are not a 
result of frivolous spending or other matters that would themselves raise a security 
concern. Instead, his financial problems were due to an unexpected medical emergency 
and excessive student loan debt – neither of which, except that they were delinquent, 
raises a security concern. He has matured greatly with the recent birth of his children. 
He has resolved his financial problems not simply because of the current security issue, 
but because he wants to provide a better life for his children. This provides far greater 
assurance that he will continue to responsibly manage his finances once the spotlight 
from this security review has long passed. He answered the questions posed by the 
Government and myself in a straightforward fashion without making excuses or 
attempting in any way to minimize his role in getting into financial difficulty in the first 
place. These whole-person factors, in conjunction with the mitigating conditions noted 
above, fully mitigate the financial considerations concern. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.r:         For Applicant19 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
18 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
19 SOR ¶ 1.q was withdrawn by the Government at hearing. Tr. at 17-18. 
