 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-02717 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 5, 2010. On 
July 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 2, 2011; answered it in an undated 
document; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on August 31, 2011. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 
 
2 
 
 
22, 2011, and the case was assigned to me on October 6, 2011. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on October 18, 2011, scheduling it for November 9, 2011. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through J, which were admitted without objection. 
I kept the record open until November 30, 2011, to enable Applicant to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX K through P, which were admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX K through P are 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
November 21, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three allegations in the SOR. 
His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old contracting officer employed by a defense contractor. 
He attended college from September 1976 to December 1977 but did not receive a 
degree. After he dropped out of college, he worked in the construction industry, starting 
as a common laborer and rapidly moving up to supervisory positions. He worked as a 
general contractor from January 2000 to December 2006, was unemployed from 
December 2006 to February 2007, and worked as a purchasing manager for a private 
company from February to July 2007. He worked as a project manager for a private 
company from July to December 2007, when the company went out of business. He 
was self-employed as a general contractor from December 2007 to September 2009, 
and unemployed from September 2009 to August 2010, when he began his current 
employment. (GX 1 at 13-19; Tr. 43-44.) He has never held a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant married in May 1978. Two children, ages 30 and 26, were born during 
the marriage. His wife is a licensed massage therapist, but her income last year was 
only about $19,200.  
 
 For most of Applicant’s married life, he relied on his wife to manage the family 
finances, including paying the mortgage and filing the income tax returns, and she did 
so faithfully for about 30 years. During his period of unemployment from September 
2009 to August 2010, he frequently asked his wife about their financial condition. She 
responded that it was “fine” and Applicant did not inquire further. During the past five 
years, she became increasingly unreliable because of her addiction to marijuana. When 
Applicant and his wife went through marriage counseling about two years ago, his wife 
promised to abstain from using marijuana, but she continued to use it. Applicant no 
longer trusts her to do anything. He has assumed responsibility for resolving their 
financial problems. He has moved out of their home, manages his own finances, and 
intends to file separate income tax returns for the current year. (Tr. 82-83.) Applicant 
and his wife intend to live apart for a year and file for divorce. Applicant gives his wife 
$1,000 every other week and sometimes gives her additional funds as needed. (Tr. 25-
26.) 
 
3 
 
 
When Applicant and his wife first began receiving correspondence from the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), his wife told him that it was about a procedural issue, 
and he did not look into it. He discovered in late 2009 or early 2010 that she had not 
filed any of their federal tax returns for tax years 2004 through 2008, and he owed 
$10,882 for tax years 2004 and 2008. He tried to negotiate a payment plan, and he sent 
$500 to the IRS, but he did not make any further payments because he was 
unemployed. (Tr. 50-52.)  
 
In March 2011, Applicant hired a tax resolution firm to negotiate with the IRS. (AX 
C; AX D; AX E.) At the time of the hearing, the firm was preparing an offer in 
compromise to settle his federal tax debt. (Tr. 49-56.) In the meantime, the IRS has 
garnished Applicant’s pay. (Tr. 70.) The IRS has collected $5,530 through garnishment 
and seized Applicant’s $931 tax refund for 2010, leaving a balance due of about $4,368. 
(AX K; AX O; AX P.) 
 
 In March or April 2011, Applicant contacted the state tax authorities about his 
unpaid taxes totaling about $5,526. He has negotiated a payment plan for his delinquent 
state taxes, with an initial payment of $860 followed by $248 per month for 36 months. 
(Tr. 58-59; AX F; AX G; AX L.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife purchased their house in 1984 and were able to keep 
current on their mortgage payments, even after Applicant’s income started declining in 
2004. When he was unemployed, they refinanced the house, took out some equity, and 
brought the payments up to date. At some time in 2008 or 2009, his wife stopped 
making the house payments. The mortgage was foreclosed, the house was sold, and 
the first mortgage was satisfied. The purchaser at the foreclosure sale allowed them to 
rent the house for about a year. The holder of the second mortgage referred the unpaid 
balance of about $24,000 to a collection agency. Applicant negotiated a payment plan 
for the second mortgage and has been making monthly $150 payments to the collection 
agency. Applicant’s wife signed and kept a copy of the payment agreement, but 
Applicant was unable to produce it at the hearing. He did, however, produce 
documentation of the $150 payments. His ability to produce documentation in this case 
was hindered because his wife maintained most of the household financial records, 
which are in disarray, and she still has them in her possession. (Tr. 61-63, 70-71; GX 2 
at 11-12; AX H; AX I; AX K; AX N.) 
 
 Applicant’s current net take-home pay after taxes and the IRS garnishment is 
about $2,200 per month. The IRS garnishment takes about $1,080 per bi-weekly pay 
period. (Tr. 70.) His monthly living expenses are rent ($1,500), groceries ($400), and 
gasoline ($300). He has no car payment. His life insurance and medical insurance are 
deducted from his pay. He has no active credit card accounts. He is using his 401k 
retirement account to pay the delinquent state taxes and second mortgage. He is 
holding some cash in reserve from his retirement account to settle the federal tax debt if 
his offer in compromise is accepted. (Tr. 72-74.)  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) testified on his behalf and submitted a 
written testimonial to his good character. The FSO testified that Applicant has been 
open and straightforward about his financial and marital problems. He describes 
Applicant as reliable, trustworthy, and loyal; and he strongly endorses granting 
Applicant a clearance. (Tr. 31-33; AX J.) 
 
 A rear admiral with 28 years of service in the U.S. Navy, who has known 
Applicant for more than eight years, submitted a testimonial to his character. The 
admiral states that Applicant has exceptionally high values and moral integrity. He 
states that Applicant has been open and forthright about his financial problems, that he 
has addressed his financial problems directly and aggressively, that his fitness for a 
security clearance has been “battle tested,” and that he has passed the test with flying 
colors. (AX M.) 
 
 A program manager for a major U.S. Navy program, who has known Applicant 
for more than 20 years, describes Applicant as a “consummate patriot,” with high 
integrity and honesty. He has “absolutely no hesitation” in recommending that Applicant 
be granted a security clearance. (AX A.) A vice-president of a construction company, 
who was Applicant’s immediate supervisor from 1990 to 1999, describes him as an 
“honest, sincere, hard-working, and devoted employee.” (AX B.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly  
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s financial history is established by his credit reports, his admissions in 
his security clearance application, his responses to the SOR, and his testimony at the 
hearing. The evidence establishes three disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
 
6 
 
 
meeting financial obligations”); and AG ¶ 19(g) (“failure to file annual Federal, state, or 
local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same”).  
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts that are not yet fully resolved. However, now that he has 
discovered his wife’s mismanagement, taken over the responsibility for financial 
management, and is on his way toward resolving his delinquent debts, they are unlikely 
to recur. His responsible approach to his financial problems allays any doubt about his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) is 
established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s periods of 
unemployment and reduced income were circumstances beyond his control, but they 
did not cause the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. However, his wife’s marijuana 
use and financial mismanagement were circumstances beyond his control, and he has 
reacted responsibly. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
has obtained professional assistance to resolve his tax delinquencies, and all three 
debts alleged in the SOR are being resolved. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(c) is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has a 
realistic plan to resolve his delinquent debts and has taken significant steps to execute 
it. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
 
7 
 
 
mitigating condition is not applicable, because Applicant has not disputed any of the 
debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult with a reputation for integrity and honesty. He was 
embarrassed, sincere, and credible at the hearing. His wife’s drug abuse, their marital 
breakup, and the related financial issues were heavy blows, but he has reacted with 
dignity, integrity, and good judgment.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
