KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that Applicant’s Pakistani relatives, his contacts with them, and
the geopolitical situation of that country raised Guideline B security concerns that were not
mitigated.  The Judge’s conclusions are supported by the record evidence.  Adverse decision
affirmed. 
CASE NO: 11-01920.a1
DATE: 12/08/2011
DATE: December 8, 2011
In Re:
-------------------------------- 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-01920
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 22, 2011, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On September 27, 2011, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Robert E. Coacher denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider all of
the record evidence; whether the Judge mis-weighed the record evidence; and whether the Judge’s
adverse security clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm. 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a consultant for a
Defense contractor.  Born in Pakistan, he came to the U.S. in the early 1980s to pursue his education,
receiving a Master’s and a Ph.D.  Applicant became a U.S. citizen in the early 2000s.  He has voted
in U.S. elections since becoming a citizen and has performed jury duty.  His daughter and her family
reside in the U.S.
Applicant has several relatives who are citizens and residents of Pakistan–two siblings and
two step-siblings.  Applicant has an in-law who is retired from the Pakistani military, having held
a high rank.  Applicant has visited Pakistan twice in the mid to late 2000s.  Applicant communicates
with his relatives with varying degrees of frequency–from monthly to once every year or two. 
Pakistan has supported the U.S. in its war on terror.  However, terrorist groups operate from
within its border, and several areas are terrorist safe havens.  American citizens visiting that country
have been kidnaped and held for ransom, and the human rights situation of Pakistan is poor.  
In the Analysis portion of the Decision, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s Pakistani
relatives, his contacts with them, and the geopolitical situation of that country raised Guideline B
security concerns.  He further concluded that Applicant had not fully mitigated the security concerns
raised.    
Applicant contends that the Judge failed to consider all of the record evidence.  He cites to
several pieces of evidence, including evidence that his relatives are not affiliated with any political
group, that his in-law who is a retired military officer is not affiliated with the government, as well
as evidence of Applicant’s academic attainments and his character references.  However, a Judge
is presumed to have considered all of the record evidence.  Applicant cites to nothing that would
tend to rebut that presumption, nor to anything that would establish that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-
07080 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2011).  
Applicant’s admissions, and the Judge’s unchallenged findings, regarding Applicant’s family
contacts in Pakistan, that country’s human rights record, the presence of terrorist activity there, and
1See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (In a Foreign Influence case, the presence of
terrorist activity in a foreign country is an important consideration that “must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate
conclusions in the case.”)  See also ISCR Case No. 03-26176 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2005), for discussion of security
significance of in-laws in a foreign country.     
other geopolitical factors support the Judge’s decision.1  The Judge examined the relevant data and
articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the
facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
