 
1 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 11-00068 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B (Foreign Influence). Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 2, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline B. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On May 10, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.1 On August 28, 2011, the Government 
compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 6. In Item 6, the Government requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Afghanistan and provided official U.S. 
documents as reference materials.  
 
On September 6, 2011, DOHA forwarded to the Applicant a copy of the FORM 
with instructions to submit any additional information and objections within 30 days of 
receipt. Applicant received the FORM on September 20, 2011. Applicant did not submit 
a response. The Government’s exhibits in the FORM are admitted into the record, and 
the request for administrative notice is granted. The facts administratively noticed are 
set out below in the findings of fact. The case was assigned to me on November 29, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations. The allegations assert that Applicant has a 
mother, two sisters, and a cousin who were citizens and residents of Afghanistan and 
that she sends her mother $100 to $200 every one or two months to help support her. 
Applicant admitted each of the SOR allegations. Her admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact.2 
 
Applicant’s Background and Foreign Contacts 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor. She has 
worked for her current employer since December 2009. She attended two schools in 
Canada between September 1997 and July 2000. During that time period, she obtained 
a high school diploma or equivalent certificate in July 1998 and a travel and tourism 
diploma in September 2000. She is married and has three sons, ages 23, 26, and 28. 
This is the first time that she has sought to obtain a security clearance.3  
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan. In 1982, she married in Afghanistan. This was 
an unarranged marriage. During an interview, she indicated that her family attempted to 
kill her and her husband in 1982. Specifically, she stated that her older sister attempted 
to kill her by physically assaulting her. Details of the assault are unknown. The attempt 
on her life was apparently because of her unarranged marriage, although the 
documents in the FORM do not explicitly state the reason for the assault upon her. After 
                                                          
1 Item 2.  
 
2 Items 1, 2. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
that incident, she lived with her husband’s family for about a year or two. In mid-1983 or 
1984, she and her husband lived in their own home in Afghanistan.4 
 
In 1994, Applicant, her husband, and their children fled Afghanistan because of a 
war. They first lived in Pakistan. In 1995, they moved to Canada. She became a 
Canadian citizen (date unknown). Her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) dated December 14, 2009, reflects that she started living in the 
United States in October 2000. She first lived in State A for about three years, moved to 
State B where her home was foreclosed in about 2009, and then moved to State C. She 
became a U.S. citizen in May 2009 and currently has a U.S. passport. She stated that 
she has no foreign business, financial, or property interests and indicated that she has 
cars and bank accounts in the United States valued at about $85,300.5 
 
 Applicant was issued a Canadian passport in February 2005. In December 2009, 
she canceled her Canadian passport at the Canadian Embassy in Washington, DC. She 
initially thought that she had renounced her Canadian citizenship by canceling her 
Canadian passport. She later was informed that such action did not result in the 
renunciation of her Canadian citizenship. During her Office of Personnel Management 
interview in July 2010, she indicated that she intended to go to a Canadian consulate to 
renounce her Canadian citizenship because she is now a U.S. citizen. No 
documentation was provided to confirm that she had renounced her Canadian 
citizenship.6 
 
 Applicant’s husband and children were born in Afghanistan. In her e-QIP, she 
listed that her husband was a Canadian citizen. During a special interview in March 
2010, she stated that he became a U.S. citizen that month. No documents in the FORM 
confirm that he is a U.S. citizen. He currently operates a martial arts studio in State C. 
Her three children are Canadian citizens, but possess U.S. green cards. She indicated 
that they have not become U.S. citizens because they are lazy and are waiting for her to 
fill out the paperwork for them. Her youngest son is attending college in State B. Her 
two eldest sons work with their father in the martial arts studio.7  
 
 Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. She is a 69-year-old 
housewife. After her family attempted to kill her, Applicant had no contact with her 
mother from 1982 to 2006. In 2006, Applicant returned to Afghanistan for a two-month 
vacation and saw her mother about two or three times each week during that vacation. 
Her cousin, who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan, takes care of her mother. From 
2006 to present, Applicant has had telephonic contact with her cousin approximately 
once every one or two months to talk about her mother, but she rarely speaks directly to 
                                                          
4 Item 4, 5.  
 
5 Id. Applicant’s OPM interview indicated that she moved to Canada in 1997. 
 
6 Id.  
 
7 Id.  
 
 
4 
 
 
her mother. Since 2006, she has sent approximately $100 to $200 every month or two 
to her cousin or younger sister for her mother’s support. The maximum she has sent for 
her mother was $500. She sends the money through an established financial institution. 
In her e-QIP, she indicated that her father disappeared in 1979, and she does not know 
whether he is alive. The nature of her father’s employment is unknown.8 
 
 Applicant had a brother and sister who were killed in 1990. Details of their deaths 
are unknown. Her two living sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Since her 
older sister attempted to kill her in 1982, she has had no contact with her. The only 
information that she receives about her older sister comes from either her cousin or 
younger sister. In 2004, Applicant traveled to Pakistan for two weeks and met with her 
younger sister. Her next contact with her younger sister was when she met with her in 
Afghanistan in 2006. Since 2006, she has telephone contact with her younger sister 
when she calls her cousin about every month or two. Her two sisters are housewives 
and have never worked for the Afghan Government. No information is contained in the 
FORM about her brothers-in-law.9 
 
 Applicant’s mother, younger sister, and cousin do not know that she is working in 
Afghanistan. If they knew that she was there, they would likely ask her for more money. 
She indicated that she would not be in danger if they learned that she was there.10  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is deceased. Her father-in-law is a citizen and resident 
of Canada. She does not know what type of job her father-in-law holds. Her sister-in-law 
is a citizen and resident of the United Kingdom.11 
  
Applicant presented no reference letters or work performance appraisals that 
would tend to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. She has worked in 
Afghanistan as a translator, but submitted no information regarding the circumstances 
under which she provided those services. Since she elected to have her case decided 
without a hearing, I was unable to evaluate in person her credibility, demeanor, or 
character.12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 Id.  
 
9 Id.  
 
10 Item 5.  
 
11 Items 4, 5.  
 
12 Id.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Afghanistan13 
 
 Afghanistan has been an independent nation since 1919, after the British 
relinquished control. A monarchy ruled until a military coup in 1973. Following a Soviet-
supported coup in 1978, a Marxist government emerged. In December 1979, Soviet 
forces invaded and occupied Afghanistan. Afghan freedom fighters, known as 
Mujaheddin, opposed the communist regime. The resistance movement eventually led 
to an agreement known as the Geneva Accords, signed by Afghanistan, Pakistan, the 
United States, and the Soviet Union, which ensured Soviet forces withdrew by February 
1989.  
 
The Mujaheddin were not a party to the negotiations for the Accords and refused 
to accept them. As a result, a civil war continued after the Soviet withdrawal. In the mid-
1990s, the Taliban rose to power largely due to anarchy and the division of the country 
among warlords that arose after the Soviet withdrawal. The Taliban sought to impose an 
extreme interpretation of Islam on the entire country and committed massive human 
rights violations. The Taliban also provided sanctuary to Osama Bin-Laden since the 
mid-1990s, to Al Qaida generally, and to other terrorist organizations. 
 
 After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, the Taliban rejected U.S. 
demands to expel Bin-Laden and his followers from Afghanistan. U.S. forces and a 
coalition partnership commenced military operations in October 2001 that forced the 
Taliban out of power in November 2001. After a few years of control by an interim 
government, the first democratic election took place in 2004, and a second round took 
place in 2009. Despite progress made since the Taliban was disposed, Afghanistan still 
faces many daunting challenges. Among these challenges are: defeating terrorists and 
insurgents; recovering from over three decades of civil strife; and rebuilding a shattered 
physical, economic, and political infrastructure.  
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record remains poor. Human rights problems 
included extrajudicial killings; torture and other abuse; poor prison conditions; 
widespread official impunity; ineffective government investigations of abuses by local 
security forces; arbitrary arrest and detention; prolonged pretrial detention; judicial 
corruption; violations of privacy rights; restrictions on freedom of the press; limits on 
freedom of assembly; restrictions on freedom of religion, including on religious 
conversions; limits on freedom of movement; official corruption; violence and societal 
                                                          
13 Item 6. The following official U.S. Government documents were used to provide the factual summary on 
Afghanistan quoted in this decision: U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, December 
6, 2010 (13 pages); U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country Specific Information: 
Afghanistan, November 12, 2010 (8 pages); U.S. Department of State, 2010 Human Rights Report: 
Afghanistan, April 8, 2011 (25 pages); Director of National Intelligence, Statement for the Record on the 
Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community for the House Permanent Committee 
on Intelligence, February 10, 2011 (34 pages); U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 
2009, Chapter 5 – Terrorist Safe Havens and Tactics and Tools for Disrupting or Eliminating Safe 
Havens, August 5, 2010 (15 pages); and U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel 
Warning: Afghanistan, March 8, 2011 (3 pages). Footnotes in the quoted text were omitted. 
 
 
6 
 
 
discrimination against women; sexual abuse of children; abuses against minorities; 
trafficking in persons; abuse of worker rights and child labor. There were numerous 
reports of the government – or its agents – committing arbitrary or unlawful killings.  
 
Despite some tactical defeats and operational setbacks in 2010, the Taliban-led 
insurgency continues to threaten U.S. and international goals in Afghanistan. The 
insurgents retain the capability and intent to conduct high-profile attacks that have had a 
disproportionate effect on local and international perceptions of security. Although there 
have been some improvements in the Afghan military and police forces, progress is 
slow and uneven. Predatory corruption – extortion, land seizures, illegal checkpoints, 
kidnapping, and drug trafficking that threaten local communities and authority structures 
– has fueled the insurgency and is detrimental to the Afghan people’s perception of their 
government and to the international community’s objectives.  
 
 Criminal networks and narcotics cultivation constitute a source of funding for the 
insurgency in Afghanistan. Streams of Taliban financing from across the border in 
Pakistan, along with funds gained from narcotics trafficking and kidnapping, have 
allowed the insurgency to strengthen its military and technical capabilities. Instability 
along the Pakistan-Afghan frontier also continued to provide Al-Qaida with the 
opportunity to conduct training, planning, and targeting of Western European and U.S. 
interests.  
 
The U.S. Department of State warns that the security threat to U.S. citizens in 
Afghanistan remains critical. Travel in all areas of Afghanistan is unsafe due to military 
combat operations, landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal 
groups, and the possibility of terrorist attacks. In August 2010, a group of doctors, 
nurses, and medical practitioners, including six U.S. citizens, were shot and killed as 
they completed a medical aid visit to remote areas. The number of attacks throughout 
the south and southeastern areas of the country is growing as a result of insurgent and 
drug-related activity, and no part of Afghanistan is immune from violence. Even the 
Afghan capital, Kabul, is considered at high risk for militant attacks, including rocket 
attacks, vehicle-borne IEDs, and suicide bombings.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
7 
 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
8 
 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them, and the following disqualifying conditions 
potentially apply: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone could 
be sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in 
the compromise of classified information. Applicant’s mother, two sisters, and cousin 
are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Since 2006, she has maintained close contact 
with her mother, one sister, and cousin in Afghanistan. She regularly provides her 
mother with money. Applicant’s contact with relatives living outside of the United States 
is sufficient to raise a security concern.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an unstable government or subject to 
terrorist activity. Insurgency operations are being conducted in Afghanistan against 
Afghan and U.S. forces. There is also evidence that Afghanistan has a dismal human 
rights record and has active terrorist groups operating within its borders. This places the 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her contacts in Afghanistan do 
not pose a security risk, and she is not in a position to be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the U.S. and her connections to family members. With Afghanistan’s negative 
human rights record, its unstable government, and the violent insurgency being 
conducted within its borders, it is conceivable that Applicant’s family members could be 
vulnerable to coercion. Of note, Applicant’s father disappeared in 1979 and her brother 
and sister were killed in 1990. The circumstances surrounding the disappearance of her 
father and the deaths of her siblings are unknown. The dangerous circumstances that 
exist in Afghanistan create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. I find both of the above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
 
9 
 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant had no contact with her family from 1982 to 2004. Between 2004 and 
2006, she reestablished some of those contacts. Currently, she maintains contact with 
her mother, younger sister, and cousin. Those contacts are not casual, infrequent, or 
minimal. She regular contacts her younger sister and cousin and regularly sends money 
to her mother. Additionally, her older sister attempted to kill her in 1982. Since then, she 
has not had any contact with her older sister. Little is known about her older sister. 
Specifically, it is unknown whether her older sister is still a threat to her or what action 
her older sister might take if she learned Applicant held a security clearance. Given her 
close family contacts in Afghanistan and the security conditions there, Applicant could 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of foreign family 
members and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply. 
 
Applicant came to United States in October 2000 and became a U.S. citizen in 
May 2009. She indicated that her husband became a U.S. citizen in March 2010. Her 
children are citizens of Canada, but live in the United States. Her financial holdings in 
the United States consist of cars and bank accounts valued at approximately $85,000. 
When considering her contacts and interests in the United States in comparison to 
those in Afghanistan, I cannot find her sense of loyalty to her family members in 
Afghanistan is so minimal or her relationships and loyalties in the United States are so 
deep and long standing that she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of U.S. interests. I find AG¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has failed to meet her burden of persuasion in establishing the 
mitigating conditions. In cases of this nature, however, an additional analysis is 
necessary. The Appeal Board has stated: 
 
 
10 
 
 
As a general rule, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security 
procedures and regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative 
value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security 
concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct 
or circumstances. However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to 
the national security. The presence of such circumstances can give 
credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to 
recognize, resist, and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or 
exploitation.14 
 
Here, however, Applicant has failed to present any evidence establishing that 
exception. It is not applicable in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2 were 
                                                          
14 ISCR Cases No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008) (internal citations omitted). See also ISCR Case 
No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006) citing ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. May, 30, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 
2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). 
 
 
11 
 
 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
been a U.S. citizen for over two-and-a-half years. Since December 2009, she has 
apparently been supporting the U.S. military in Afghanistan, but the exact nature of that 
support is unknown. She has close family contacts in Afghanistan that create security 
concerns. Those security concerns are not mitigated by the evidence that Applicant has 
presented. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under the Foreign 
Influence guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
