 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04291 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Ans.) the SOR on December 11, 2014, and requested a 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 8, 2015, setting the hearing for 
May 19, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
 
2 
 
testified and offered exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 27, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and has worked for a government contractor for 15 
years. He holds a bachelor’s degree. He is married for a second time and has two adult 
children. He has no military service, but has held a security clearance since 2008.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant had a charged-off account in the amount of $17,941 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) and a home foreclosure in the approximate amount of $443,000 (SOR ¶ 
1.b). The debts were listed on a credit report from February 2014. Applicant denied 
SOR ¶ 1.a, but admitted SOR ¶ 1.b.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began in approximately July 2007 when he 
divorced from his first wife after 15 years of marriage. She did not work outside the 
home. Under the terms of the divorce decree, Applicant was required to pay monthly 
alimony and child support that totaled approximately $3,000. This represented about 50 
percent of his total monthly income. Additionally, Applicant’s ex-wife was awarded the 
marital residence and was to hold Applicant harmless for any debts or obligations on the 
property. Applicant’s alimony and child support payments were sufficient to pay the 
monthly mortgage amount. Applicant’s wife did not keep up the payments and the home 
eventually was foreclosed. Because the value of the property decreased as a result of 
the economy, it sold for less than was owed on it. He received a tax form concerning the 
tax consequences of the deficiency amount, but he could not remember specifically 
what it was. SOR ¶ 1.b is resolved.3 
 
 Applicant accumulated the credit card debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.a during the course 
of his first marriage. Once his divorce was finalized and he began making alimony and 
child support payments, he could no longer afford to pay this credit card. He contacted 
the company in an attempt to work out a payment plan, but it refused. Later, he 
contacted two debt management companies and an attorney, all told him not to pay this 
debt because it was beyond the state statute of limitations. He followed that advice and 
eventually received an IRS form 1099-C showing a cancellation of debt. He filed that 
form with his tax return. This debt is resolved.4  
 
 Applicant testified that his current financial status is good. He remarried and his 
current wife works. Their combined income is approximately $270,000 per year. He no 
longer is obligated to pay alimony or child support. Both of his sons graduated from 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 25, 28; GE 1. 
 
2 Ans.; GE 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 25-27, 32-34; Ans. 
 
4 Tr. at 29-30, 36-37; Ans.; GE 2.  
 
 
3 
 
college, so he no longer pays college-related expenses. He is current on his taxes and 
paid other debts not listed on the SOR.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 31, 3540, 42; Ans.; AE A-B. 
 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
   
 Applicant had two delinquent debts including a foreclosure. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
5 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant are recent. Both debts have been 
resolved. Since the delinquent debts arose as a result of the financial hardship caused 
by his divorce, they do not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) partially applies.  
 
Applicant’s debts became delinquent when he was required to pay 50 percent of 
his salary to his ex-wife in alimony and child support and he lost possession and control 
over paying for the family residence. This was a condition beyond his control and he 
acted responsibly by contacting his creditors and making regular payments to his wife 
so that she had the ability to pay the mortgage. He is not responsible for her failure to 
make the mortgage payments. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant received credit counseling from two debt relief companies and an 
attorney. He made an effort to resolve the credit card debt and then was advised not to 
pay the debt. While his action is not necessarily good faith, the debt is otherwise 
resolved and it was claimed as a forgiven debt on his tax return. He did show good faith 
in paying alimony and child support to his ex-wife so that she had the ability to pay the 
mortgage. AG ¶ 20(c) applies and ¶ 20(d) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s divorce and how it affected his financial status. I found 
Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his debts. I find it 
unlikely that Applicant will find himself in a similar situation in the future.  
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
