1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                       )                     
        )
)                     ISCR Case No. 11-12262
)
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On April 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 7, 2014. The case was
initially delayed due to Applicant’s medical condition. A notice of hearing was issued on
August 20, 2014, scheduling the hearing for September 23, 2014. The hearing was held
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-6 were admitted into evidence without
objection. Applicant testified, and submitted  a binder, which was marked as Applicant
Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted into the record without objection. I kept the record
open until October 7, 2014 for Applicant to submit additional documents. She submitted
additional information, which was marked as AX B, and entered into the record. The
transcript (Tr.) was received on September 30, 2014. Based on a review of the
2
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted. 
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations ¶¶1. a-1.j with
explanations for several debts that were paid.    
Applicant is a 37-year-old security specialist for a defense contractor who
graduated from high school and attended college, but she has not yet obtained a
degree. Applicant is married and has three children.  She has been with her current
employer for about two years. (Tr. 38)  Applicant has held a security clearance since
2006. (GX 1)
The SOR alleges indebtedness for ten delinquent debts including four
judgments, medical accounts, collection accounts, a charged-off account, and a
mortgage loan account that is 180 days or more past due with an approximate balance
of $254,000. The total amount of delinquent debt is approximately $36,770. Credit
reports confirm her delinquent debts. (GX 3 through 6)
Applicant disclosed her multiple financial issues on her latest security clearance
application. The explanation for her accumulated debts is a combination of loss of  her
employment for one year, medical conditions, including four surgeries, her husband’s
unemployment in 2008, and his deployment to Iraq.
Shortly after Applicant and her husband married in 2006, they purchased a home
for $260,000. Applicant and her husband had no difficulties paying their bills. However,
in 2007- 2008, various hardships befell them.  Applicant had a baby in 2008, and
shortly thereafter her husband lost his job. Applicant became very ill after the birth of
her daughter and required surgery. (Tr. 48) After surgery, Applicant was sent to a
rehabilitation center. (Tr. 51) At that time in 2009, Applicant was on short-term disability.
Applicant became employed again in April 2010. However, she again required surgery
in 2010. She was unemployed again from June 2011 until May 2012, when she started
her present employment. (Tr. 55)
Applicant could not afford the mortgage payment and immediately contacted the
bank. A forbearance payment of $800 a month was set. This lasted a short period of
time (one year). Applicant tried to sell the house on at least three occasions. (AX A)
She obtained a contract but the bank would not accept the amount. (Tr. 57) She also
tried to rent the home in 2010.  Applicant obtained the assistance of a management
company and paid them $500 to start the process of negotiating with the mortgage
company to modify the home mortgage loan. (Tr. 61) The representative from the
management company was to contact the mortgage company but she did not. The
company went bankrupt and Applicant lost the $500. (Tr. 64) Applicant attempted a
short sale in 2012. The market price was about $199,000. The home almost sold in
2012, but with a lien on the house, it could not sell. (Tr. 65) The two liens were from the
judgments entered by the bank. 
3
Applicant’s husband could not find a job for almost a year, and decided to join
the military so that he could support his family. On October 13, 2009, he was deployed
to Iraq for one year. Applicant’s husband received a lower salary than when he was
employed as a civilian. (Tr. 12) As of February 2013, he is in the Army Reserves and
works as a property manager for a company. (Tr. 32)
Applicant’s monthly net income is approximately $4,449. Her husband’s net
monthly income is $3,814. Applicant has no car note. She follows a budget. She has
about $300 net monthly remainder.
In June 2013, Applicant consulted an attorney who advised her to file Chapter 7
bankruptcy. (AX A). The attorney advised Applicant to include the house in  bankruptcy.
She was also advised to stop any payment plans that she had. 0n February 3, 2014,
Applicant and her husband took the mandatory credit counseling course. Applicant
stated that the debts alleged in the SOR are included in the bankruptcy. (Tr. 67) She
submitted a final copy of the petition for the Chapter 7 bankruptcy that was filed on
October 3, 2013. (AX B)
Regarding the other allegations in the SOR, debts in ¶ 1.a and ¶1.d are paid.
She provided receipts to substantiate the payments.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
5
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant admitted that she acquired delinquent debt in the amount of $36,700.
She also admitted that there is a past-due mortgage on her house. Her admissions and
the credit reports confirm her debts. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise
disqualifying conditions in ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following
are potentially relevant:
6
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties occurred as the result of multiple job losses for
herself and her husband, illness, multiple surgeries and her husband’s  deployment to
Iraq.  The combination of these events is unlikely to recur. They purchased a house but
due to financial difficulties could not maintain the mortgage loan. Applicant attempted to
either sell or rent the house on many occasions.   She tried a short sale. She paid two
small bills. She wanted to pay her creditors but was unable. In 2013, after obtaining
legal advice, she was advised to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. This is a legal means of
resolving debts. She received the required financial counseling.  Applicant  provided
documentation concerning the bankruptcy petition and the  date of filing. AG ¶¶ 20(a)
through (d)  apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
7
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 37 years old. She is married and has three children. She has held a
security clearance since 2006 without incident.
Applicant and her husband suffered a multitude of losses. Applicant was ill, had
surgeries, was in rehabilitation, was unemployed for about a year, and her husband
also lost his employment. In desperation, he joined the military to gain employment. He
was deployed to Iraq.  In 2006, Applicant and her husband purchased a home. Shortly
thereafter, she suffered the above circumstances, which were beyond her control. She
could not afford the mortgage payments and could not sell the house, despite repeated
attempts. In 2013, she was advised to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. This is a legal
means to resolve debts. Applicant was caught in a perfect storm of misfortune which is
unlikely to recur. Applicant’s good faith efforts to resolve her financial difficulty, and the
bankruptcy filing and information that she provided mitigate the security concerns. She
has provided sufficient information to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the
guideline governing her finances. I do not have doubts about Applicant’s judgment and
trustworthiness. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under the financial
considerations guideline.   
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.j: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
