 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 12-04796   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
concerns raised by his $8,100 in unresolved delinquent debt and his multiple failures to 
disclose adverse information to the government during his 2007 and 2011 security 
clearance adjudications. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations and 
personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing on 
August 20, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, without objection. 
I also appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, a Person Summary from the 
Joint Personnel Adjudication System. During the hearing an issue was raised about the 
adjudication of Applicant’s 2007 security clearance application. Because neither 
Department Counsel nor Applicant was able to resolve the issue, I, sua sponte, 
obtained a copy of Applicant’s Security Investigation Index (SII), which shows his 
investigative history with agencies outside the DOD. The SII Summary is attached to the 
record as HE II. After the hearing, Applicant submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which 
was also admitted without objection.2  I received the transcript (Tr.) on August 29, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 27, has worked in security for a federal contractor since 2007. 
Applicant began living on his own and supporting himself at 19 years old. He began his 
professional career in retail stores. Between 2005 and 2006, Applicant worked as a 
sales associate at a national superstore chain. Shortly after obtaining a counter 
manager position, Applicant was terminated for violating the store’s overtime policy. 
Applicant complained to his supervisor that he could not complete the closing tasks 
during his shift without help from another associate. Because his supervisor was 
unwilling to provide additional staff, Applicant continued to work overtime to complete 
the tasks despite being warned not to do so. In January 2007, Applicant quit his job at a 
department store after being told that he was being fired. On two separate occasions 
during his probation period, co-workers accused Applicant of stealing personal items 
from them.3  
 
After Applicant began working for his current employer, he completed a DOD 
Standard Form 86 (SF-86) application in November 2007 to obtain a security clearance 
from another government agency. In response to questions about his employment 
record,4 Applicant did not disclose the unfavorable circumstances surrounding the 
termination of his employment with the department store earlier that year. Applicant also 
did not disclose 2004 and 2006 criminal incidents in response to questions about his 
police record.5 After the 2004 incident for petty theft, which occurred when Applicant 
                                                          
2 The Government’s response to Applicant’s post-hearing submission is appended to the record as HE III. 
 
3 Tr. 20, 59-63; GE 1, GE 3; HE II. 
 
4 Section 22: Your Employment Record. Has any of the following happened to you in the last 7 years? 1. 
Fired from a job. 2. Quit a job after being told you are being fired. 3. Left a job by mutual agreement 
following allegations of misconduct. 4. Let a job by mutual agreement following allegations of 
unsatisfactory performance. 5. Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances. 
 
5 Section 23: Your Police Record. For this item, report information whether the record in your case has 
been “sealed” or otherwise stricken from the court record. The single exception to this requirement is for 
 
3 
 
was 16 years old, he completed a juvenile diversion program. The 2006 incident 
resulted from his failure to appear at a court date related to a traffic violation.6  
 
Applicant offered several reasons for his omissions. He did not believe he was 
required to disclose the termination from the department store because he quit. 
Applicant did not believe that he had to disclose the criminal incidents because they 
occurred when he was a minor, even though the questions on the security clearance 
application did not provide for such a reporting exclusion. Applicant also cites a July 
2007 clearance letter from his local police department saying they did not have any 
arrest records for him. The letter was based on Applicant’s assertion that he had lived in 
the jurisdiction for one year and five months as opposed to the six and a half years he 
actually resided in the community. Despite his omissions, the other government agency 
favorably adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance in September 2008.7  
 
In conjunction with his promotion to his current position, Applicant applied for a 
security clearance from the DOD, completing another SF-86 in November 2011. In 
January 2012, a background investigator interviewed Applicant at his employer’s office. 
During the interview, the investigator went through each question on the security 
clearance application with Applicant, who confirmed his answers. He did not update or 
provide any new information. Having not reported any adverse financial information in 
response to the financial record questions,8 the investigator questioned Applicant about 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
certain conviction under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18. U.S.C. 3607. A. Have you ever been 
charged with or convicted of any felony offense? (Include those under the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice) B. Have you ever been charged with or convicted of a firearms or explosive offenses? C.  Are 
there currently any charges pending agents you for any criminal offense? D. Have you ever been charged 
with or convicted of any offense(s) related to drugs or alcohol? E. In the last 7 years, have you been 
subject to court martial or other disciplinary proceedings under the Uniform Code of Military Justice? 
(Include non-judicial, Captain’s mast, etc.) F. In the last 7 years, have you been arrested for, charged 
with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in respond to A, B, C, D, or E, above? (Leave out traffic 
fines of less than $150 unless the violation was alcohol or drug related.) 
  
6 Tr. 66-67, 74-76; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. 46-49, 72-77; GE 3; HE II; Answer. 
 
8 Section 26. Financial Record.… Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts. Other than previously listed, 
has any off the following happened? In the past seven (7) years [have] you: Had any possessions or 
property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed? (Include any financial obligations for which 
you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosigner or guarantor); Defaulted on any 
type of loan? (Include any financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for 
which you were a cosigner or guarantor); Had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency? (Include 
financial obligation for which you were the sole creditor as well as those for which you were a cosigner or 
guarantor); Had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as 
agreed? (Include financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor as well as those for which you 
were a cosigner or guarantor); [Been] evicted for non-payment?; Had your wages, benefits, or assets 
garnished or attached for any reason? [Been] over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously 
entered? (Include any financial obligation for which you are the sole debtor as well as those for which you 
are a cosigner or guarantor; You are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include any debt 
for which you are the sole debtor as well as those for which you were a cosigner or guarantor.) 
 
 
4 
 
six delinquent consumer accounts, a 2006 car repossession, and a 2008 garnishment 
that were discovered during the routine credit check.9  
 
Applicant told the investigator that he did not know why he failed to disclose the 
delinquent accounts. At hearing, Applicant testified that he did not disclose derogatory 
financial information because he did not understand the questions.  He also stated that 
he did not believe he needed to disclose paid collection accounts. Although the 
garnishment was resolved before Applicant completed the November 2011 security 
clearance application, three of the collection accounts were not resolved until 2012. The 
two remaining consumer accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.c, for $3,701 and $755, 
respectively) and the $3,690 car repossession deficiency balance (SOR ¶ 1.b) remain 
unpaid. Applicant notes that three accounts, which became delinquent between January 
and May 2007 do not appear on his most recent credit reports. Despite being 
consistently employed since 2007, Applicant has not taken any steps to contact the 
creditors or resolve these delinquent debts. Applicant testified that he has focused his 
attention on resolving his other debts, but plans to pay the remaining delinquent 
accounts when he becomes more financially stable. Applicant currently lives within his 
means. He has not incurred any new delinquent debts. He has approximately $700 in 
monthly disposable income.10  
 
In February 2012, the investigator interviewed Applicant a second time to discuss 
an arrest for driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol that occurred in December 
2011, in between Applicant’s completion of his security clearance application and his 
first background interview. Applicant was pulled over during a routine traffic stop. His 
blood alcohol level measured .10%. After receiving his Miranda rights, the police 
transported Applicant to a detoxification center where he was held for five hours before 
being released. Ten days before his first background interview, Applicant was 
arraigned, entering a not guilty plea on the DUI charge. He was also assigned a public 
defender and given an April 2012 court date. Applicant told the investigator and 
reiterated at the hearing that he did not mention the incident during his January 2012 
interview because he did not believe he had been arrested or charged with any crime. 
Applicant eventually pleaded no contest to a reduced charge. The court ordered 
Applicant to complete a first offender program and pay a $1,500 fine.11  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 51, 63-65; GE 1, GE 5-6. 
 
10 Tr. 25-37, 43-46, 77-82, 85-86; GE 3, GE 8; AE A. 
 
11 Tr. 39-41, 52, 55-56, 83-84, 86; GE 3. 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a concern when his actions show 
questionable judgment, an unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations, or raises 
questions about an applicant’s ability to protect classified information.12 The SOR 
alleges that Applicant’s termination from a retail job in 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.g), the 
circumstances surrounding his quitting another retail job in 2007 (SOR ¶ 2.h), and a 
December 2011 DUI arrest (SOR ¶ 2.a) exemplify these concerns and together support 
a negative whole-person assessment, indicating that Applicant may not properly handle 
or safeguard classified information. They do not. Applicant has maintained a positive 
employment history since he began his current employment in 2007. The employment 
issues he experienced as a 19 year old do not have any bearing on his current security 
worthiness. While Applicant’s December 2011 DUI is a serious offense, it is an isolated 
incident that is not indicative of alcohol-related issues. The underlying act, which 
occurred almost four years ago, was a mistake and does not raise security concerns. 
However, Applicant’s subsequent failure to report the incident does, as discussed 
below. 
 
 An applicant’s failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process raises issues about his reliability and trustworthiness that ultimately 
                                                          
12  See  AG ¶15. 
 
 
6 
 
calls into question his ability to protect classified information.13 The SOR alleges that 
Applicant has a history of failing to disclose negative information to the government. 
Specifically, the SOR alleges that: (1) Applicant falsified material facts on his November 
2007 security clearance application by failing to disclose adverse information regarding 
his employment and police records (SOR ¶¶ 2.d, 2.e); (2) Applicant  falsified material 
facts on his November 2011 security clearance application by failing to disclose a car 
repossession and five delinquent accounts in response to questions about his financial 
record (SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c); and (3) Applicant failed to disclose his December 2011 
DUI arrest during his January 2012 background interview (SOR ¶ 2.f). Applicant denies 
having any intent to deceive or mislead the government and provides conflicting 
explanations to justify his omissions — none of which are credible.  
 
 The language used in the questions Applicant falsified on his November 2007 
and November 2011 security clearance applications is clear and unambiguous. A 
reasonable person reading the same questions would have disclosed the unfavorable 
employment, criminal, and financial information Applicant chose to withhold. Also, 
Applicant’s claims that he did not understand that he was arrested and charged with 
crimes in 2004, 2006, and in December 2011 are disingenuous. During the course of 
the adjudication, Applicant has provided enough information about each event tending 
to show that he understood that he was either arrested or charged with criminal conduct 
in each instance.  As such, the record contains sufficient evidence to find that Applicant 
deliberately omitted relevant facts from his 2007 and 2011 security clearance 
applications and that he deliberately provided false and misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to the investigator during his January 2012 background 
interview.14  
 
Making false or misleading statements to the federal government during the 
security-clearance process is serious misconduct, and it is not easily explained away, 
excused, or mitigated. At no point during the 2011 adjudication did Applicant try to 
correct any of the misleading information he provided. Given the extent of Applicant’s 
falsifications, his actions cannot be considered minor. His actions undermine the 
security clearance process, which depends in part on honest self-reporting by 
applicants. Applicant’s earlier falsifications are not mitigated because he received a 
favorable adjudication from another government agency. Nor does this fact mean his 
earlier falsifications are not relevant to a determination of his current security 
worthiness. An applicant is expected to provide full, frank, and candid answers 
throughout the investigative process. Anything less provides a rational basis for a 
finding against an applicant’s security worthiness. Applicant has established a pattern of 
conduct that shows he cannot be relied upon to self-report adverse information. None of 
the personal conduct mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 See  AG ¶ 15. 
 
14 AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b).  
 
7 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”15 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to three creditors for 
approximately $8,100. He has demonstrated a history of unresolved debt and 
unwillingness to repay his creditors.16 Although Applicant incurred the debt at a young 
age and before he obtained steady employment, he has not taken any steps in the 
seven years he has been gainfully employed to address any of these debts. Instead he 
relies on the fact that the debts no longer appear on his credit report and may be 
uncollectible. While the debts may not be a source of vulnerability for Applicant, his 
decision to not pay his debts casts doubts on his current security worthiness. None of 
the relevant mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. The purpose of the security 
clearance adjudication is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life 
to make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”17 In 
these cases, the degree of acceptable risk is less than that acceptable to mere access 
to employment.18 Applicant may well be an acceptable employee, but his lack of candor 
with the government during his 2007 and 2011 security clearance adjudications and his 
financial irresponsibility raise ongoing concerns about his trustworthiness and reliability 
that must be resolved in favor of the Government.  
                                                          
15  AG ¶ 18. 
 
16 AG ¶¶ 19 (a) and (c). 
 
17 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
18 See Gayer v. Schlesinger, 490 F.2d 740, 750 (D.C. Cir. 1973).  
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.g-2.h:   For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 2.b – 2.f:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
