                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  12-03158           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Allison O,Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his personal conduct.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On April 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on September
1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 9, 2014, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on June 26, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on August
28, 2014. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on October 8, 2014. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) stated in a Government interview that
he feared that if he were offered money to engage in espionage against the United States
he would consider doing so; (b) violated his employer’s standard policy and procedures
when he discussed proprietary information with an employee of another company without
requiring the individual to sign a non-disclosure agreement (NDA); and (c) falsified his
security clearance application of August 2009 by failing to disclose his employment with
another employer out of concern that his primary employment would be compromised if
his employer learned of his affiliation with the other entity.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied making statements to a Government
investigator about engaging in espionage if offered money. He denied violating his
employer’s standard policy on disclosing proprietary information without an executed
NDA. He admitted to his deliberate omission of his Company B employment in the e-QIP
he completed in August 2009, while interpreting the intent of the clearance application to
cover only major employments and periods of unemployment, and not part-time
employment like his Company B consulting arrangement.  Applicant further claimed in his
SOR response that the work he provided Company B was accomplished on his personal
time with no impact on his Company A job responsibilities. He claimed the work he
completed for Company B was insignificant and not material to his employment history.  
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 58-year-old engineer for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in August 1996. (GE 1; Tr. 32) He has one child and two adult
step-children from his wife’s previous marriage. (GE 1; Tr. 32)  Applicant earned a
bachelor’s of science degree in engineering in December 1977 from a recognized
university (GE 1) and a masters of science degree from the same university in December
1978. (GE 1; Tr. 31). He claims no military service. (GE 1; Tr. 31) 
Employment history
Applicant was employed by his last firm (Company A) in December 2001. He left
this firm in April 2013 over concerns about the proper use of his job skills. (Tr. 32-33)
Between December 2008 and January 2009, and again between November 2009 and
3
January 2010, Applicant held a second job as a 1099 engineering consultant with another
firm (Company B).  Once he completed his contract work with Company B in January
2010,  he severed his employment relationship with the firm.  Currently, he is suspended
from his new employer (Company C) pending completion of his security clearance
investigation. (Tr. 51-52)
Personal conduct issues
In March 2010, while still employed by Company A, Applicant disclosed proprietary
information owned by his principal employer (Company A) when he told his Company B
employer certain proprietary information pertaining to Company A’s business operations.
Applicant considered this information insignificant at the time and did not insist on
obtaining a signed NDA from this Company B official. (GE 3; Tr.  28) Typically, Applicant
assists in the completion of NDAs in these types of situations (Tr. 45-46) and takes
responsibility for not insisting on an NDA. He never used any of the proprietary
information he obtained from Company A in his work with Company B. (Tr. 47-48) And
because he had no previous agreement with Company A requiring his disclosure of
outside employment, he did not feel obligated to inform his Company A employer of his
Company B affiliation. (Tr. 48)
When completing his e-QIP in August 2009, Applicant omitted any mention of his
1099 affiliation with Company B. (GE 4) At the time, he feared that his disclosure of his
Company B affiliation in his e-QIP would compromise his employment with Company A.
(GE 4; Tr. 29-30, 37-38)  More specifically, were Company A to learn of his providing
such information to Company B, he would be punished by having a letter of reprimand
placed in his Company A personnel file. (GE 2) Applicant’s omission covered prior
employment information that was material to a Government assessment of Applicant’s
suitability to hold a security clearance.  (GE 4)
Even if his Company B employment entailed only part-time consulting, such part-
time work was clearly covered by Section 13 of the e-QIP he completed in August 2009.
(GE 4) Section 13's plain coverage is imputed to Applicant. His claims to the contrary in
his ensuing interview with an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in
January 2012 (GE 3) cannot be reconciled with the clear wording of Section 13. 
Asked to explain his e-QIP omission at hearing, Applicant acknowledged his
deliberate omission of his Company B affiliation in his August 2009 e-QIP out of concern
his disclosure could have jeopardized his employment relationship with Company A. (GE
3; Tr. 29) He did not disclose the information to the Government before he completed an
updated e-QIP in November 2011. (GE 1)  Both in this updated e-QIP and in his ensuing
interview with an OPM agent in January 2012, he disclosed his Company B employment
and his dates of service. (GEs 1 and 3; Tr. 29; 37-38) Considering the facts and
circumstances, inferences are warranted that Applicant’s deliberate omissions of his
Company B employment in his 2009 e-QIP were not excused by his concerns over how
his disclosure of his Company B affiliation could jeopardize his employment t relationship
with Company A. 
4
Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from another government agency in
March 2010. (GE 2; Tr. 36-37) When told by the investigator that his answers were
indicative of possible deception, Applicant told the agent that his personal finances are of
concern to him; in as much as he and his family “are living beyond their financial means, ”
as they “were spending more money than they earn.” (GE 2; Tr. 39-41)  Because of his
concerns about his personal finances, Applicant told the investigator “he fears that if he
were offered money to engage in espionage against the United States, he would consider
doing so rather than reflexively refusing such an offer.” (GE 2)  Although, he cautioned
that he did not believe he would “ultimately engage in espionage against the United
States if he were offered money.” (GE 2) 
In his hearing testimony, Applicant attributed his espionage consideration
statements to “clutching at straws” and “looking for things that could possibly be a
concern.” (Tr. 25) He assured that he would never engage in espionage against the
United States for money. (Tr. 27, 42) He stressed his clean record in protecting classified
information during the more than eight years he has held a clearance. (GE 2) 
While Applicant has never engaged in any form of espionage or compromised
classified information at any level of clearance over the extended period of time that he
has held a clearance, his expressed thoughts under pressure from a government
investigator are material to a trustworthiness assessment and are entitled to considerable
weight when appraising Applicant’s overall clearance worthiness in conjunction with all of
the facts and circumstances associated with Applicant’s interview statements.
 Over the Christmas and New Years holidays, between December 2008 and
January 2009, Applicant worked as a 1099 employee for Company B. (GE 2; Tr. 31-32)
During this time he wrote a contract proposal for Company B to assist Company B in
“getting a foot in the door” for a designed detection device contract. (GE 2)  For his
efforts, Company B paid him $2,500. (GE 2) Applicant was careful not to use any
Company A proprietary information in the proposal. He was also careful to perform his
work on his personal time and in such ways as to avoid any conflicts of interest with his
primary Company A employer. (AEs 2 and 3)
In March 2010, Applicant and his Company B counterpart (also a former Company
A employee) met with an employee of another firm. (GE 2) In their meeting with this firm,
they discussed Company A’s involvement in bidding on a Government contract with the
other firm’s employee. When sharing such information, Company A’s policy requires the
employee of the company receiving proprietary Company A information to execute an
NDA. (GE 2). 
Aware of the Company NDA requirement, Applicant neglected to provide NDA
forms to the other firm’s employees in the meetings they had with them in March 2010.
(GE 2) By his own admissions, Applicant “may have crossed the line” in providing
proprietary information belonging to Company A when talking to individuals of other firms.
(GE 2) 
5
On several occasions during his 12-month affiliation with Company B, Applicant
provided proprietary information to Company B that he had acquired at trade shows he
attended in Company A’s behalf.  (GE 2) Applicant was never paid by Company B for
supplying this information.  Whether this information was material to Company A’s bidding
interests is unclear. Regardless of the proprietary status of this information, Applicant
passed the information to his Company B counterpart without requiring him to sign an
NDA. (GEs 2 and 3) Applicant acknowledged his judgment lapses while insisting that
none of the information exchanged was material. (Tr.  29) 
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by his supervisor (a retired sheriff), who maintains a
strictly professional onsite business relationship with Applicant. (Tr. 59) His supervisor
considered Applicant trustworthy and reliable. (Tr. 59)
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
The Ags include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
6
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
  Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that
to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in
the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance
depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. See United
States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the
judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the
evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are
grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial evidence
any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the Government to
affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or abused classified
information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather, the judge must
consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently
fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
7
Analysis  
Applicant is an engineer who was once employed by his primary defense contractor
(Company A) while contemporaneously employed on a part-time consulting basis by
another engineering firm (Company B). While simultaneously employed by both
companies he provided proprietary information of Company A to Company B officials
without first obtaining an NDA from the Company B officials. In a subsequent post-
polygraph interview with another Government agency, he told the investigator that he
feared that if he were offered money to engage in espionage against the United States, he
would consider doing so.  
In the process of completing an e-QIP in August 2009, he intentionally omitted his
Company B employment out of concern his disclosure of his consulting arrangement with
Company B could jeopardize his employment relationship with his primary employer
(Company A). In both his OPM interview and interrogatory responses that followed, he
claimed that his Company B employment was insignificant part-time work that was not
material to the information asked for in his e-QIP about his employment relationships.
Applicant’s intentional omissions were material and were not excused by his concerns
over how his disclosure might affect his employment relationship with his primary
employer.   
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his (a) expressed fears in a post-polygraph
interview that if he were offered money to engage in espionage against the United States
he would consider doing so; (b) providing proprietary Company A information to Company
B employees without an executed NDA; and (c) falsifying his e-QIP by failing to disclose
his Company B employment out of concern his disclosure could compromise his Company
A employment. By his statements and actions, Applicant placed in issue his fiducial
commitment to safeguarding classified and other sensitive materials. 
Several of the disqualifying conditions covered by Guideline E are applicable.  DC ¶
16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts to any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;”  DC ¶
16(d)(1), “untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality,
release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information;” and DC ¶ 16(d)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rule
violations,” apply to Applicant’s situation. Each of these disqualifying conditions may be
considered in evaluating Applicant’s March 2010 interview statements, his breach of
Company A proprietary information disclosure standards, and his security-related
employment omissions in his August 2009 e-QIP.
Applicant’s March 2010 post-polygraph interview statements, although
subsequently revised, reflect potentially serious breaches of his fiduciary duty to protect
and safeguard classified and sensitive information in his custody and control. Where
8
doubts are raised about an applicant’s commitments to protecting national security, Egan
principles teach that they should be resolved in the Government’s favor. See Department
of the Navy v. Egan, supra. While Applicant’s cited high stress levels during his polygraph
examination and ensuing post-polygraph interview are understandable, his statements
cannot be fully mitigated by later revisions or explanations of his responses.
Applicant’s post-polygraph admissions cover more than his expressed intentions
about the possibilities of his engaging in espionage at some undefined future date.
Applicant’s admissions included his affirmations of his efforts on behalf of his Company B
employer to discuss Company A-owned proprietary information to a Company B
employee. By his own accounts, his disclosures quite possibly violated his company’s
standard policy and procedures to the extent they involved his discussion of proprietary
information owned by Company A without enlisting the Company B employee to sign an
NDA. DC ¶ 16(d)a)(1) fully applies to Applicant’s sharing of Company A proprietary
information without requiring a signed NDA.  Applicant provided no documented evidence
to refute or minimize his previous admissions.
Applicant’s deliberate omissions of his Company B employment in the e-QIP he
executed in August 2009 are fully proven as well. His omissions were made out of concern
for how his disclosure of his Company B employment could affect his employment with
Company A. His omissions were motivated by his desire to conceal his other employer if
he could do so through his adoption of a narrow interpretation of the term “employment.” 
Under the facts and circumstances of this case, Applicant’s omissions were not only
deliberate but were material to a Government assessment of his continued eligibility to
access classified information. See United States, v. Gaudin, supra. Section 13 of his
August 2009 e-QIP asks for information about all of Applicant’s employment activities and
expressly includes both full-time and  part-time work, paid or unpaid. (GE 4) Considering
his education and experience, his adopted narrower interpretation is neither plausible nor
credible and cannot be reconciled with the plain wording of Section 13 of his e-QIP.  
Mitigation is difficult to achieve under the facts presented. Applicant’s omission
corrections to the employment-related questions posed in the August 2009 e-QIP he
completed were furnished over two years later and do not meet the prompt, good-faith
requirements of either MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to
correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts,”
or MC ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”
Likewise, his  answers to employment-related questions posed by the OPM agent who
interviewed him in January 2012 cannot be fully reconciled with the prompt, good-faith
requirements of MC ¶ 17(a), or the infrequent, unique circumstances criterion of MC ¶
17(c). And none of the other mitigating conditions covered by Guideline E apply to
Applicant’s situation. 
9
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s withholding of
material information about his employment in the e-QIP he completed, the answers he
provided in his ensuing OPM interview, his interrogatory responses, and his hearing
testimony, his explanations and timing of his corrections are insufficient to convincingly
refute or mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations. Questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, are each core
policy concerns of the personal conduct guideline (AG ¶ 15). Considering all of the
circumstances surrounding his March 2010 post-polygraph statements about the
possibilities of his engaging in espionage for money; his disclosures of Company A
proprietary information without the required NDA; and his omissions of his employment
relationship with Company B in the 2009 e-QIP he completed, his admitted omissions and
actions are neither refuted nor mitigated
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that
Applicant has mounted responsible, good-faith efforts to provide accurate background
information to the Government in the 2009 e-QIP he completed. While his civilian  service
is recognized and commended, it is not enough to meet security eligibility requirements.  
Applicant’s post-polygraph admissions, his disclosure of proprietary information to a
potential bidding competitor, and his e-QIP omissions were material and precluded him
from meeting the conditions of demonstrated trust and reliability necessary to satisfy
minimum security eligibility requirements under Guideline E. Overall, Applicant’s
explanations are not persuasive enough to warrant conclusions that the allegations relative
to his (a) expressed fears that he would consider espionage against the United States in
exchange for money, (b) disclosures of proprietary information to a potential competitor,
and (c) 2009 e-QIP omissions covering his employment with Company B are either refuted
or mitigated. 
In making a whole-person assessment, careful consideration was given to the
respective burdens of proof established in Egan (supra), the AGs, and the facts and
circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a-1.c. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I make
the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a  through 1.c:     Against Applicant
10
                        Conclus i o  n  s  
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
11
  
