 
1 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02065 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HEINY, Claude, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owns a condominium in Thailand. He has extended family members 
who are citizens and residents of Thailand, some of whom work or have worked for the 
government of Thailand. Between 2008 and 2011, he purchased sex from foreign 
nationals in foreign countries. His foreign relatives and past criminal conduct are no 
longer a security concern. The ownership of a condominium in Thailand, when balanced 
against his financial interests in the United States, does not pose a security concern. 
The foreign influence, sexual behavior, and personal conduct security concerns are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 6, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
                                            
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
  
due to alleged security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence), Guideline D 
(sexual behavior), and Guideline E (personal conduct). (Item 1)  
 
On February 14, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived 
his right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated March 31, 2014, was provided to him on April 14, 2014. The FORM contained 
nine attachments (Items). Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of 
his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s 
response of June 10, 2014. The case was assigned to me on June 25, 2014. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
Kingdom of Thailand (Thailand) and provided supporting documents to show details and 
context for those facts. Applicant asserted that issues in the administrative notice had 
no relevance to or impact on his suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization 
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports.  
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in the SOR. His admissions 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 31 years old, and works as a field technician for a DoD contractor at 
an overseas location. He is a U.S. citizen born in Germany. His father served 21 years 
in the U.S. Army retiring as a master sergeant. In January 1992, after retiring from the 
Army, his father spent five years working for the U.S. government in Thailand until 
March 1997. Applicant’s mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen having been born in 
Thailand. Applicant has a number of relatives who are citizens and residents of 
Thailand. From September 2009 through November 2013, Applicant traveled to 
Thailand three times a year. He worked for three months at various overseas locations 
and then had three to four weeks of vacation, which he spent in Thailand. While in 
Thailand he saw his relatives who are citizens and residents there. Many of the 
meetings involve going out to eat. Applicant does not speak Thai and he was left out of 
much of the conversations during dinner. 
                                            
2To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information.  
 
3 
  
 
In 1992, Applicant, then nine years old, met his relatives who are citizens and 
residents of Thailand when is father worked in country. He had contact with them until 
1997, when he father left Thailand. Applicant did not see these relatives again until 
September 2009. His contact with four of his relatives was limited to five minutes to a 
couple hours a time, three times a year between September 2009 and September 2013. 
One of these individuals is his 70-year-old maternal aunt. In 2005, she retired from a 
government-owned airline. This aunt’s husband, age 81, is a retired aircraft mechanic, a 
flight engineer, and pilot. Applicant is not close to those individuals. They have two 
sons. Applicant has contact with one son between one and two hours at a time when 
Applicant visited Thailand. His cousin’s wife previously worked as an architect. 
Applicant is not close to his cousin or his cousin’s wife.  
 
The other son is a purchasing manager for a private company. Between 2009 
and 2013, Applicant would see this cousin 8 to 12 times per visit to Thailand. Their 
meetings would last several hours.  
 
Another maternal aunt, age 67, is a retired professor at a university in Thailand. 
Applicant saw her three times a year from 2009 through 2013, spending 5 to 20 minutes 
with her each time. His final relative who is a citizen and resident of Thailand is another 
maternal aunt, age 56, who is a research judge in Thailand. Applicant has not seen this 
aunt since September 2013. Between 2009 and 2013, he had 5 minutes to 20minute 
interactions with her three times a year when he visited Thailand. 
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Air Force from February 2002 through February 
2008. His had one overseas tour of duty. He was a staff sergeant (E-5) when he 
honorably separated from the service. While on active duty, he was awarded the Air 
Force Commendation Medal, the Air Force Achievement Medal, and the Army 
Achievement Medal. In 2008, after leaving the Air Force, Applicant worked for a DoD 
contractor in Qatar. Starting in 2009, he worked on a State Department contract 
supporting various locations in Iraq.  
 
From January 2011 through September July 2013, Applicant traveled to 42 
different countries in his DoD contractor position. In November 2013, he obtained his 
current government contracting job. In his current job he works for six months and then 
has three weeks of vacation. 
 
In Applicant’s previous jobs, he would work three months and then have three to 
four weeks of vacation. For federal income tax reasons3 he chose to spend his 
vacations in overseas locations and not return to the United States. At some point, he 
decided that owing property overseas made more sense than paying hotel fees when 
he took vacations. In March 2013, he purchased a condominium in Thailand for 
                                            
3 A U.S. citizen living abroad may exclude up to $97,600 of foreign earnings. To qualify for the exclusion 
a person must have a tax home in a foreign country, have foreign earned income, and be a bona fide 
resident of a foreign country for an uninterrupted period that included an entire tax year or be a U.S. 
citizen who is physically present in a foreign country for at least 330 days during any period of 12 
consecutive months. Applicant now claims to be a bona fide resident of a foreign country. 
 
4 
  
$353,000. He maintains a bank account containing less than $1,000 to pay condo fees 
and other condo-related expenses. 
 
When Applicant learned that ownership of the condominium could be a security 
problem, he attempted to sell it. The sale was not competed due to no fault of Applicant. 
Had the sale been completed, Applicant would have incurred a $50,000 loss. He was 
willing to accept the loss in order to address any security concern. 
  
In 2008, Applicant spent two weeks in the United States. In 2010, he spent three 
weeks in the United States. He also visited the United States in September 2013. 
Applicant admits that his visits to the United States have been infrequent during the past 
several years. He has done so because of the federal income tax advantage created 
when a taxpayer remains overseas for designated periods of time. He routinely spent 
his three-week vacations every three months at overseas locations. He has weekly 
telephone or email contact with his father, mother, brother, sister, and sister-in-law in 
the United States. He has $145,655 in a trade account, $13,712 in a Roth IRA account, 
a $6,462 account, and a $10,329 401(k) retirement account, all in the United States. 
 
The record shows no arrests, convictions, evidence of alcohol abuse, or illegal 
drug usage. However between 2008 and May 2011, Applicant admitted paying for sex 
in different countries around the world. Prostitution was illegal in some of those 
countries. An additional concern is that those individuals involved in prostitution may be 
involved with other individuals who could attempt to coerce or exploit an individual 
employing a prostitute. Applicant’s last involvement with prostitutes occurred in May 
2011. His employer, supervisors, and security officer are aware of his conduct.  
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
5 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.  
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
6 
  
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
 
Applicant has relatives that are citizens and residents of Thailand. He has an 
aunt who is a judge in Thailand, an aunt who is a retired university professor, and an 
aunt and uncle who worked for a state-owned airline, but are now retired. He also has a 
cousin living in Thailand. Except for his cousin, he visits with his aunts and uncle three 
times a year, when he vacations in Thailand. The conversations are short since he does 
not speak Thai and their English is limited. He spends more time with his cousin when 
he is in Thailand.  
  
There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Influence, pressure, or coercion 
applied to Applicant’s relatives living in Thailand could result in a security concern. 
Applicant’s communications with his relatives in Thailand are infrequent and casual. His 
ongoing communications over the years with his relatives living in Thailand are 
insufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” His relationships with his relatives in Thailand do 
not create a concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology.” 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The United States 
currently has and for a long period of time has had a close relationship with Thailand. 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United States 
has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any 
person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). Furthermore, 
 
7 
  
friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States over matters 
they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know 
friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially in the 
economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA 
LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
Applicant owns a $350,000 condominium in Thailand. When he learned that this 
could be a security concern he attempted to sell the condo, but has been unsuccessful. 
He purchased the condo so he would not have to pay for hotels when he was on 
vacation from his overseas job. He maintains a very small bank account to pay for 
transactions related to the condo. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
 
8 
  
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) apply to his relatives in Thailand. Applicant’s contact with 
them is casual and infrequent. There is no showing of strong loyalty or connections to 
his relatives in Thailand.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. Applicant’s parents and siblings are U.S. citizens and 
residents. He has telephone or email communication with them weekly. His father 
served for an extended time in the U.S. Army and Applicant has honorably served in the 
U.S. Air Force.  
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies to the small bank account he maintains in Thailand in relation to 
payments of the condo fee and other expenses related to the real estate in Thailand. 
AG ¶ 8(f) does not apply to the ownership of the condo in Thailand. It is a sizable 
investment. However, he maintains financial accounts of approximately $176,000 in the 
United States, which represents approximately half the value of the condo. He 
attempted to sell the condo once he was aware of the security concern.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his relatives living in Thailand are not 
significant. He does not have close or continued communicate with them. Applicant’s 
connections to his relatives in the United States are strong.  
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior, “Sexual 
behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or emotional disorder, 
reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may subject the individual to undue 
influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”  
 
AG ¶ 13 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, ¶ 13(a), “sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual 
has been prosecuted,” and ¶ 13(c), “sexual behavior that causes an individual to be 
vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress.”  
 
9 
  
 
Between 2008 and May 2011, Applicant paid for sex in various foreign countries. 
His actions were legal in some of the countries and illegal in others. Those individuals 
involved in such conduct often associate with individuals who could attempt to coerce or 
exploit someone who engages in such conduct. His last involvement with a prostitute 
occurred more than three years ago. His employer, supervisors, and security officer are 
aware of his conduct.  
 
AG ¶ 14 provides two conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.  
 
The conduct did not involve arrests, but because there are multiple incidents 
occurring over a number of years, the conduct cannot be considered “infrequent.” 
However, since it has been more than three years since the last incident, Applicant’s 
conduct does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 14(b) applies. AG ¶ 14(c) also applies because Applicant fully disclosed 
his conduct, is no longer involved in such conduct, and it could not serve as the basis 
for coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
 
There is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including the passage of three 
years since the last involvement with foreign prostitutes. He accepted responsibility for 
his actions and admitted the conduct to security officials. He has outstanding 
recommendations as to his duty performance. His post-offense behavior is sufficient to 
fully mitigate the criminal conduct in this case. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The sexual behavior previously discussed was also listed as a personal conduct 
security concern. For the same reasons previously listed to mitigate the sexual behavior 
concern, the personal conduct concerns are also mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
10 
  
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B, D, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The factors weighing for approval of Applicant’s security clearance are more 
substantial than the factors weighing against its approval due to the ownership of the 
condo in Thailand. His connections to his relatives in Thailand also do not make him 
more vulnerable as a target of coercion. 
 
Applicant lives and works overseas in support of the U.S. Government. In the 
four years between 2008 and September 2013, he spent most of his vacations 
overseas. Choosing to spend approximately ten vacations overseas instead of returning 
to the United States is not a determinative factor. Applicant’s condo is a significant 
financial investment. He also has significate financial investments in the United States 
totaling approximately half the value of the condo. He has been actively attempting to 
sell the condo once he was informed of its security significance. The fact he chose to 
vacation overseas and purchase real estate overseas is not of sufficient security 
concern to deny his clearance.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has carried his 
burden and the foreign influence, sexual behavior, and personal conduct concerns are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:   For Applicant 
    
Paragraph 2, Sexual Behavior:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Personal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
11 
  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Claude R. Heiny  
Administrative Judge 
