 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR No. 12-01295 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahyrn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
In 1959 Applicant was born in Egypt. In 2003 he became a U.S. naturalized 
citizen. His spouse and son are U.S. naturalized citizens and residents. All three of 
them hold dual citizenship with Egypt. One of his brothers is a dual citizen of the United 
States and Egypt, residing here. Applicant has a brother and sister, who are citizens 
and residents of Egypt. He has several in-laws who are citizens and residents of Egypt. 
Two brothers-in-law and one sister-in-law work for the Egyptian government. Applicant 
has a financial interest in real estate in Egypt. He produced insufficient evidence to 
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Access to classified information is 
denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 1, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 7, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a 
security clearance to Applicant, and it recommended referral to an administrative judge 
to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 26, 2013, and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 3.) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on July 24, 
2014. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing seven 
Government Items was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.   
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on August 1, 2014, and returned it to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). He subsequently submitted four documents that I marked Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A to D, and admitted into the record without objection from Department Counsel. 
DOHA assigned the case to me on September 12, 2014. 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning Egypt. 
(FORM.) Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. (Item 7.) Applicant did not object to these documents and Department Counsel’s 
request was granted.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all facts alleged in Paragraph 1 of the SOR, except those 
contained in Paragraph 1.g. His admissions are incorporated into the following findings 
of fact. (Item 3.)   
 
Applicant was born in Egypt in 1959. He earned a bachelor’s degree in electrical 
engineering from an Egyptian university in June 1983. He was conscripted into the 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Egyptian Air Force from October 1983 to March 1986. He became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in February 2003.1 (Item 5.)  
 
From December 2000 to July 2002, Applicant worked for a U.S. private 
engineering firm. He was unemployed from August 2002 to February 2003, when he 
obtained a position with another engineering firm. He worked for that firm until April 
2008, and then moved to another company for a couple months. Since September 2008 
Applicant has worked as an electrical engineer for a defense contractor. (Item 4.) On 
April 1, 2011, Applicant submitted his first e-QIP. On August 21, 2014, Applicant’s 
employer destroyed his expired Egyptian passport. (AE B.) 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Egypt and are now deceased. They were 
citizens and residents of Egypt. He has three brothers and one sister, all of whom were 
born and raised in Egypt. One brother is deceased. That brother’s wife (Applicant’s 
sister-in-law) is a professor at an Egyptian university. Applicant’s second brother is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen and resident since 1995; he holds dual citizenship with Egypt. 
His third brother is a citizen and resident of Egypt, working as an accountant for a 
private hospital. This brother’s wife worked for the Egyptian embassy in Tunisia for two 
years. She now works for the embassy in Egypt. (Item 5, AE D.) Applicant’s only sister 
is a citizen and resident of Egypt. She and her husband are retired engineers. (Item 3.) 
Applicant calls his sister and brother in Egypt once a month. (Item 5.)  
 
Applicant’s wife was born in Egypt. They married in 1989 while living in Egypt. 
She is a naturalized U.S. citizen residing with Applicant, and has dual citizenship with 
Egypt. They have two children. One was born in Egypt. He is a naturalized U.S. citizen, 
and holds dual citizenship with Egypt. The other child was born in the United States. 
(Item 4.) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are deceased. They were citizens 
and residents of Egypt. Applicant’s wife has three brothers, all of whom are citizens of 
Egypt. One of Applicant’s brothers-in-law is an accountant working for an Egyptian 
governmental agency. Another brother-in-law is an accountant with an Egyptian 
government department store; his wife works for a travel agency. The third brother-in-
law is a physician, as is his wife. They reside in Oman. Applicant speaks to his in-laws 
once or twice a year. His wife speaks to them more frequently. (Item 5.) 
 
Applicant visited his family in Egypt in 2003 and 2004. None of his foreign-
resident family members has visited the United States, except his mother-in-law who is 
now deceased. (Item 5.)  
 
Applicant and his siblings own six apartment buildings in Egypt, which they 
inherited from their father. (Item 5.) He estimated that his share was approximately 
$20,000 in 2011, but is currently worth about $10,000, as a result of a decrease in the 
                                            
1 The record does not contain the date Applicant and his immediate family arrived in the United States, or 
under what type of visa. In his e-QIP, Applicant recorded that he has held dual citizenship with the United 
States and Egypt since 1997. The basis for that statement is not clear. (Item 4.) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
value of real estate in Egypt over the past couple years. He said he is financially stable 
in the United States and that the $10,000 share of ownership has little effect on his 
financial situation. He did not elaborate on the extent of his financial or real property 
interests in the United States. (Item 3.) 
 
During an interview with a government investigator in April 2011, Applicant said 
that his allegiance is to the United States. He would be willing to renounce his Egyptian 
citizenship if necessary for employment, but would prefer not to do that. He explained 
that any loyalty he feels to Egypt is based on his family there and memories with them. 
(Item 3.) In his November 2013 answer to the SOR, he said he is willing to renounce 
and relinquish his Egyptian citizenship. He asserted that the potential for pressure or 
coercion based on his connections to Egypt could not change his loyalty to the United 
States. (Item 3.) 
 
There is no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s police or financial 
records. There is no evidence of record showing any U.S. arrests, illegal drug 
possession or use, or alcohol-related incidents.  
 
 I took administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents (FORM) concerning Egypt, which are incorporated herein by reference. Of 
particular significance is Egypt’s current state of crisis politically and economically. 
Since 2013 terrorism and violence have increased. There is little indication that the 
situation is improving. Although the current military leadership has attempted to contain 
the various terrorist organizations operating in the country, including the Muslim 
Brotherhood, conflicts and attacks are rampant. Egypt’s record of human rights 
violations is poor. The U.S. State Department has issued travel warnings to the country 
because of ongoing threats to U.S. citizens and its interests, including kidnappings and 
mob protests.  
 
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
in conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heighted risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires the presence of family members (or business or professional 
associates, friends, or other persons), who are citizens and/or residents of a foreign 
nation, and substantial evidence of a heightened risk. Applicant’s brother, sister, and 
four in-laws are citizens and residents of Egypt. One brother-in-law is a citizen of Egypt 
and resident of Oman. The heightened risk required to raise one of the disqualifying 
conditions is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk greater than the 
normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government or 
substantial assets in a foreign nation. Egypt is a country known to have terrorism 
problems that are aimed against U.S. citizens and their connections. Egypt also 
engages in human right abuses. These factors create a heightened risk. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(a) with respect to Applicant’s relatives living in Egypt.  
  
Applicant’s sister-in-law and two brothers-in-law work for the Egyptian 
government. One sister-in-law works for an Egyptian university. Those connections also 
raise a heightened risk through family ties and could create a potential conflict of 
interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and his desire to help those family members by providing that information. AG ¶ 7(b) 
applies. 
 
 Applicant’s wife and son are dual citizens of the United States and Egypt, 
residing with him. He and his wife maintain close contact with family members in Egypt.  
The evidence supports the application of AG ¶ 7(d). 
 
 Applicant has a financial interest in six apartment buildings in Egypt. Those 
apartments may have a worth between $10,000 and $20,000. Given Egypt’s current 
political situation and anti-Western climate, his financial asset in Egypt raises a security 
concern under AG ¶ 7(e).  
 
 Applicant’s regular and close contacts, relationships, and connections with Egypt 
shift the burden to him to prove mitigation. AG ¶ 8 lists four conditions that could 
mitigate those foreign influence security concerns. Those with potential application are: 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and  
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interest is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and count not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant has a strong emotional bond with his sister and two brothers who are 
citizens of Egypt, of which two are residents. He demonstrated his affections for them 
by regular and ongoing contact with them over the years, which cannot be construed as 
casual. He also has shown a level of bond with his in-laws who reside there. While 
Applicant’s loyalty and close relationship to his family are positive character traits, those 
relationships raise security concerns under this guideline. He should not be placed in a 
position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a 
desire to assist family members, who might be pressured or coerced by terrorists or 
other governmental entities in Egypt for classified information. The fact that four in-laws 
work for the Egyptian government or a university there further negates the application of 
these mitigating conditions. Accordingly, he failed to establish the mitigating conditions 
set forth in AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c).  
 
The evidence establishes some mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b). Applicant provided 
evidence of longstanding relationships to the United States since becoming a U.S. 
citizen in 2003. He has been employed by various U.S. companies since 2002. His 
spouse and two children are U.S. citizens and residents. His brother is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen and resident. He has some U.S. financial assets, however the amount is 
unknown. He did not provide sufficient evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 8(f), 
as to his financial interest in Egypt versus his assets in the United States. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are facts supporting mitigation of the raised security concerns. Applicant 
became a U.S. citizen in 2003. His wife, two children, and brother are citizens and 
residents of the United States. He has a history of working for U.S. companies. He has 
some financial assets in the United States. 
 
The circumstances tending to support denial of Applicant’s security clearance are 
more significant than the facts weighing toward approval of his security clearance. 
Applicant, his wife, and son hold dual citizenship with Egypt. Applicant’s two siblings 
and five in-laws are citizens of Egypt. Four of them are residents of Egypt. Applicant has 
sufficiently frequent and ongoing contact with those family members, indicating a 
commitment to them and their welfare. Applicant’s family in Egypt creates a heightened 
risk to exploitation, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Of particular significance is 
Applicant’s statement in April 2011 that he preferred not to renounce his Egyptian 
citizenship because of family members living there and a history of memories. His 
subsequent assertion in November 2013 that he would renounce his citizenship raises 
credibility issues.   
 
Overall, the record contains insufficient evidence that documents Applicant’s 
deep connections to the United States or explains in greater detail his connections with 
Egypt. Seemingly, he and his immediate family members prefer to maintain dual 
citizenship with the Egypt, despite having obtained U.S. citizenship over ten years ago. 
The totality of the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubts as to Applicant’s 
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from foreign influence.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
