                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  12-04980           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On April 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on September
1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 16, 2014, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on June 26, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on July 22,
2014. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of nine exhibits (GEs 1-9). Applicant
relied on one witness (himself) and six exhibits (AEs A-F). The transcript (Tr.) was
received on July 31, 2014. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with a spread sheet covering his
Chapter 13 payments to the bankruptcy trustee. (Tr. 87-89) For good cause shown,
Applicant was granted seven days to supplement the record. The Government was
afforded additional time to August 5, 2014 to respond. 
Applicant did not supplement the record. In August 2014. Within the time
requested, Applicant advised that he was ending his employment with his defense
contractor employer and taking a position with the Navy. Applicant’s updated employment
submission is admitted as AE G.  His change of positions does not alter the jurisdictional
status of the proceeding. Once a hearing has commenced, jurisdiction is retained to
complete the hearing and issue a decision. See Directive, Sec. 4.4.1.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) petitioned for Chapter 13 relief in
February 2011, scheduling $663,672 in liabilities; (b) accumulated eight consumer debts
exceeding $9,000 since petitioning for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection; © is indebted on
an educational loan in the amount of $38,867; and (d) is indebted for federal taxes for tax
years 2008-2010 in the amount of $13,660.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with
explanations.  He claimed he has maintained a Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented
Information (TS/SCI) clearance since 1992 and has never been questioned about his
ability to protect classified information. He claimed his financial situation is poor and has
been “building for years.” 
Applicant further claimed he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in February
2011 and attributed his financial problems to his failure to deal with his undiagnosed
depression and non-admitted alcoholism, which he has since effectively addressed. And
he claimed he has been paying off other debts not included in either the SOR or his
bankruptcy petition at the rate of $1,000 a month, and will move his resources to the
debts alleged in the SOR as he pays off these other debts.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old former program manager for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 61) The allegations covered in the SOR and
3
admitted by Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his first spouse in October 1990 and divorced her in January
1998. (GE 1) He has two adult children from this marriage. (GE 1) He married his current
spouse in February 2000 and has two children and one adult step-child from this
marriage. (GE 1; Tr.85) 
Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree from a service academy in May 1990 and a
master’s degree from a recognized university in May 1997. (GE 1; Tr. 86) He completed
11 years of active duty in the Navy as a commissioned naval officer and received an
honorable discharge in September 2011. (GE 1; Tr. 64)
Applicant’s finances
Applicant purchased his current house in early 2001 for about $180,000 and
financed his purchase with a $153,000 first trust deed that carried monthly payments of
$1,800. (GEs 5 and 9; Tr. 61-63, 70-73)  He refinanced his first mortgage in February
2002 with a $198,432 first mortgage that established monthly payments of $2,200. (GE 5;
Tr. 73-74) and added a $60,000 second mortgage in November 2002. (GE 5) 
Records reflect the creation of a $266,502 first mortgage with another lender in
February 2004. (GE 5).  Whether the recorded mortgage was the result of an assignment
or the creation of a third refinancing of Applicant’s residence is unclear. (GE 5; Tr. 75-76)
Applicant’s credit reports also reveal a $310,175 first mortgage with still another lender in
August 2004. (GE 5) It is not clear whether this recorded mortgage is the result of a
mortgage assignment or a new loan arranged by Applicant on his residence.
In November 2005, Applicant refinanced his home mortgage for at least the third
time with a $362,176 adjustable first mortgage and an $89,600 fixed second mortgage to
create an aggregate mortgage debt in excess of $450,000. (GE 5; Tr. 76-77) Monthly
payment terms on this new first mortgage were $2,200 a month and a little over $800 a
month on the second mortgage. (GE 5; Tr. 76) When the adjustable rate on the first
mortgage adjusted years later, Applicant’s combined monthly payments on both
mortgages increased to around $4,400 a month. (GE 8; Tr. 76-77)  Credit reports reveal
that these two mortgages were sold to another lender in March 2010. (GEs 5 and 9)
Between 1998 and 2011, Applicant accumulated other consumer debts, some
secured and some not. (GEs 5 and 9) Many of these consumer accounts became
delinquent. Besides his consumer debts, Applicant’s credit reports indicate he accrued
$38,867 in government-guaranteed student loans in 2006 and $13,660 in federal taxes
for the 2008-2010 tax years. (GEs 5, 7, and 9) 
4
By early 2010, Applicant began falling behind with his bills. Applicant attributes his
financial troubles to “carelessness and irresponsibility.” (GE 7) Excessive spending by
himself and his wife were the chief factors in his accruing of so much debt. (GEs 5, 7, and
9; Tr. 68-69) His excessive debts prompted difficult choices over what creditors to
prioritize. (GEs 7 and 8) In hindsight, he made poor financial decisions.
Unable to address his rising debt load (especially his mortgages), Applicant
petitioned for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief in February 2011, while still on active-duty
status with the Navy. (GEs 3 and 8; Tr. 64, 77-79) He scheduled $529,214 in secured
debts, which are comprised of his first and second trust deeds on his home, real estate
taxes owed on his residence, a first deed of trust on a timeshare property in another
state, furniture, and two vehicles. (GE 3; Tr. 79-81)  
Additionally, Applicant, scheduled $13,829 in unsecured priority claims, consisting
of personal property taxes and federal taxes. (GE 3; Tr. 81-83)  Finally, he scheduled
$120,628 in unsecured non-priority claims, which are comprised of education loans, bank
loans, service accounts, credit card accounts, and medical accounts. (GE 3) Altogether,
Applicant scheduled $663,672 in debts and $413,566 in listed assets. (GE 3; Tr. 63)
Applicant’s amended modified Chapter 13 plan was confirmed in March 2014. (GE 2)
Since filing his Chapter 13 petition, Applicant has made monthly payments of
$2,525 to the Chapter 13 trustee; his aggregate payments to date exceed $90,000, and
he is current with his mortgage lender. (GE 8 and AEs B and C; Tr. 63) Applicant expects
to complete his Chapter 13 plan by March 2016. (Tr. 55)  Once he completes his plan, he
will use the funds he has allocated to his Chapter 13 plan to pay the delinquent debts
listed in the SOR, eight in all exceeding $9,000. (Tr. 54-57)  Currently, Applicant intends
to hold onto his house, which is worth less than the debts owed on his mortgages. (Tr. 54,
62, 84-85)
Besides the debts covered in the SOR, Applicant is indebted on a $22,100
promissory note he executed for his sister-in-law in April 2013. (AE E; Tr. 41-42) The note
calls for monthly payments of $500 to his sister-in-law and her husband, commencing in
June 2013. His sister-jn-law and her husband loaned him money in 2006 under an
informal arrangement. (Tr. 40-43) When later pressed for repayment initiatives, Applicant
agreed to do so. While obligated to make $500 monthly payments to his sister-in-law and
her husband, they have actually been “paying them only $300 a month.” (Tr. 43) 
Applicant’s payment arrangement with his sister-in-law and her husband is not
included in his Chapter 13 plan. Applicant has also obligated himself to make monthly
payments of $250 to his son to partially cover his son’s monthly college expenses (AE D;
Tr. 43) and another $250 a month to cover legal expenses associated with his wife’s
divorce from her previous husband. (AE F; Tr. 43-44) These monthly payments have
been made through a $500 monthly allotment from his retirement account. (AE B)
Applicant has not received any formal financial counseling,  other than his required
Chapter 13 on-line counseling. (Tr. 53) However, he has benefitted from the medical
5
counseling he initiated to address his depression issues. (Tr. 51, 69-70) Applicant
reported net monthly income of $11,350 and monthly expenses of $3,150.  Compare GE
8 with AE B.  He reported monthly debt payments of $7,125, which encompasses both his
monthly mortgage payments and his trustee payments. (GE 8) He listed a net monthly
remainder of $1,075 and assets totaling $343,000.  (GE 8)
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by his supervisors. (AE A) His supervisor cited him as
one of his sounding boards (almost as a mentor) and credited him with the knowledge,
wisdom, and experience that only comes from a long and distinguished career as a U.S.
Navy officer. (AE A) Applicant’s supervisor considered Applicant trustworthy and
recommended him to a position of trust. Friends who served with Applicant similarly
expressed confidence in Applicant’s trustworthiness and ability to safeguard classified
information. (AE A)
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
6
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
7
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts,
attributable to excessive spending and poor financial decisions. Applicant’s debt
accruals raise potential security concerns about his judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness in managing his personal finances. He has since petitioned for Chapter
13 bankruptcy protection and has made making monthly payments to his Chapter 13
trustee and his mortgage lender since 2011. His amended modified plan is court-
approved. Applicant’s actions warrant the application of two of the disqualifying
conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts;” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
By 2011, Applicant’s debts had risen to levels he could no longer responsibly
service with his available income sources. To achieve payment terms he could
realistically manage, he petitioned for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in February
2011.  However, his lengthy history of excessive spending and poor decision-making in
managing his finances is not extenuating enough to entitle him to the application of MC
¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s only financial counseling consisted of the required on-line counseling
he received in connection with his Chapter 13 petition.  Without more elaboration of the
nature of the on-line counseling he completed, no more than partial application of MC ¶
20(c), “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” is warranted
in these circumstances. By successfully petitioning for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief and
establishing well-supported monthly payments to the Chapter 13 trustee and his lender,
Applicant has established a promising track record for resolving his debts. MC ¶ 20(d),
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts,”  fully applies to Applicant’s situation.  
1
  Approval of a clearance does not prevent the Government from revisiting and re-validating an applicant’s
financial condition at any future time through credit reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories.
Violation of promises made (explicitly or implicitly) to pay legitimate debts and maintain valid accounts in
current status raises judgment concerns under both Guideline F and Guideline E and may support a future
security clearance revocation. An administrative  judge does not have “authority to grant an interim,
conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012)(citing ISCR
Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 8, 2011).  And no such suggestion is made herein that Applicant’s
clearance is a conditional one. 
8
Applicant’s documented Chapter 13 plan and payment history reflect satisfactory
progress in accordance with the criteria established by the Appeal Board for assessing
an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with responsible efforts
considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29,
2009). That Applicant is currently unable to address his additional delinquent debts
identified in his credit reports and SOR, but not covered in his Chapter 13 plan, is not
enough to deprive him of the mitigation benefits achieved from his Chapter 13 plan and
implementation.  So long as Applicant is able to establish a credible and realistic plan,
or plans, to resolve his financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to
implement his plan, he meets the Appeal’s Board requirements for stabilizing his
finances. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008). See ISCR Case No. 05-
11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan., 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd.
May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).    
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant presents with a distinguished Navy
career and record of civilian employment with his defense contractor employer. He has
impressive university schooling to his credit and the support of supervisors and friends
who have worked with him. While his aggregate debt is considerable, he has developed
a significant track record with his Chapter 13 trustee and mortgage lender and is
committed to restoring his finances to respectable levels consistent with holding a
security clearance. Applicant’s overall payment initiatives to date are encouraging and
are likely to succeed. 
While Applicant has not addressed the eight SOR-listed consumer debts
accumulated since he petitioned for Chapter 13 relief, he is committed to doing so once
his income resources permit. Applicant is well-educated with demonstrated
trustworthiness in his personal and business affairs, and knows what he needs to do to
fulfill and maintain his financial responsibilities.   1
Overall, Applicant’s corrective actions to date are sufficient to meet mitigation
requirements imposed by the guideline governing his finances. Favorable conclusions
are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
9
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a  through 1.k:                  For Applicant
                        Conclusio  n  s    
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
