 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-02226 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated personal conduct and financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations).1 The action was taken under DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 9, 2014, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
                                                          
1 The SOR identifies this as a public trust position case. Applicant’s job is consistent with that designation. 
Department Counsel indicated the case may be a security clearance case. I am not changing the 
designation. The adjudicative guidelines are the same for public trust position and security clearance 
cases, and this decision would be the same under either designation.  
 
2 
submitted on May 15, 2014. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on June 2, 2014. As of September 10, 2014, she had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on September 11, 2014. The Government 
exhibits included in the FORM (Items 4-8) are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has a 
bachelor’s degree from 2000 and two master’s degrees that were awarded in 2010 and 
2011. She is married with two children.2 
  
 Applicant worked for a bank from 2003 until she was terminated in 2006 for 
embezzling $500. A deposit bag contained $500 more than was listed on the deposit 
slip. Applicant stole the $500 believing the money would not be missed. She was 
questioned by a bank investigator about two weeks later. She admitted the theft and 
was terminated. In 2007, she was charged in federal court with embezzlement. She 
completed the terms of a pretrial diversion program, and the charge was dismissed in 
2009. Applicant stated that the charge was expunged. Her husband is aware of her 
conduct. She listed the charge on her Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 
86), and she admitted her conduct during her background interview.3 
 
 Applicant obtained another job after she lost her bank job. She remained 
employed until she lost her job in December 2009. She was unemployed until she 
obtained work with her current employer in November 2011. Applicant has significant 
medical problems requiring daily medication. She did not have medical insurance for an 
extended period. She was unable to pay all her bills, and a number of debts became 
delinquent.4 
 
 The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts totaling about $13,950. Applicant admitted 
owing all the debts except the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($204), 1.e ($603), 1.f 
($207), and 1.r ($556), which she denied. She stated that she paid the $6 medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a in 2013.5 
 
 With the exception of the $6 medical debt, there is no evidence that Applicant 
made any payments toward any of the delinquent debts. She had difficulty contacting 
several creditors; she was told that some debts were charged off; and she was unable 
                                                          
2 Items 4, 5. 
 
3 Items 3-5, 7. 
 
4 Items 4, 5. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
 
3 
to pay the amount requested by other creditors. She did not pay the $67 medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.u because the creditor would “only accept full payment.”6  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. Little is known 
about Applicant’s current financial situation because the only credit report in the record 
was obtained in November 2011. Applicant then had more than $110,000 in deferred 
student loans. Applicant submitted a personal financial statement in August 2013. She 
noted that her and her husband’s net monthly income varied, but she gave an estimated 
figure of $3,366. After monthly expenses and $784 in car payments, they had a net 
monthly remainder of about $164. That amount did not include payments toward her 
student loans or any of her delinquent debts.7 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
                                                          
6 Item 3, 6. 
 
7 Items 5, 6, 8. Applicant’s student loans were not alleged in the SOR. Any financial matters that were not 
alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. They may be considered when 
assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in 
analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
 
4 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c). 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
5 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to medical issues and unemployment, 
but she may not have been unemployed if she had not been terminated from the bank 
for embezzlement. To the extent that the above events were beyond her control, for the 
full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must also have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
 Applicant is given credit for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($204), 1.e ($603), 
1.f ($207), and 1.r ($556), which she denied owing. With the exception of the $6 medical 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, there is no evidence that Applicant made any payments 
toward any of the delinquent debts. She indicated that she had difficulty contacting 
several creditors; she was told that some debts were charged off; and she was unable 
to pay the amount requested by other creditors. Applicant and her husband pay $784 
each month in car payments, but she stated that she did not pay the $67 medical debt 
because the creditor would “only accept full payment.” The status of her student loans is 
unknown. 
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her 
debts. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) 
are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial considerations 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The trustworthiness concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as 
follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
[sensitive] information. 
 
 
6 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant abused a position of trust when she embezzled $500 while working for 
a bank. That conduct created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. 
AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. Additionally, the conduct showed dishonesty, poor judgment, 
and an unwillingness to comply with the law, which raises questions about Applicant’s 
ability to protect sensitive information. The general concern addressed in AG ¶ 15 is 
also raised. See ISCR Case No. 12-01683 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 10, 2014).  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 It has been about eight years since Applicant stole money from a bank. She 
completed the terms of her pretrial diversion program, and the charge was dismissed in 
2009. It may have also been expunged. Her husband is aware of her conduct; she listed 
the charge on her SF 86; and she admitted her conduct during her background 
interview. Applicant has reduced her vulnerability to coercion, exploitation, and duress. 
AG ¶ 14(e) is applicable. However, I remain concerned about Applicant’s core honesty. 
She committed a serious breach of trust. She has significant financial problems that 
could lead her to again succumb to temptation. Her conduct continues to cast doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I am unable to conclude that 
such conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 14(c) and 14(d) are not applicable. Personal 
conduct concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
 
7 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has not convinced me that she will attain financial stability within the 
foreseeable future. Moreover, I have concerns about her honesty. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated personal conduct and financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.q:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.s-1.u:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
    
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
