 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-04297 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 13, 2011, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP; SF 86). On March 21, 2014, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 14, 2014. He answered the 
SOR in writing on April 22, 2014, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request after that 
date. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 16, 2014, and I received 
the case assignment on June 19, 2014. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 26, 
2014, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 24, 2014. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
offered Exhibits 1 through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant testified 
and submitted no exhibits at that time. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on August 4, 2014. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until August 
21, 2014, to submit additional matters. On August 20, 2014, he submitted Exhibits A 
through I, without objection after the hearing. The record closed on August 21, 2014. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 
and 1.f of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support his request for 
eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 56 years old and married for the third time. He works for a defense 
contractor. Applicant has three children from his first marriage. He has had several 
employers over the years. He has worked for the same company since 1995. Applicant 
served in the U.S. Army for seven years on active duty from 1978 to 1985 and then in 
the Army Reserve from 1985 to 2005. He received an honorable discharge in 2005. (Tr. 
31, 32, 37, 40; Exhibits 1, 5; Answer)  
 
Applicant claims he could not work for certain periods of time since 2010. He 
asserts several three-week periods in 2010, six-to-seven weeks total in 2011, and April 
and May 2011, all causing financial hardship for him. He had gastric bypass surgery, 
back and knee problems, and other medical issues. He also claimed several periods of 
employment layoffs between 1991 and 1995. When unemployed he worked at lower-
paying jobs but had difficulty paying his debts in those times, according to Applicant. 
(Tr. 35-38) 
 
 Applicant has six debts listed in the SOR. They total $22,811. (Tr. 24-29, 53-87; 
Exhibits 2-7; Answer) 
 
 Applicant contracted for an internet business provider’s plan and the creditor 
alleges he now owes $10,676 (Subparagraph 1.a). Applicant paid $750 to buy into the 
website program and then agreed to a monthly fee. Applicant and his wife assert they 
got nothing from the creditor to assist them in building their website and delivery 
business. Applicant refuses to pay this amount or any money to the creditor because he 
says it is a “scam.” The creditor is the subject of a class action lawsuit in which 
Applicant filed a claim that he enclosed as an exhibit. It was filed in 2009 but no specific 
resolution pertaining to Applicant was submitted in any documents. This account is not 
resolved because of the litigation involved. He has not written to the credit reporting 
agencies to dispute this debt. Applicant submitted as exhibits copies of internet 
commentary by other investors designed to lead the reader to believe the creditor was a 
fraudulent operator. Applicant has not resolved this debt because he sincerely thinks he 
has a valid defense to this debt. (Tr. 74-87; Exhibits 4, A, F-I)    
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant owes $952 to a payday lender (Subparagraph 1.b) since 2011. He 
admits this debt. Applicant claims he talked to the creditor about this debt but has not 
made any payments because of other obligations to his family, such as the mortgage 
and food. The two credit reports submitted as exhibits show the debt is “charged off” by 
the creditor. Applicant testified that he sent in an installment agreement with his SOR 
Answer, but the only documents attached to his Answer pertained to another debt and 
his federal income tax debt. This debt is not paid. (Tr. 25, 26, 69-71; Exhibits 2, 5 
(pages 24, 25), 7; Answer) 
 
 Applicant owes a collector $1,191(Subparagraph 1.c). This debt is a car loan. 
Applicant admits this debt and claims he is making payments on it. It is current now. 
$645 is now due but is not past due. Applicant has resolved this delinquency by making 
payments on an installment payment plan. (Tr. 26, 27, 71-73; Exhibits 2, 7) 
 
Applicant is alleged to owe income taxes to two states, $1,883 to one state and 
$5,353 to another (Subparagraphs 1.d, and 1.e). He denies he owes these taxes. 
Applicant’s attributes his tax problems to his tax preparer’s failure to maintain currency 
on tax regulations from 2005 to 2010. As a result, errors were made. After taxes were 
not taken from a bonus he received in 2007, Applicant owed taxes on that amount. He 
testified he is now current on all his federal and state taxes. However, his exhibits 
submitted after the hearing did not contain any documentary evidence to show the taxes 
were paid. Applicant claims he called the tax department of one state, and was told he 
owed nothing, but that it would take him more time to obtain a tax transcript to show he 
did not owe it any money. Applicant testified that he saw a release letter for the $5,353 
taxes after he paid them in May 2006 and could submit it but he did not submit any 
document after the hearing in the form of a release letter. The credit report from 
February 2014 does not list either tax debt as owing. However, the judgment and lien 
report submitted by Department Counsel shows the current state of residence tax lien 
for $1,883 is owed as of February 2014. The tax lien for $5,353 is shown on the same 
document as unsatisfied and still owing. The weight of the evidence, including 
Applicant’s uncertain and unspecific answers, shows that these tax debts are not 
resolved. (Tr. 27-29, 42-49, 53-60; Exhibits1-7, A; Answer) 
 
In explanation of his tax problems, Applicant admits he did not pay sufficient 
money to the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and his original state of residence in 
2005, 2006, 2008, 2009, and 2010. He owed $1,600 to his former state of residence 
and over $13,000 to the IRS. Applicant claims he entered payment arrangements with 
the two governments. He pays the IRS $325 monthly. When that installment payment 
plan is concluded, he will pay $30 monthly to the state. His Answer included documents 
pertaining only to an IRS tax debt. The IRS debt is not alleged in the SOR. Nor is more 
than one tax debt to that particular state alleged in Subparagraph 1.e of the SOR.  
Applicant asserted he was certain he did not owe any taxes but could not verify his 
claim and seemed uncertain about the history of these tax debts.. (Tr. 27, 28, 42-49, 53-
60; Exhibits1-7, A; Answer) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant owes a finance company $2,756.00 on a truck loan for the money he 
borrowed in the first state of his residence (Subparagraph 1.f). Applicant claims he paid 
this debt after it was arbitrated through the local court system in Applicant’s current 
state of residence (the second state). This action occurred in 2005 and resulted in an 
award to the plaintiff finance company in the amount of $2,756 plus $500 in attorney’s 
fees and court costs of $192, for a total of $3,448. This debt was paid by wage 
garnishment deductions from Applicant’s income. Applicant submitted a court order 
from September 2007 related to this debt in which the second state court judge 
dismissed the garnishment order because the debt was paid through wage garnishment 
in the first state. Applicant also submitted a Satisfaction of Judgment document from 
August 22, 2007, showing the debt was paid in the first state. However, Applicant 
acknowledged in answers to the Department Counsel during the hearing that about 
$1,100 is owed on this debt and that with additional time after the hearing he could 
submit documents from his company’s payroll office to show that money was garnished 
and paid. Applicant never submitted such documents. Therefore, his assertion cannot 
be verified. This debt is not resolved. (Tr. 62-67; Exhibits 2, 5, 6, D, E; Answer) 
 
 Applicant admits he was evicted from an apartment in November 2011 for $2,300 
in unpaid rent. Applicant submitted documents showing a wage deduction order based 
on a judgment obtained by that landlord. That debt is not alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
claims it was paid by garnishment deductions. (Tr. 35; Exhibits 1, 5, B, C; Answer) 
 
 Since 2003 Applicant borrowed money from a couple of payday lenders, but 
primarily one such lender. He took those loans regularly and at least 25 are listed in the 
December 2011 credit report. He repays these monies on the installment basis. He 
claims he does this borrowing to help him over times he is unemployed or laid off by his 
employer. Applicant’s credit report from 2011 shows a number of other borrowings from 
various lenders, most of which have been repaid. He had three tax liens filed against 
him since 1996 and three creditor judgments filed since 2005. Applicant borrows and 
repays money on a regular basis to cover the gaps between his income and expenses. 
(Exhibits 2, 5 (pages 19-21), 6, 7; Answer) 
 
 Applicant submitted as part of his answers to the DOHA interrogatories 
documents pertaining to debts and events not alleged in the SOR. He has a “repayment 
plan option” for a charged-off loan from a credit union in 2013 for $552 payable at $125 
bi-weekly. He included credit reporting agency documents showing a state tax lien and 
the truck loan entries were deleted from that one company’s records. Applicant also 
included documents pertaining to the apartment lease and small claims lawsuit referred 
to previously. He included letters pertaining to a speeding arrest in 2011. Next, he 
included documents pertaining to an employee corrective action taken regarding him by 
his employer in 2007 that resulted in him taking off three days without pay. Then he 
included several pages of documents pertaining to his military service. Finally, he again 
submitted IRS documents pertaining to his federal tax debt. (Exhibit 5) 
 
  
  
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement in answer to the DOHA 
interrogatories in Exhibit 5 (page 69). That document from December 2013 shows about 
$30,000 in debt owed, including three debts alleged on the SOR. The statement also 
shows a net remainder after taxes and debt payments of $1,743 for Applicant. He 
claimed he did not have that money in cash each month because he was paying it to 
creditors and for other matters. Applicant was imprecise on where his net remainder 
funds are spent each month. (Tr. 90-107; Exhibit 5) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
6 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $22,811 in delinquent debt from 1996 to the present time 
that remains unpaid. Applicant has six delinquent debts listed in the SOR. AG ¶ 19 (a) 
and (c) apply. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Four conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
 trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the  person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 
7 
 
 
 or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
 circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
 dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
   
Applicant attributes some of his financial problems to his illnesses in 2010 and 
2011. He had gastric bypass surgery, back and knee problems, and other medical 
issues. He acted responsibly by trying to find lower-paying jobs during those periods of 
unemployment and his medical conditions to pay his bills. AG ¶ 20 (b) has partial 
application except that Applicant still incurred debts during those years.  
 
Applicant is confused and uncertain about the status and history of his delinquent 
debts. He is not currently paying his five debts in an orderly manner. There are not clear 
indications from the evidence he presented that the financial problems are under control 
and are being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) does not apply.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (d) does not apply because Applicant has not shown good-faith efforts 
to repay his delinquent debts. His answers and exhibits made it difficult to determine the 
current status of the debts. He received the SOR in March 2014 and had sufficient time 
to gather his documents and make an organized presentation designed to persuade the 
finder of fact that he resolved each alleged debt. He did not meet that burden of proof 
and was obviously confused about what he owed and when he could pay it.  
 
If Applicant has a reasonable basis to dispute the first debt listed in the SOR, that 
being owed to the internet business developer he found that might have allowed him to 
create his own home business, he has not worked to assert it in any forum. He must do 
so to have the mitigating condition apply. He just denies he owes it. Applicant submitted 
evidence he tried to join a class action lawsuit against the creditor, and that other 
investors concluded the developer was a fraud who only took their money and provided 
no assistance as promised. However, the claim form Applicant submitted was signed by 
him but not dated properly, so it cannot be determined if he sent it and is included in the 
class action. The current status of the lawsuit was not presented. Applicant has not 
written to the credit reporting agencies to object to the debt on his report nor taken other 
action with legal authorities to rid him of this debt, although he said he was going to do 
that some time ago. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant has not pursued his 
 
8 
 
 
remedies. Furthermore, the internet comments of various writers who allegedly dealt 
with the same creditor are not verified and are really only, at best, second-level hearsay. 
 
None of the other mitigating conditions have any applicability to Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant displayed a history of poor 
financial management without submitting any evidence that he has changed his 
behavior. He resolved one of the debts, but none of the other five with any certitude 
supported by any objective documents. His actions demonstrate poor judgment, 
untrustworthiness, and unreliability regarding his security position. 
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the Financial Considerations security concern. Also, 
I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.b, 1.d to 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
