 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05931 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James Cumbie, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On May 28, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 18, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
 
2 
 
 
29, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled, by video teleconference, on September 
17, 2014.  
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. In Applicant’s Answer to the 
SOR, he requested the Government’s investigative file be produced. It was produced 
and supplemented with additional information.  
 
Applicant’s Counsel objected to all of the Government’s exhibits. He first objected 
to GE 4, stating:  
 
The [SOR] addressed the February 14, 2014 credit report, not the March 
30, 2012 report, which we submit is therefore irrelevant and immaterial 
because that’s not what he was charged with in the [SOR].1 
 
He next stated: 
 
The other objections are –they may be procedural, but I’m objecting to the 
admissions, because when [Applicant] filed his answer, sworn answer to 
the [SOR], he requested what they referred to as the investigative file, that 
is, all materials that were used by the Government in support of its [SOR], 
and he got a series of documents and a transmittal letter [from] a 
Government employee saying these were all the documents that were 
used.2  
 
When asked if Applicant received the investigative file, his Counsel stated:  
 
Well, that’s what we’re here about today. We have the documents that he 
was provided. Then, in a later point in time, another month later, additional 
information was sent, that was not sent with the original production. It was 
sent by a different person. Okay. At that point, that’s when I sent the email 
to [Department Counsel] saying, will you produce, will the Government 
produce these two witnesses that signed the letters producing different 
documents on this case. He said no, and that’s – we got an email to that 
effect.  
 
So we submit that any documents that were not produced the first time, 
that we requested, and the Government stated these are the documents 
we used, for example, the 2012 report was not in the first batch-should not 
be used. 3   
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 28-29. 
 
2 Tr. 29-30. 
 
3 Tr. 30-31. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s Counsel confirmed that Applicant received the entire investigative file 
in two different mailings. The first included the 2014 credit bureau report along with 
other documents. The second mailing included the 2012 credit bureau report along with 
168 pages of other documents. He objected that information in the second mailing that 
was not in the SOR or that related to a 2014 credit report should not be admissible.4 
 
Applicant’s Counsel further stated:  
 
Number one, they-the Government should only be able to use what’s 
listed in the [SOR], which was the 2014 investigative file, which is number-
Exhibit No. 3.  
 
Second. When the Government produces the documents pursuant to his 
request, they should not be able to supplement that later, without an 
explanation, and go back to 2012, when they haven’t amended the [SOR] 
and the 2014, the first production stated this is all that’s there.  
 
The Government did not state, in the transmittal letters, that documents 
were being withheld. I then asked to ask questions from the two witnesses 
that signed the letters that work for the Government, and of course I was 
declined pursuant to the rules of this court.5  
 
When asked if there were further objections, Applicant’s Counsel stated:  
 
No. Just for the record, I’d like to note that not being able to subpoena 
those witnesses or compel their production, you know, I realize it’s the 
process of this court, but we would submit, that it’s not constitutional due 
process.6 
 
 Department Counsel’s responded as to the relevancy of the documents and that 
the Government was not bound by the four corners of the SOR, and could address 
matters regarding the whole person.7 
 
There was no objection claiming Applicant was not provided the entire 
investigative file. Applicant’s objections were overruled and GE 1 through 4 were 
admitted into evidence. Applicant’s Counsel moved to dismiss the SOR for lack of 
evidence. The objection was overruled.8  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 32-34. 
 
5 Tr. 34-35. 
 
6 Tr. 35. 
 
7 Tr. 35-37. 
 
8 Tr. 41. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant and one witness testified. Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D were 
offered and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on September 25, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 50 years old. He served in the Navy from 1985 to 1995 and was 
honorably discharged. He married in 1987 and has two children, ages 20 and 15. He 
worked for the same employer since 1998. He held a security clearance while in the 
Navy and has held one with his present employer for 16 years.9  
 
Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy sometime between 1995 and 1998. He 
could not recall the specific year. At the time, he was working in the corrections field, did 
not have medical insurance, and was earning $9 an hour. He experienced financial 
difficulties and approximately $20,000 to $30,000 of debt was discharged. When 
Applicant began working for his present employer, his earnings increased. He was able 
to meet his financial obligations.10  
 
In March 2009, Applicant sent an email to his security officer advising him that 
Applicant’s wife was going to be laid off from her job in the next month and his family’s 
household income was going to be reduced by approximately $2,000 a month. He noted 
in the email that he was going to speak to a debt counselor or a lawyer to discuss how 
to proceed regarding his obligations. He also reinforced to his security manager that he 
would never use his protected information to help him resolve his financial situation. He 
indicated he would use proper channels to handle the matter legally and through the 
least painful method. He further advised that he would keep his security manager 
informed if there were any changes. Shortly thereafter, Applicant’s wife was laid off from 
her job and their income was reduced. He adopted an emergency budget, reducing 
unnecessary services and recreational expenses. He stated that before 2009 their 
finances were tight, but manageable. He also admitted that he and his wife overused 
credit cards.11 
 
 Applicant testified that after his wife lost her job, at some point, they were unable 
to make the minimum payments on their credit card accounts. The interest rates on all 
                                                          
9 Tr. 45-47. 
 
10 Tr. 104-107; Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant’s credibility; to 
decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, 
mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful 
rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006) (citations omitted). I have considered Applicant’s bankruptcy that was not alleged in the SOR for 
these limited purposes. 
 
11 Tr. 47-53, 71, 101-102; AE B. 
 
5 
 
 
of their credit cards were raised, and some were doubled. He discussed with friends the 
different options that were available to resolve their financial problems, as he believed it 
was becoming somewhat hopeless. Creditors contacted him regarding the delinquent 
debts. His wife would speak with the creditors in an attempt to work out a payment plan, 
but they refused to negotiate. Applicant admitted he never reached out to the creditors 
to offer a settlement. He stated he was unaware the creditor could negotiate a lower 
interest rate or payoff amount. He stated his primary goal was maintaining his 
residence, and providing food and medical care for his family. Applicant stated his wife 
was unable to obtain unemployment benefits, but he was not sure why. Applicant’s wife 
found new employment sometime in the middle of 2010. She earned approximately 
$1,400 a month. Applicant admitted that once his wife began working again they would 
have been able to pay some of their delinquent debts, but they were waiting for their 
bankruptcy attorney to provide them with some type of resolution.12  
 
 In April 2009, Applicant sought assistance from a bankruptcy attorney. On his 
client intake questionnaire he noted he had eight accounts, which included four credit 
cards. The cost to file bankruptcy with attorney’s fees was $2,002.13 Applicant was 
unable to pay the amount at one time and paid the fees through installments from April 
2009 to October 2009. He completed the payments. He completed the mandatory debt 
counseling required to file bankruptcy. He indicated that he was told he earned too 
much money to file Chapter 7 and was advised to wait and see if had any additional 
debts that would make him eligible to file Chapter 7. He was told filing Chapter 13 was 
an option, and he indicated he was open to that possibility, but at that time he did not 
have the money to pay the creditors. When he received letters from creditors, Applicant 
would give them to his attorney. He stopped answering the phone because creditors 
would harass him. If he did answer, he would refer the creditor to the bankruptcy 
attorney. After the bankruptcy fees were paid, Applicant’s wife maintained contact with 
the bankruptcy attorney for about six or seven months, and then stopped. Applicant’s 
intention was to file bankruptcy, but he never did. He admitted he was at fault for not 
being proactive. He never followed through with contacting the attorney to pursue the 
bankruptcy. He stated he was waiting for somebody to sue him, basically to force his 
hand, and then he would have gone back to the bankruptcy attorney to resolve the 
matter.14  
 
The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling approximately $52,423. Applicant 
testified that all of the debts belonged to him. The credit bureau reports support he owes 
these delinquent debts.15 He answered “yes” to questions on his security clearance 
application (SCA) dated March 27, 2012, that he had debts that were turned over to a 
collection agency; he had accounts or credit cards suspended, charged off, or canceled 
                                                          
12 Tr. 51-56, 72-75, 83, 86-89. 
 
13 AE C. 
 
14 Tr. 56, 62-70, 77-78, 80, 89-94, 96-97. 
 
15 GE 3 and 4. 
 
6 
 
 
for failing to pay as agreed; and that he was currently over 120 delinquent on a debt. He 
specifically disclosed he had various credit card debts that were delinquent and 
estimated the total amount owed was approximately $55,000. He disclosed the reason 
for the delinquent debts was that he was “unable to provide the necessities of life for 
family and make the credit card payments.” He admitted he overused credit cards. He 
listed the current status of the debts as: “Consulted a lawyer to look into bankruptcy. 
Issue is still in limbo. Paid the lawyer and issue was never filed or resolved.” He 
disclosed the financial issues began in approximately January 2010. In response to the 
SCA inquiry as to what actions he had taken to resolve the debt or if he had not taken 
any action, he wrote: “Looking into getting our money refunded from the [lawyer] and 
finding an agency that can negotiate a settlement for us so we can pay off our debt at 
an affordable rate.” He never pursued finding an agency to assist him in negotiating 
settlements. He never contacted the bankruptcy attorney again. He testified he had no 
excuse except that he lost track of the debts.16  
 
 Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney testified on his behalf. He did not remember any 
specific information about Applicant’s case, other than the notes he made on the client 
intake questionnaire. He confirmed Applicant paid his fee in installments from April 2009 
to October 2009. He confirmed that state law barred creditors with written contracts 
from pursuing claims after five years.17 
 
 Applicant was not sued for payment by any of his creditors. Applicant is aware 
that there is a statute of limitations for pursuing legal action on delinquent debts that are 
more than five years old. If he was to make any payment toward his delinquent debts 
that are over five years old, it would reaffirm the debt, and the five year statute of 
limitations would start over. Applicant admitted he out-waited the creditors, but he was 
unaware of the statute of limitations provision until recently. He stated he was waiting 
for the creditors to contact him or sue him. None of the delinquent debts are paid. It 
appears under state law the creditors are barred from suing Applicant for payment.18 
 
 Applicant indicated the statement he made to the Government investigator during 
his background investigation is accurate.19 Applicant testified that he has learned his 
lesson and changed his living habits. He maintains a budget and does not use credit 
cards any longer. He has not incurred any new delinquent debt in the past five years. 
He lives paycheck to paycheck and has about $100 in savings. He stated he was 
amendable to resolving the delinquent debts now that he cannot be sued and he is in a 
better negotiating position.20  
 
                                                          
16 Tr. 60, 93; GE 1 pages 27-29. 
 
17 Tr. 116, 120-133. 
 
18 Tr. 58, 68-69, 78-79, 95, 98-100, 113. 
 
19 GE 2. 
 
20 Tr. 59-60, 97-98, 102, 109. 
 
7 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has 14 delinquent debts totaling approximately $52,423 that are 
unpaid. Applicant was unwilling and unable for a period of time to satisfy his debts. The 
debts have been delinquent since approximately 2009. I find there is sufficient evidence 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
9 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant incurred credit card debts that he was unable to pay when his wife lost 
her job in 2009. His intention was to file bankruptcy, but he never completed it. The 
creditors were unwilling to negotiate with him. He admitted he was waiting for the 
creditors to sue him. When they did not contact him or sue him, he did not pursue 
resolving the delinquent debts, and they remain unpaid. The creditors are barred by 
state statute from suing Applicant for payment. This does not negate Applicant’s 
obligation and responsibility to pay his just debts. His failure to address the debts and 
wait out the creditors cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness and good 
judgment. His behavior is recent because the debts remain unpaid or unresolved. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not established.  
 
When Applicant’s wife lost her job they were unable to make payments on their 
credit cards, which caused the interest rates to increase. This was beyond his control. In 
order to fully apply AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. He acted responsibly by notifying his security officer that he anticipated 
having financial problems due to the loss of his wife’s income. Applicant is given credit 
for complying with the security rules and regulations as required. His wife got another 
job in the middle of 2010, but was earning less. He contacted an attorney, discussed 
filing bankruptcy, paid the fee, but never followed through. Instead, despite being aware 
he had over $50,000 of credit card debt, and receiving phone calls and letters from 
creditors, he chose to wait until the creditors sued him. When he was not sued, he did 
not pursue resolving any of his delinquent debt. At this point, both he and his wife were 
working, but she was earning less than she had been. Applicant did not act responsibly. 
AG¶ 20(b) only partially applies.  
 
The only financial counseling Applicant participated in was that which was 
required in order to file bankruptcy. He has not had any other financial counseling. He 
did not initiate a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his 
delinquent debts. Although the creditors are barred by statute from suing him, it does 
not mean he no longer has an obligation to pay the debt. He has taken no action to 
resolve his delinquent debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant did not 
dispute any of the alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is not raised.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
10 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 50 years old. He served in the Navy for ten years and received an 
Honorable Discharge. He had debts discharged through bankruptcy in the mid-1990s. 
He was given a clean financial slate to start over debt-free. When his wife lost her job in 
2009, they were unable to meet the minimum payments on numerous credit cards. The 
interest rates increased and their debt escalated. They contacted a bankruptcy attorney 
with the intention of having their debts discharged, but Applicant’s income was too high, 
and they were advised to wait and see if anything changed that might make them 
qualify. They failed to follow through with filing bankruptcy. Applicant’s wife got a new 
job that paid less. Despite the fact she was working again, they did not attempt to pay 
any of the delinquent debts. They waited to be sued by the creditors. The creditors may 
be barred by state law from suing Applicant, but it does not negate that Applicant failed 
to act responsibly even after his finances improved. Applicant ignored his obligations 
because the creditors chose not to sue him. The creditors’ failure to sue Applicant does 
not mean he is no longer obligated to pay what he owes. The Government expects 
employees with security clearances to do the right thing, even when no one is watching. 
It expects those holding security clearances to act responsibly. Applicant chose to walk 
away from his obligation to pay his delinquent debts. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
