 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
       )  ISCR Case No. 12-10692 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for use of 
information technology systems. His request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under Guideline M (use of 
information technology systems). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992) as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted both allegations under Guideline 
M. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on 
July 28, 2014, setting the hearing by video teleconference on August 19, 2014. At the 
hearing, I admitted into evidence seven Government exhibits (GE 1-7). I marked the 
Government’s exhibit list as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and the Government’s discovery 
cover letter as HE II. Applicant testified, offered the testimony of one additional witness, 
 
 
 
2 
and offered eight exhibits, admitted into evidence as AE A-H. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 28, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and the evidence, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is 38 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1998, and expects to 
complete a master’s degree in information security and assurance in 2015. He married 
in 2009 and has two children, who are two and four years old. He has worked in 
information technology (IT) for more than 10 years, and has held the position of senior 
systems administrator for several defense contractors. He was granted his first security 
clearance in 2001. Applicant worked for Company A, a defense contractor, from 2010 to 
2012. He began working for his current employer in November 2012. (GE 1; AE D-F; Tr. 
53-54)  
 
While employed by Company A, Applicant and his two team mates supported 
two government agencies, Agency B and Agency C. Company A was contracted to 
Agency B. Company A also provided IT support to Agency C. Agency B was located at 
a different site from Applicant’s, and did not provide support to his location; but it 
allowed him to handle computer problems that arose in his location. Agency B provided 
Applicant with an administrator user name and password so that he could log on as an 
administrator when necessary to solve IT issues. (GE 2, 6; AE A, C; Tr. 27-51) 
 
In about February 2012, Applicant and his team members were having problems 
printing. Applicant found that if he logged on using administrator privileges, he was able 
to print. He elevated his rights to administrator level, installed the printer, and it became 
available for Applicant and his team mates’ use. He testified that he intended to remove 
the administrator privileges and return to his user-level account, but forgot to do so. He 
also testified that it “[i]s unsustainable to log off and log back on all day long to make 
this function happen, to print.” He continued to use his account with the administrator 
privileges. When questioned at the hearing why he did not immediately remove the 
administrator privileges after installing the printer, he testified, “I do not recall the 
circumstances as to why I did not.” (GE 2; AE A; Tr. 57, 67-72) 
 
During an April 2012 interview with representatives of Agency B and his 
employer, Applicant was asked if he had “browsed the web while logged onto his [work 
computer] under your administrative account.” Applicant replied that he did browse the 
web to research work-related issues, program downloads, troubleshoot, and research 
college-related course information. He also admitted that he surfed the web while the 
administrator privileges were still on his account, and did not remove the administrator 
privileges after solving the printer problem. He said he did not intentionally leave the 
 
 
3 
privileges on his account. He admitted that he did not need to have the administrator 
privileges while surfing. (GE 3) Agency B investigators noted in their incident report that,  
 
Surfing the web as an administrator exposes the [Agency B] network to an 
unacceptable level of risk. The reason being that if a machine is 
compromised by a user having administrative privileges, the malicious 
software would be able to propagate unencumbered throughout a network 
because it would assume the privilege level of the compromised user. (GE 
6 at 3) 
 
Applicant's Company A supervisor testified that he did not agree with this assessment 
because the computers were not connected to a government network. Applicant 
agreed, noting in his written explanation of events that his laptop was not on the 
(Agency B] network and therefore, any programs on his laptop would not affect the 
[Agency B] network. (GE 3, 6; AE A, C; Tr. 44-45) However, the Agency B disagreed, 
stating in its incident report,  
 
Users who have been entrusted with privilege of being administrators 
function with two accounts. Normal duties are performed as a normal user, 
and administrative tasks are performed with the elevated administrator 
account. In this instance [Applicant] destroyed that separation by utilizing 
his administrator account to elevate his personal user account with 
administrative rights. Thus presenting the [Agency B] network with an 
unacceptable level of risk. (GE 6) 
 
On March 13, 2012, Applicant was at work using his government laptop. He was 
taking an online college course, which was approved by his division director. The 
training related to coursework for “ethical hacker” certification. A virus alert appeared on 
his screen. He received a call from the computer security office, advising him to run a 
virus scan, provide the results, and disconnect from the Internet. Applicant ran the scan, 
which completed on the following morning, March 14. It showed no viruses on his 
laptop.1 He forwarded the results to the computer security office. The following day, 
March 15, Applicant was told to complete a questionnaire regarding the incident. His 
computer was forwarded to Agency B. He also was required to leave the facility until 
cleared to return.2 (GE 2, 3, 5; AE A, B)  
                                                 
1 Investigation by government security personnel initially showed that hacking tools, including password-
cracking software, resided on Applicant's work computer. Applicant denied any knowledge of how this 
software appeared on his system. He also testified that nothing other than the alert was found, i.e., no 
file, and that sometimes virus alerts are “false positives” that occur when no virus or malware is present. 
Applicant's supervisor testified that, to his knowledge, no evidence was discovered to show hacking 
programs resided on Applicant's work computer. The SOR alleges that Applicant installed unauthorized 
software on his government computer, but it does not allege that he installed hacking tools or malicious 
software on it. (GE 3; Tr. 32-33, 76) 
 
2 Applicant's access to classified information was suspended on an interim basis on May 3, 2012. His 
security clearance remained suspended as of the date of the hearing. (GE 7; Tr. 54) 
 
 
4 
During March and April 2012, Applicant completed two additional questionnaires. 
Also in April, Applicant met with representatives of Agency B and Company A. Following 
the forensic analysis performed on his computer, he was asked about two particular 
software programs that were discovered on his work laptop’s hard drive (Programs 1 
and 2). Applicant was informed that one of the programs was a password-cracking tool 
(Program 1). He denied any knowledge that this software, or any other hacking tools, 
resided on his laptop. During his security interview with a DOD investigator in August 
2012, Applicant again denied downloading or installing any such tools.3 (GE 2, 3, 5; AE 
A) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that Program 2 was a business tool that he 
installed on his government laptop in order to test it. During his April 13 interview, he 
said he downloaded it to his work laptop “[w]ith the intention of researching the viability 
and potential for it on our internal network.” He also stated, “I did not have specific 
authorization to download [Program 2] to this laptop.” During Applicant's August 2012 
security interview, he discussed a telephone conference with representatives of Agency 
B, who asked if he had downloaded software without authorization. He stated he told 
the representatives that he had not. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
downloading software without authorization. (Answer; GE 2, 3; AE A) 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he was confused about who to ask for 
authorization: “I lost sight that these were supposed to be managed by [Agency B] 
(because our site managed them), therefore I needed their permission to install any 
software.” However, at the hearing, when asked if he knew he should have sought 
authorization, he testified it was not until after the fact that he knew he had to obtain 
authorization. (Answer; Tr. 64-65) Applicant testified he thought he had latitude to 
download software because his job was to  
 
[p]rovide solutions, to issues and problems. And I didn't believe that I 
every [sic] if I asked [Agency C] or [Agency B] every time to try to fix a 
problem, I probably wouldn't get any work done, honestly. So that was, 
that's my rationale. (Tr. 64) 
 
 The program manager who supervised Applicant from 2010 to 2012 testified. He 
has held a top secret security clearance since 2001, and was a senior network engineer 
in the 2010-2012 time period. He testified that in March 2012, Agency B was 
investigating attempted hacking into its IT systems. He stated, “[a] remote detection 
system had identified Applicant's computer as having several types of viruses or 
programs that could be used for malicious intent, specifically hacking or password 
gathering.” Ultimately, a hacker was not discovered, and his understanding is that no 
evidence was found to show that any virus or hacking programs resided on Applicant's 
                                                                                                                                                            
 
3 DOHA provided Applicant with a copy of the summary of his August 7, 2012 security interview with an 
authorized DOD investigator. He was asked to review the contents and correct any inaccuracies. He 
made no changes, and adopted the summary as accurately reflecting his interview. (GE 2) 
 
 
5 
work computer. He stated that the software Applicant downloaded was Program 2, a 
commonly used business program, not a hacking tool. He opined it was possible that 
Agency C might have supported downloading Program 2, but Agency B might not have 
been aware it was downloaded. He testified, “It is my belief that there is no, there was 
no unauthorized software on these workstations from an [Agency C] perspective.” (Tr. 
27-51) 
 
 During cross-examination, the witness stated that the team was “[g]iven great 
latitude to download software tools and research them for business purposes” but they 
were first required to obtain approval:  
 
MS. O'CONNELL: And were all those tools you had to receive approval before 
you could download those software tools? 
 
 [WITNESS]: I would say yes. Yes. (Tr. 42) 
 
 As to the issue of administrator privileges, the witness said Agency B gave the 
team members a username and password to log in as an administrator when 
necessary. However, Agency B did not give them authorization to change their own 
personal user accounts to administrator-level accounts. (Tr. 45-48) 
 
 Applicant's character reference from his current employer noted his reliability 
and positive feedback from the client. His 2010 through 2012 performance evaluations 
noted his expertise in information assurance, his striving for mastery of his field, and 
his professionalism. In 2010 and 2011, he was rated either “excellent” or “meets 
standards” in all categories. Applicant received a 2011 Certificate of Appreciation from 
Agency C. His friend, a lay minister, noted Applicant's honesty. Other friends noted his 
integrity, and described him as trustworthy, sincere, and hardworking. (AE D, G, H) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, 
commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a 
disqualifying or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an 
applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can 
be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or 
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the 
information presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and 
adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline M (use of information technology 
systems).   
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
6 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern about use of information technology 
systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern, 
including the following relevant conditions:  
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and  
 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
 
7 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, 
or media to or from any information technology system without 
authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or 
regulations. 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admits SOR allegation ¶1.a, that he installed software 
on his government computer system without authorization. The software was Program 
2, a business tool. Although Applicant’s supervisor testified that the team was given 
leeway to download and research software tools for business purposes, he also stated 
that the team members were required to seek authorization to download such software. 
The initial suspicion that Applicant also downloaded a hacker tool, Program 1, was not 
substantiated, and is not alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 40(f) applies to his installing 
Program 2 on his government computer. Applicant also admitted to SOR allegation 
¶1.b, that he added administrator privileges to his personal IT user account without 
authorization, and surfed the web using an administrator-level account. AG ¶ 40(e) 
applies.  
 
AG ¶ 41 provides the following relevant mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and, 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
 
The events at issue occurred more than two years ago, which is not recent. 
However, they did not occur under unusual circumstances that are unlikely to recur, but 
rather in the normal course of Applicant's work, in the field in which he continues to be 
employed. His actions raise doubt about his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 41(a) 
applies in part. 
 
Applicant receives some mitigation under AG ¶ 41(b) regarding the downloading 
of Program 2, because he downloaded it to research whether it would improve the 
agency’s efficiency. However, his actions in upgrading his account to administrator 
level, leaving it at that level instead of returning to his personal account, and then 
surfing with an administrator’s privileges, were not minor. Agency B determined that 
Applicant's surfing the web under an account with administrator privileges resulted in 
 
 
8 
an unacceptable level of risk. Applicant receives only partial mitigation under AG ¶ 
41(b). 
 
As to AG ¶ 41(c), I cannot confidently conclude that Applicant’s actions were 
unintentional, because of the conflicting information he provided about his knowledge 
of the requirement to seek authorization to download software. In his Answer, he 
admitted he downloaded software without authorization, but “lost sight of” the fact that 
he should do so. Also, when questioned by Agency B on April 20, 2012, he admitted he 
downloaded software without authorization. However, his testimony at the hearing 
conflicted with these statements, when he testified he did not know he had to seek 
authorization, and only learned it later, through the investigation process. In addition, 
there is no evidence that he notified his supervisors about the downloading at any point 
before the Agency B investigation began. AG ¶ 41(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant is a mature adult, and a responsible husband and father. He has 
worked in IT for more than 10 years, providing support to DOD contractors. His friends 
laud his dependability and honesty. He has received solid performance evaluations 
and praise from his supervisor, who testified at his hearing. Moreover, Agency B’s 
investigation did not find that Applicant downloaded or installed any malicious software 
or hacker’s tools. 
 
 The fact that Applicant sought out software, Program 2, to maximize the 
efficiency of his agency’s IT systems is not at issue. However, Applicant's disregard for 
 
 
9 
the requirement to obtain authorization to download and install Program 2 on a 
government computer is a concern. His supervisor testified that the team members 
were required to obtain such authorization. Also of concern is Applicant's attitude 
toward the requirements. As to the need for authorization, he testified that he “wouldn’t 
get any work done” if he had to seek authorization every time. Regarding the 
requirement to return to his regular user-level account after upgrading to administrator 
level to fix IT issues such as the printer, he testified that it was “unsustainable” to 
repeat that action whenever he needed to fix a problem. Applicant’s willingness to 
place his own desire for convenience above the Government’s requirements is a 
security concern.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
