 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 13-01318 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and B (foreign influence). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 30, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86). On March 
21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H (drug involvement), B 
(foreign influence), and E (personal conduct).  The SOR detailed reasons why the 
DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his case be 
 
2 
 
 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should 
be continued or revoked.  
 
On March 31, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On May 20, 2014, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On July 18, 2014, 
DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On July 30, 2014, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for August 
27, 2014. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, 
which were received into evidence without objection. (Tr. 13-17.) Applicant called two 
witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through X, which were 
received into evidence without objection. (Tr. 18-19, 21-92.) On September 5, 2014, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 3.a, a sole allegation under 
Guideline E (personal conduct). Without objection from Applicant’s counsel, I granted 
Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 8-9.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c with 
explanations. He denied SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 3.a with explanations. Applicant’s answers 
and explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old radar systems engineer, who has been employed by 
a defense contractor since November 2009. Before his current job, he worked for a 
defense contractor from June 2003 to October 2009. Applicant has continuously held 
a security clearance since 2003. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which is a 
requirement of his continued employment. Applicant deployed overseas for his current 
employer on assignments to include Afghanistan from 2011 to 2012. (GE 1, AE W, Tr. 
23, 28-29, 60-62.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1998. He was awarded a bachelor of 
science degree in electrical engineering and a bachelor of science degree in physics 
in May 2003. Applicant was awarded a master of science degree in applied physics in 
May 2009. (GE 1, AE A – AE C, Tr. 25-28.) Applicant married his wife (W) in 
December 2012 and at the time of his hearing W was eight months pregnant with their 
first child, discussed supra. At present, she does not work outside the home. (Tr. 49, 
60.) Applicant has not served in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1, Tr. 25-27.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 The basis of Applicant’s past drug involvement is derived from his self-
disclosure in his January 2013 e-QIP. He was forthcoming about his drug involvement 
in his March 2013 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM 
PSI) and in his SOR answer. The facts surrounding his drug involvement are not in 
dispute. At age 27, while living with two roommates, Applicant smoked marijuana two 
times, once per night, on two consecutive evenings in September 2007. At the time 
Applicant smoked marijuana he held a security clearance. He has not used any type 
of illegal drug since then. (SOR ¶ 1.a, GE 1, GE 2, Tr. 31-33, 40-48.) 
 
 Applicant has long since terminated his relationship with his roommates or 
anyone who used or uses drugs. He explained that he let his roommates influence his 
decision to use marijuana. Applicant chose to disclose his marijuana use knowing that 
he would suffer consequences. (SOR answer, Tr. 43-44, 64.) In addition to the 
responsibilities of being married, Applicant will have the added responsibilities of being 
a father. (Tr. 63.) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant submitted a signed, sworn statement of intent, dated 
August 21, 2014, to continue abstaining from any drug abuse or other illegal use of 
drugs both presently and in the future, with the understanding that any drug violation 
will result in the automatic revocation of his security clearance. Applicant took and 
passed a drug test before he began working for his current employer and is willing to 
take additional random drug tests. (AE F, Tr. 33, 48, 63-64.)  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 The basis of foreign influence concerns arise from Applicant being married to a 
Romanian citizen, that his in-laws are resident citizens of Romania, that his father-in-
law was a Romanian politician who purportedly maintains contact with Romanian 
government officials, and his wife purportedly has financial and property interests in 
Romania. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.d.) 
 
Applicant met W, age 32, through an online dating site in February 2012. She 
was born and educated in Romania, where she earned a bachelor of science degree 
in geography and a master of science degree in travel and tourism. At the time W met 
Applicant, she was working for the Romanian government recording temperature and 
humidity levels in a non-supervisory position. W has no siblings. (SOR answer, Tr. 33-
23, 49-53, 66.) W holds a “green card” issued in May 2013 with an expiration date in 
May 2015 and intends to become a U.S. citizen as soon as she is eligible. (AE G, Tr. 
66-67.) After the birth of their child, W plans to pursue a Ph.D. program in 
anthropology. (AE H, Tr. 68.) 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law (FL) and mother-in-law (ML) are resident citizens of 
Romania. FL is a university professor at a private university and ML is a teacher at a 
public school. Applicant communicates with his in-laws by e-mail or telephone on 
 
4 
 
 
average “once a month.” (Tr. 51-53.) Applicant’s FL ended his career as a politician in 
1996 and no longer maintains contact with Romanian government officials. (AE H, Tr. 
35.) 
 
 Applicant has no financial or property interests in Romania. However, W owns 
a one-acre vineyard in her birth village. The grapes grown on her vineyard are 
harvested to make wine for personal consumption and are not used for commercial 
purposes. (Tr. 35-37, 58.) Apart from the one-acre vineyard, W has divested herself of 
all personal property that she may have had in Romania. The value of W’s one-acre 
vineyard is approximately $10,000 to 15,000. (Tr. 54-57, 69.) Applicant and W sent a 
total of “around $300” on two occasions to W’s grandmother to help defray the cost of 
cancer drugs for W’s grandfather.  (Tr. 57.) 
 
Applicant visited Romania in December 2012 to get married, and a second time 
in the fall of 2013. W went with him both of those times and a third time on her own 
during the summer 2012 to prepare for their “church” wedding in Romania. They had a 
civil ceremony in the United States before their church wedding in Romania. (Tr. 53-
54, 68.) 
 
Applicant’s connections are substantial and numerous in the United States as 
opposed to having minimal attenuated connections with Romania through his wife. For 
example, Applicant’s U.S. connections consist of: (1) owns a home in the United 
States valued at $200,000; (2) has a checking and savings account in the United 
States with a combined value of $16,000; (3) has a 401(k) retirement account with a 
current value of $190,000; (5) registered to vote and regularly exercises his right to 
vote in the United States; and (6) makes an annual income of $120,000. Applicant has 
no real or personal property in Romania. (Tr. 58-60, 64, 69.)  
  
Character Evidence 
 
 Two character witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf – W and a senior 
company executive (CE). W has never seen Applicant use marijuana nor would she 
condone his use of marijuana or any other drug. W intends on becoming a U.S. citizen 
when eligible. W corroborated Applicant’s testimony regarding her connections to 
Romania. W intends to remain in the United States, which is now her home. CE is a 
retired Navy officer, has held a security clearance his entire professional career, and is 
Applicant’s supervisor. CE has known Applicant for several years and described his 
work performance as being at a “very high level.” CE is aware of Applicant’s past 
marijuana use and is of the view that he has “addressed it properly.” Furthermore, 
after being made aware of and reviewing the facts surrounding Applicant’s marriage to 
W, CE does not have any security concerns. CE maintains complete trust in Applicant 
and recommended him for a security clearance. (Tr. 71-93.) 
 
 A company vice president (VP), and holder of a security clearance for 32 years, 
submitted a reference letter on Applicant’s behalf. He has known Applicant for four 
years, and spoke about him in the highest possible terms with regard to his 
 
5 
 
 
professionalism, honesty, and trustworthiness.  VP strongly recommended Applicant 
for a security clearance. (AE I.) Applicant submitted: (1) work performance evaluations 
for the years 2010 to 2013; (2) a May 2014 company letter request to postpone 
Applicant’s hearing because of his critical role in overseas travel; (3) three work-
related awards; and (4) documentation of the favorable relationship enjoyed between 
the United States and Romania. (AE J – AE V.)  
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant 
concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the 
Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
 
6 
 
 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline H through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented. He fully disclosed his drug abuse in his 
March 2013 OPM PSI, SOR response, and at his hearing.  
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of three drug involvement 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse (see above definition);”1 AG ¶ 
25(c) “illegal drug possession;” and AG ¶ 25(g): “any illegal drug use after being 
granted a security clearance.” 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
drug involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
                                                          
1
AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medication direction. 
 
7 
 
 
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.”  
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in 
ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of 
marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the 
evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”2 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was in September 2007, about 
seven years before his hearing. His illegal drug use consisted of two uses on two 
consecutive evenings when he was single and living with roommates. Applicant 
realized that drug use was incompatible with holding a security clearance and that 
there was no room for drug use of any kind in his life. The absence of evidence of 
more recent or extensive drug use, and his promise not to use illegal drugs in the 
                                                          
2
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on 
the absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, 
compel the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a 
matter of law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided 
not to apply that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the 
case) with ISCR Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative 
judge articulated a rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of 
Applicant's efforts at alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history 
of improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the 
security clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three 
times a year from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also 
included the illegal purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. 
 
 
8 
 
 
future eliminates doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment 
with respect to abstaining from illegal drug use.3   
   
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. With maturity, he has broken or reduced the prevalence of 
his patterns of drug abuse, and he has changed his own life with respect to illegal drug 
use. He has abstained from drug abuse for seven years and has no problem in 
continuing to do so. AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
The testimony from a senior company representative as well as a reference 
letter from a senior company executive show Applicant’s work behavior has not been 
indicative of his having a drug problem. He is viewed as a valuable employee, who is 
reliable, dependable, and professional. His value to the defense industry is supported 
by senior company officials, who know him personally and professionally, and by his 
own credible testimony and evidence presented. At his hearing, Applicant 
acknowledged that drug abuse is incompatible with his future career and family plans. 
He expressed a steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle changes consistent with 
total abstinence of marijuana or any other drugs.  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or she] may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but 
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information 
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
                                                          
3
In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
9 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire 
to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline B through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented. Applicant is married to a Romanian citizen, 
his in-laws are resident citizens of Romania, and his wife owns a one-acre vineyard in 
Romania valued at $10,000 to $15,000. Although Applicant’s father-in-law was 
involved in Romanian politics in the past, that is no longer the case today. W has no 
siblings. Applicant’s contact with his in-laws is infrequent.   
 
W has ties of affection for her family living in Romania. She also has provided 
modest funds to defray the cost of her grandfather’s cancer drugs. In 2011, the Appeal 
Board stated: 
 
[I]n-laws represent a class of persons who are contemplated by the 
Directive as presenting a potential security risk. As a matter of common 
sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a 
person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family 
members of the person’s spouse.  
 
ISCR Case No. 09-06457 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011) (citing ISCR Case No. 03-
26176 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 14, 2005)). 
 
Applicant has not rebutted this presumption. His relationship through his 
spouse with her family living in Romania is sufficient to create “a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” and a potential 
conflict of interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and [his] desire to help” his family and in-laws living in Romania. See ISCR 
Case No. 09-06457 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 2011). He has affection for his spouse, and 
she has affection for her family living in Romania. His communications with his in-laws 
living in Romania are less frequent, and accordingly, his own personal relationship to 
his in-laws does not raise a security concern.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with family living in a foreign country 
is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant 
 
10 
 
 
has a close relationship with even one relative, who has a relationship with another 
family member living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the 
potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 
2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States, or the country has a significant problem with lawless elements or terrorists. 
The relationship of the Romanian government with the U.S. government reduces 
Applicant’s burden of persuasion to demonstrate that his or his spouse’s relationships 
with family in a foreign country do not pose a security risk. The United States and 
Romania have close ties forged through several years.4 Nevertheless, Applicant 
should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his in-laws living in Romania.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Romania or terrorists 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or 
his in-laws. Nevertheless, his relationship with his in-laws living in Romania creates a 
potential conflict of interest. His relationship with them is sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist them by providing sensitive or classified 
information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s 
contacts with his spouse, and his spouse’s contacts with her family living in Romania. 
His and his spouse’s relationships with family members living in Romania raise the 
issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. In addition, W has a one-
acre vineyard in Romania valued at $10,000 to $15,000, which are sufficient to subject 
Applicant to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 
7(d), and 7(e) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any 
mitigating conditions.  
                                                          
4
Applicant submitted evidence to establish the cordial and ongoing positive relationship 
between the United States and Romania. (AE R – AE V.) 
 
11 
 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business 
or are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats 
from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact 
with and affection for his spouse, who lives with him, and she has a close relationship 
with her family living in Romania, which includes her mother and father. He is not able 
to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with 
his relatives, friends, and business associates who are Romanian citizens and living in 
Romania] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be 
weighed against the potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his 
spouse and through her with her family living in Romania. Although there is no 
evidence that terrorists or criminals have approached or threatened Applicant because 
of his work for the United States, he is nevertheless potentially vulnerable to threats 
and coercion made against his in-laws living in Romania. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) 
analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” 
 
12 
 
 
Applicant has established that “[he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant was born in the United States. He has worked 
for defense contractors for 11 years and has deployed to Afghanistan for his current 
employer. All of Applicant’s assets are in the United States in contrast to having no 
assets in Romania. Furthermore, as of the hearing date, Applicant was about to 
become a first-time father. Through Applicant’s many years of service as a defense 
contractor, he has repeatedly shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United 
States.    
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies to the allegations in SOR ¶ 2.d because the value of W’s one-
acre vineyard in Romania is insignificant in contrast to Applicant’s U.S. assets.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections through his spouse to her family living in 
Romania are much less significant than his strong connections to the United States. 
His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the 
foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain conduct expected of one entrusted 
with a security clearance. His employer and family support him. His employment 
history to date is indicative of stability and a strong work ethic. This support and self-
introspection should ensure his continued success. Applicant demonstrated the 
correct attitude and commitment to remaining drug free. Considering his demeanor 
 
13 
 
 
and testimony, I believe Applicant has learned from his mistakes, and his questionable 
behavior is unlikely to recur. I find Applicant has presented sufficient evidence of 
rehabilitation.  
 
There are important factors supporting a foreign influence security concern and 
tending to support revocation of Applicant’s security clearance because of Applicant’s 
connections to Romania, and the risk that his in-laws face in the event that terrorists or 
criminals discover his relationship to them. In ISCR Case No. 09-06457 (App. Bd. May 
16, 2011), the Appeal Board concluded that an Applicant’s father, who was prominent 
in the Afghan Government and who had guards for protection because of his position, 
might receive additional danger or threats because his son wanted to be a linguist in 
Afghanistan. The Appeal Board explained their rationale for reversing that grant of 
access to classified information stating: 
 
In the case before us now, those who might be tempted to use 
Applicant’s father as a means of coercion include terrorist organizations 
that are hostile to the U.S. and that are engaged in operations designed 
to defeat our geopolitical goals. As we have previously stated, terrorist 
activity in a foreign country is an important consideration in Guideline B 
cases. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007). 
 
Applicant has emotional ties to his spouse, and she has emotional ties to her 
mother and father, who are citizens and residents of Romania. Should insurgents, 
terrorists, or criminals discover their connections to Applicant, his family living in 
Romania would face some increased probability of reprisal, especially kidnapping for 
ransom. They are vulnerable should terrorists or insurgents seek to harm them.  
 
The whole-person factors weighing towards granting Applicant’s security 
clearance are more significant. He was born in the United States 34 years ago. He 
has been employed by defense contractors for 11 years and deployed to Afghanistan 
with his current employer. All of Applicant’s assets are in the United States as 
opposed to having no assets in Romania. His employer lauds his duty performance 
and contributions to mission accomplishment. He is mature and responsible.  
 
Applicant’s strong connections to the United States, community, and his 
employment establish “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
U.S., [he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” See Discussion of AG ¶ 8(b), supra. To conclude, Applicant presented 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns raised. 
Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors”5 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
                                                          
5
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
14 
 
 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
    
   Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:  For Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 3, Guideline E:  Withdrawn 
 
          Subparagraph 3.a:   Withdrawn 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
