 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 13-01032 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 12, 2013, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the 
Security Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On March 11, 2014, the Department of 
Defense issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 19, 2014. Applicant offered 
explanations of the two debts listed in the SOR. Applicant requested his case be 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
On July 15, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
on July 16, 2014. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on July 22, 2014. 
Applicant filed a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that would have 
expired on August 21, 2014. Department Counsel had no objection to the admission 
into the file of these documents. 
 
I received the case assignment on October 1, 2014. Based upon a review of the 
complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in Subparagraph 1.a concerning a bank debt. 
He denied the allegation in Subparagraph 1.b. concerning another debt. (Items 1-4) 
 
Applicant is 56 years old, He is married. His e-QIP lists six children of various 
ages from about 30 years old downward. Applicant works for a defense contractor. 
(Item 5) 
 
The SOR lists two delinquent debts owed by Applicant. They total $28,584. The 
first debt is owed to a bank on a judgment for $23,040 (Subparagraph 1.a). This debt 
dates from 2010. Applicant admits this debt and stated in his Answer that the money 
was being garnished from his paycheck. He did not explain the origin and purpose of 
the debt. Applicant’s Answer stated he tried to arrange monthly payments of $450 on 
the debt but could not continue them because of the financial demands of his other 
monthly expenses. So he allowed the money to be garnished. Applicant’s Response 
states “arrangements are being made to pay this off.” This debt is unresolved. (Items 3, 
6, 8, FORM Response) 
 
The second debt is owed to another bank in the amount of $5,544 and is the 
subject of a judgment (Subparagraph 1.b). The debt dates from 2008. Applicant told the 
government investigator in December 2013 that he did not know the origin of the debt. 
He was trying to contact the local courts that granted the judgment to determine the 
basis of the debt. He also stated in his Answer he was disputing the debt because the 
case number is “not associated with his name.” Applicant disputed the $5,544 debt by 
stating in his Answer and the Response to the FORM that his research showed it was 
not his debt. He stated the second debt remains on his credit report dated August 14, 
2014. He claims the bank told him he is not the debtor and to send a letter to the credit 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
reporting agency to have the debt removed from his record. Applicant did not submit 
any documents from the creditor concerning this debt and his alleged non-obligation to 
pay it. Nor did he submit any letter to the credit reporting agency asking it to remove the 
debt from his record with supporting justification. This debt is unresolved. (Items 3, 6, 8, 
FORM Response) 
 
The two delinquent debts appear on the two credit reports submitted as exhibits 
by the Department Counsel. The reports are dated December 7, 2013; and July 9, 
2014. These credit reports also show numerous borrowings and debt repayments. On 
the 2013 report there are seven collection actions listed. (Items 6, 8) 
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Based on two credit bureau reports and his admissions, Applicant has been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy his two delinquent debts that began accruing in 2008 and 
remain unpaid at the present. The debts total $28,584. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 set forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies have been ongoing since 2008, remain 
unresolved, and are not isolated. Accordingly, there is insufficient evidence to support a 
finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or continue. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply.  
 
He did not present credible evidence to corroborate his assertions that the 
accumulation of the debt was due to conditions beyond his control or that he attempted 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
to responsibly manage that debt once as it accrued. Therefore, mitigating condition AG 
¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant established no mitigation under AG & 20(c). He did not submit 
evidence that he received credit counseling or that he paid or resolved any debt, which 
would indicate that the situation is coming under control.  
 
Applicant did not present evidence that he made a good-faith effort to pay or 
resolve either of the two debts. AG & 20(d) does not apply without any such evidence. 
 
Applicant did not provide documentation verifying that he formally disputed or 
investigated any debt, including the second debt that he denied, which evidence is 
necessary to trigger the application of AG & 20(e).  
 
There is no evidence to support the application of AG & 20(f). No affluence of 
any type was shown.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual. In 
December 2013 the Government informed Applicant of its concern about these two 
delinquent debts. In March 2014 the government filed the FORM. For seven months, he 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
has been on notice that his delinquent debts were creating security concerns and 
potentially affecting his employment.   
 
Despite that knowledge, he did not provide proof that he had taken any steps to 
address the two delinquent debts. He stated he allowed money to be garnished to pay 
one debt. In his Response to the FORM Applicant claimed he was trying to arrange a 
payment schedule. Applicant has not submitted any documents by either creditor to 
evidence his efforts to repay the first debt or dispute the second debt. Applicant writes 
only short and vague statements concerning the debts unsupported by any objective 
documentation. 
 
    Applicant failed to demonstrate financial rehabilitation, which is required to 
assure the Government that the recurrence or continuance of these unaddressed 
obligations is unlikely. The record contains insufficient other evidence about his 
character, trustworthiness, or responsibility to mitigate these concerns or make their 
continuation less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
 
