The Government submitted nine items in support of its case.1
1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
         
            
In the matter of: )
)
)     ISCR Case No. 13-00642
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On February 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the basis for its decision to deny his application for
a security clearance, citing security concerns under Guideline  B (Foreign Influence). The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented in
September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the
written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on August 15, 2014.  The FORM was mailed to Applicant and he1
received it on September 10, 2014. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant provided additional
2
documentation. The case was assigned to me on October 2, 2014. Eligibility for access
to classified information is granted.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
relating to Morocco. The request and the attached documents are included in the record
file. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the findings of fact, below.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline B. (Foreign Influence). His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. I
make the following findings:
Foreign Influence
Applicant is a 40-year-old man who was born in Morocco. In 1996, he received a
degree in languages from a college in Morocco.  He has attended college courses in the
United States, but he has not obtained a diploma. In August 1999, he came to the United
States sponsored by his first wife. Applicant became a naturalized American citizen in
2005. (Item 1) He married his first wife, who was an American citizen. He has one
daughter from his first marriage. (Item 4) When Applicant and his first wife divorced
almost a year later, Applicant’s wife could not take care of her daughter. Applicant was
working as a restaurant manager and worked long hours. He decided that he could not
take care of his daughter in a proper fashion by himself. He and his ex-wife agreed to
send their daughter to Morocco to live with Applicant’s mother. He supported his
daughter, who is a U.S. citizen, by sending money to his mother so that she could
provide for the child. His daughter still resides in Morocco, although Applicant intends to
bring her to the United States.
Applicant remarried in July 2010 to a woman who is a Moroccan citizen and
resident. Applicant began the process of sponsoring his second wife to live in the United
States. For some reason, the process was delayed. His second wife applied for a U.S.
visa in 2010. She would have proceeded directly to the United States; however,
Applicant received a job as a linguist for the U.S. military in Afghanistan. Applicant
deployed to Afghanistan in December 2, 2011. His second wife agreed to wait for him in
Morocco until he completes his work in Afghanistan. Applicant and his second wife have
two sons. Since his wife speaks French and not English, it was agreed that she and
Applicant’s two sons would remain in Morocco. They live with Applicant’s mother.
Applicant supports his second wife and his two sons by sending money to them. His two
sons are U.S. citizens. 
 Applicant has worked as a linguist (CAT II) with mission-essential companies for
three years. He speaks fluent Arabic, French, and English. Applicant has lived and
3
worked as a linguist on U.S. Army installations in Afghanistan. He has completed three
years of work as an interpreter in an active combat zone.
   
Applicant has family members who are citizens of Morocco. His mother is a citizen
and resident of Morocco. She is 66 years old. She cares for Applicant’s children.
Applicant intends to bring his mother to the United States when he completes his
assignment in Afghanistan. She has visited Applicant in the United States. Applicant
maintains contact with his immediate family on a daily-to-weekly basis. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of Morocco.
They are in their 60's. Applicant does not maintain any contact with them except for a
holiday greeting. His father-in-law is a farmer and his mother-in-law is a housewife.
Applicant has a brother and three sisters who are citizens and residents of
Morocco.  His mother-in-law, father-in-law, and four brothers-in-law are citizens and
residents of Morocco. 
Applicant owns a home in the United States. He also owns an automobile. He
worked for many years in the restaurant business in the United States. He has  total
assets of about $105,000. He wants to live in the United States and build a future for his
wife and three children.  (Response to FORM)
Applicant’s linguistic and cultural advisory skills have been noted in Certificates of 
Appreciation. (Response to FORM) He went on missions with the U.S. Army from 2011
until the present. He has willingly put himself in danger on many occasions in order to
help the United States. He has participated in more than 1,000 missions with the U.S.
military.
There is no evidence in the record that Applicant has breached any security
policies or procedures while in Afghanistan. He submitted seven letters of appreciation
for his work in the past three years. (Response to FORM) All letters attest to his
dedication and skill in providing a great service.
A commanding officer who has worked with Applicant in Afghanistan recommends
him for his professional and loyal support. “His tireless work ethic and steady patience
during a variety of combat operations demonstrated his skills as an interpreter and a
high-level of character.” He states that Applicant has been trusted to pass sensitive
information to Jordanian military personnel to coordinate missions against the Taliban
insurgency. Applicant’s leadership skills are also noted. He is recommended for a
position as an instructor of Special Forces students during the Special Operations
Language training portion of the Special Forces Qualification Course. (Response to
FORM, Letter dated January 2014)
Applicant renounced his Moroccan citizenship and returned his Moroccan
passport in February 2011. A bank account he had in Morocco is now closed. He has no
other accounts in Morocco.
4
 Administrative Notice
I take administrative notice of the following facts about Morocco. Morocco is a
moderate Arab state which maintains close relations with Europe and the United States.
It was the first Arab state to condemn Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990 and sent troops
to help defend Saudi Arabia. Morocco was among the first of the Arab and Islamic states
to denounce the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States and declare
solidarity with the American people in fighting terrorism. 
There is the potential for terrorist violence against U.S. interests and citizens in
Morocco. Morocco’s terrorist threat continues to stem largely from the existence of
numerous small, independent violent extremist cells. In the past decade, Moroccan
nationals have been implicated in terrorism at home and abroad.
In May 2013 suicide bombers attacked five Western and Jewish targets in
Casablanca, killing themselves and 33 others, and injuring more than 100. Moroccan
officials regularly report that they have terrorist cells plotting attacks against government
and military institutions, foreigners, and tourist sites.  
Policies
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . .
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person
access to such information.”  Id. at 527.  The President has authorized the Secretary of
Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec.
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as
amended and modified.  
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon an applicant meeting the
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines
are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the
possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
5
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or.
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a
determination of the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant has
not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have
established for issuing a clearance
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify an applicant from
being eligible for access to classified information.  The government has the burden of
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v.
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 95-0611
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial
evidence, the burden shifts to an applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).  “[S]ecurity clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Egan, 484 U.S. at 531;
see AG ¶ 2(b).
Analysis
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
The security concern under Guideline B is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
A disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(a).  A disqualifying condition
also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
6
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person,
group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b).  Under AG ¶ 7(d) “sharing
living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or
coercion” is another disqualifying condition. Finally, AG 7 ¶ (e) “a substantial business,
financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-
operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign
influence or exploitation” raises a disqualifying condition.”
Applicant’s mother, second wife, mother-in-law and father-in-law, and siblings are
citizens and residents of Morocco. He maintains regular contact with them and he has
visited them in Morocco. 
Applicant’s three children reside in Morocco, but are U.S. citizens. They are cared
for by his mother and his second wife. His second wife was in the process of coming to
the United States, but Applicant took an assignment as a linguist for the U.S. military in
Afghanistan. By agreement, his wife remained in Morocco to wait for Applicant. He sends
money to his spouse and his mother so that they can provide for the three children. 
Applicant has worked very hard since coming to the United States. Despite the
fact that he has a degree in languages, he worked in a restaurant business working long
hours so that he could provide for his first child who lives in Morocco. He also continued
his education and has taken college courses. He is advancing his career opportunities.
He has lived in the United States since 1999, and became a U.S. citizen in 2005.
He married a U.S. citizen and had a daughter. However, when he and his first wife
divorced, she did not want to take care of her daughter and Applicant was working long
hours and could not give his daughter the care she needed. He sent the child to live with
his mother in Morocco.  His second wife could create a potential conflict of interest
between his security obligations and his desire to help her, only in a situation wherein
they were taken hostage or otherwise threatened with harm if Applicant did not
cooperate. Applicant has maintained regular contact with his family; however, under
either disqualifying condition, security concerns could arise in connection with the
potential that hostile forces might seek protected information from Applicant by
threatening harm to his family members in Morocco. Based on this evidence, AG ¶¶ 7(a),
(b), (d), and (e) are raised.
Since the Government produced evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in
AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), (d), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to
the Government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information
7
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it,
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those
of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States,
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-0317,
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the nature of
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States.
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.”  AG ¶ 8(a). The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well
as each individual family tie must be considered.  ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App.
Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Similarly, security concerns can be mitigated under AG 8(b) if “there
is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to
the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”
Applicant has been in the United States since 1999, and he has been a
naturalized U.S. citizen since 2005 . He has a home in the United States. His children
are U.S. citizens. His second wife is in the process of coming to the United States to live
with Applicant. He has no desire to return to live in Morocco. Applicant maintains regular
contact with his extended family and has visited Morocco. He considers this is his duty to
support his family. 
Applicant explained that he loves and appreciates the fact that he is a U.S. citizen.
He renounced his citizenship and surrendered his Moroccan passport. His mother has
visited the United States and is eager to come to the United States. He believes he has
much to offer the United States. He states that his family would never betray the United
States.
Applicant’s work as an interpreter and cultural advisor supported the U.S. military
mission in Afghanistan, not the work of those who seek to destroy the growing
democracy in Afghanistan. The new Afghanistan government relies upon the United
States for support, both financially and militarily, as it moves forward with a new form of
8
government. Since working as an interpreter with the Army for several years, neither
Applicant nor his family has been pressured by any organization to provide any type of
information, classified or otherwise, about the United States.
In every case where family members live overseas, there is a risk of pressure on
this relative and through them upon the holder of a security clearance. Under the facts of
this case, there is a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. Applicant has significant ties to Morocco. He has helped his family
financially for many years while living in the United States. He is close to his family,
which is laudable.  AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. 
Applicant wants to help the United States. He has unique experience and has
participated in over 1,000 missions as an interpreter, working side-by-side with the
United States and other special forces. He speaks fluent French, Arabic, and English.
There is nothing about the nature of Applicant’s relationships with his family members in
Morocco or the positions or activities of those persons that aligns them with the
Moroccan government. Applicant has  presented sufficient information to mitigate the
burden in this case. 
Applicant wrote about his undivided loyalty to the United States. Based on the
facts in this case, it is  clear that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in
favor of the U.S. interest. He endured dangerous conditions in Afghanistan on behalf of
the U.S. Army. He has high recommendations from the U.S. military.  He has established
application of AG ¶ 8(b) and 8(c).
Like many countries around the world, including the United States, Morocco has
experienced terrorist attacks. Some of these attacks were directed against American
interests, and personnel in Morocco. In response to the continuing terrorist threats in
Morocco, its authorities have disrupted groups seeking to attack U.S. or Western-
affiliated and Moroccan government targets, and have arrested numerous individuals
associated with international terrorist groups. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007).2
9
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
The Appeal Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family ties to the
U.S. relative to his or her ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.;
and, many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7
(App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Certain circumstances weigh against
Applicant in the whole-person analysis. First, Applicant has a wife, mother, and in-laws
who are citizens of Morocco. He has extended family with whom he is in frequent
contact. He sends money to his mother and wife to support his three children who are
U.S. citizens. He sees this as a temporary situation. Terrorists could attempt to use
Applicant’s family to obtain information. These connections raise the possibility of foreign
influence.  
A Guideline B decision concerning Morocco must take into consideration the
geopolitical situation and dangers there.  The United States and Morocco are allies in the
war on terrorism. 
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has been creating a life in the United
States. Granted, he has a unique situation with his second wife and three children. He
fully intends to bring them to the United States and has been working hard to earn a
living. He has expressed his loyalty to the United States as witnessed by his dedication
and work with the U.S. Army. I have no doubts about Applicant having access to
classified information. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action that could
cause potential harm to the United States. His military supervisors, who work with him
daily in a war zone, praised his work in the cause of freedom in Afghanistan.  
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked under dangerous conditions in
support of our national defense. The Appeal Board has held that “generally, an
applicant’s statements, by themselves, as to what he [or she] would do in the face of
threats by a foreign government or entity are entitled to little weight. On the other hand,
an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States is very important
and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”2
Applicant served the United States in a dangerous, high-risk situation and his
character references establish his significant contributions to U.S. national security.
10
While contribution to a company is not normally to be considered a factor in granting a
clearance, the Appeal Board noted in ISCR Case. No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14,
2006):
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s
prior history of complying with security procedures and regulations
significant probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or
extenuating the security concerns raised by applicant’s more immediate
disqualifying conduct or circumstances. See, e.g. ISCR  Case. No. 01-
03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No 02-10113 at 4 (App.
Bd. Mr. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30,
2006). However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general
rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible,
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances
in which the applicant made a significant contribution to the nation’s
security. See. e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006).
The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an applicant’s
assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report to a
foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has  mitigated the
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.  He has met that burden.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
Formal Findings
I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3:
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.h: For  Applicant
11
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
