 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 13-01392 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns related to Guideline F and Guideline E. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On February 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In an undated Answer to the SOR, Applicant responded to the allegations and 
requested a decision without hearing. The Government prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) containing eight attachments to support the Government’s position in 
this matter. Applicant timely submitted a response to the FORM. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on August 28, 2014. I have 
thoroughly reviewed the FORM and other case file materials. Based on the materials 
 
 
 
 
2 
submitted, I find that Applicant met his burden in mitigating financial considerations and 
personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old college student and outside machinist (OSM) who has 
worked for the same employer for over a year. He has prior management experience 
dating back to 2005. Applicant is single and he has no children. Balancing school and 
work, Applicant failed to review his credit report before applying for a security clearance. 
He was unaware that his student loans were past-due. He did not intend to mislead or 
defraud when he denied having any delinquent debts on his security clearance 
application. During an interview with investigators in the summer of 2013, Applicant 
learned that his loan payments had been disrupted. This apparently caused his loans to 
become delinquent. He immediately took rehabilitative action to address the situation, 
as described below. 
 
At issue are eight delinquent debts noted in the SOR. Allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.c 
represent debts to the U.S. Department of Education (ED) for accounts placed for 
collection in the amounts of $6,162, $6,090, and $6,027, respectively. Allegation ¶ 1.d 
represents a debt to a state university (SU) that is 120 days or more past due in the 
approximate amount of $711. Allegation ¶ 1.e represents a debt to ED that is 120 days 
or more past due in the approximate amount of $316. Allegations ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g 
represent debts to ED for accounts placed for collection in the amounts of $2,935 and 
$2,414, respectively. Allegation ¶ 1.h represents a debt to ED that is 120 days or more 
past due in the approximate amount of $140. A credit report dated August 27, 2013 
(FORM, Attachment 6), reflects these accounts. A subsequent credit report, dated July 
7, 2014 (FORM, Attachment 7), indicates that these accounts were transferred in June 
2014 for slightly differing balances to a nationally recognized conglomerate (NRC) 
specializing in the administration and streamlined repayment of student loans and 
education financial services. In number, this 2014 credit report shows one account more 
under ED (8) than it does under NRC (7) due to a duplicated ED entry. The eighth 
account at issue in the SOR, the since-rehabilitated account with SU, is not reflected as 
a negative entry on the recent June 2014 credit report.  
 
Applicant provided evidence of regular payments to NRC dating back to at least 
August 2013 regarding his former ED student loan balance. (Response to the FORM, at 
Attachments 1A-C) Under this arrangement, $50 payments are applied to rehabilitate 
past-due accounts while larger payments are applied to the delinquent balance now 
held by NRC. Applicant also provided evidence of quarterly payments to a well-known 
national provider of customer care and repayment services for campus based loans, 
private education loans, and Federal Family Education Loan Program loans (NP) for his 
loan with SU. Payments to NRC and NP are automatically debited from Applicant’s 
bank account. (Response to the FORM, Attachments 2A-B) He denies that he sought to 
defraud or mislead when he denied having delinquent debts on his security clearance 
application, credibly repeating that the situation was unknown to him at the time. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Applicant is contrite over his past financial ignorance. He has approached the 
rehabilitation of his student loans as a learning process. Applicant has verified that NRC 
and NP are properly in sync with his bank for debiting purposes, so “as to not fall into 
the mistake I made originally and to ensure that I never have a late payment again.” 
(Response to the FORM, Cover Letter) He is committed to being more attentive with his 
finances and satisfying his student loans. He feels confident he is now in control of his 
finances due to his current employment and careful budgeting. Applicant feels his job is 
“nothing short of a blessing.” (Response to the FORM, Cover Letter) He will not 
jeopardize either his job or his finances again. 
 
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
 
 
 
4 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had 
multiple delinquent or past-due student loans. Applicant did not deny this to have been 
the case. Therefore, the following financial considerations disqualifying conditions apply:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions, however, could mitigate the security concerns raised in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s explanation of the facts is limited to the written record. The record 
implies that his student loans initially became delinquent and past-due because of some 
mishap involving an auto-debit process. Regardless, it is plain that the result was not 
due to intentional neglect. Over six months before the SOR was issued, after learning of 
the delinquencies from investigators, Applicant immediately enrolled his ED and SU 
debts into NRC and NP for auto-debit payments. He showed that such payments have 
been regularly made for over a year. His oversight can be attributed to youthful 
inexperience, just as his quick response to the problem can be characterized as a 
successfully learned life experience. Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions AG 
¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d) apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
Applicant’s denied having delinquent debt on his security clearance application.  
If his answer was intentionally false, one of the following disqualifying conditions would 
apply:  
 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
As noted, for AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) to apply, Applicant’s omission must have 
been deliberate. The Government established that his answer was incorrect. Applicant 
countered by explaining that he was unaware that his student loans were delinquent or 
past-due. Whether this was due to his failure to check his credit report or through a 
 
 
 
 
6 
disruption to an auto-debit mechanism for repayments, his denial of intentional falsity is 
plausible, and nothing indicates that his comments are less than credible. When an 
allegation of falsification is controverted, the Government has the burden of proving it. 
Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent 
or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. (See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 1, 2004)(explaining ISCR 
Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
As noted, Applicant’s explanations are credibly plausible, a factor fortified by a 
record that indicates no other suggestions of falsity. Given the totality of the facts and 
circumstances, I find the Government has not established that the Applicant 
intentionally withheld information during his investigation. AG ¶¶16(a) and 16(b) are not 
established and Personal Conduct concerns are mitigated.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
limited facts and circumstances noted in this case. I incorporate my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, others may have warranted additional comment.  
 
In his early to mid-20s, Applicant’s student loans became delinquent or past-due 
when his repayment method was unknowingly disrupted. When informed of this during 
an interview in the summer of 2013, he took quick action to enroll his repayments 
through NRC and NP. Once there, payments resumed by at least August 2013, half of a 
year before the SOR was issued. He has been in regular, uninterrupted repayment for 
over a year. Applicant is fully appreciative of and beholden to his employer and his 
present work. There is little likelihood he will again raise financial considerations or 
other security concerns.  Moreover, there is no evidence showing that he intended to 
mislead or defraud when he denied having any delinquent debts on his application for a 
security clearance. Based on these considerations, I find that Applicant mitigated 
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
