 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00601 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s 2010 conviction on a 
child endangerment charge is mitigated by the passage of time. Furthermore, the 
isolated nature of the event does not reflect negatively on the Applicant’s current 
security worthiness. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the criminal conduct guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing 
convened on August 19, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, over 
Applicant’s objection. Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A was also admitted without objection. 
After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted AE B and C, which were also admitted 
without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on August 27, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 40, works as an electromechanical assembly specialist for a federal 
contractor. Although he previously worked for a different federal contractor from 2001 to 
2009, this is his first security clearance application. In response to questions about his 
criminal history, Applicant revealed that, in 2010, he pleaded no contest to child 
endangerment charges.2 
 
Applicant began dating his fiancée in 2009. A year later, Applicant and his 
fiancée began living together as a blended family, consisting of two of Applicant’s three 
children and his fiancée’s two children. At the time, the children ranged in ages from 10 
to 20 years old. Although the two families blended well with the children accepting 
Applicant and his fiancée in their roles as co-parents, the couple experienced ongoing 
issues with her son, the youngest child in the family. The boy often lied to his parents 
and began stealing electronics from the other children in the house.3   
 
In June 2010, the boy took his sister’s iPod from her room. When confronted by 
his mother and Applicant, the boy told them that he took the iPod to the after-school 
program he attended, where it was stolen by another child. They reported the theft to 
the director of the after-school program, who in turn confronted the accused child. The 
following day, Applicant learned from the program director that his step-son admitted to 
falsely accusing the other child of theft. Applicant and his finance were shocked, 
embarrassed, and frustrated by their son’s behavior.4  
 
Applicant and his step-son discussed the incident on their way home. They 
continued to discuss the incident as Applicant completed chores in the garage while 
they waited for his fiancée to come home from work. The conversation in the garage 
turned into an argument. Angered by the lack of affect or remorse shown by the boy, 
Applicant pulled the boy from where he was seated on the garage floor by the collar of 
his shirt. When the boy was on his feet, Applicant gave him an open-handed smack on 
the back of his head. Applicant testified that this incident was the only time he hit his 
step-son. Holding on to the boy, Applicant started to march him into the house. As they 
                                                          
2 Tr. 21-23; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 27-33. 
 
4 Tr. 34-37.  
 
3 
 
were climbing the stairs to enter the home, the boy tripped over a damaged stair and 
fell. Applicant fell on top of him.5  
 
The police arrived at Applicant’s home in response to an anonymous phone call. 
The caller reported seeing Applicant twist the boy’s arm behind his back and the boy 
falling to the ground. The officers attempted multiple times to reach the reporting 
witness, but the witness did not respond. The officers separated Applicant and his 10-
year-old step-son and interviewed them, taking statements from each. Applicant 
reported that he had an incident with his step-son and admitted that he smacked the 
boy on the back of the head. In his interview, the boy told the police officer that he and 
Applicant had gotten into verbal altercations in the past because of the boy’s past lying 
and stealing. The boy also told the police officer  that Applicant wrenched the boy’s arm 
behind his back, punched him in his stomach, and slammed his head against the 
garage floor, “ three, four, or six times.” The interviewing officer noted that he did not 
see any bruising or bleeding on the boy’s head or any bruising on the boy’s abdomen. 
After confronting the boy about his history of lying, the boy explained that he knew the 
difference between the truth and a lie and insisted that he was telling the truth. Based 
on their interview with the boy, the police arrested Applicant for inflicting corporal 
punishment on a child.6  
 
When she arrived home, the police asked Applicant’s fiancée, a medical 
assistant who works in emergency triage, to examine her son. She did not see any 
signs of injury on him. After the police left, the boy told his mother about the incident 
with Applicant, saying that Applicant smacked him on the back of the head and that the 
two tripped up the stairs coming into the house. He also told his mother that he might 
not have been completely honest with the police officers. Child Protective Services 
(CPS) also responded to the incident. CPS did an evaluation, interviewing the boy and 
Applicant’s fiancée. The agency did not take any steps to remove Applicant or his step-
son from the home.7  
 
Applicant decided to plead no contest to the child endangerment charge to avoid 
the cost of a trial and to avoid incarceration. Accepting Applicant’s plea, the court 
sentenced Applicant to 80 hours weekend work detail and a 52-week parenting class. 
According to his FBI identification report, Applicant was also sentenced to 4 years 
formal probation. Applicant completed the terms of his sentence and the court 
terminated his probation in October 2012.8  
 
Applicant and his fiancée believe that some good has come out of this incident. 
Their son received additional counseling, which resulted in his diagnosis with a disorder 
on the autism spectrum. The diagnosis helped Applicant and his fiancée understand 
                                                          
5 Tr. 34, 37-45. 
 
6 Tr. 45-48; AE A.   
 
7 Tr. 56-57, 77, 84, 87: AE C.  
 
8 Tr. 58-62; GE 2; AE B. 
 
4 
 
their son’s lack of affect and emotional response to the events around him as well as his 
habitual lying. As a result, they have learned better techniques for dealing with their son.  
Despite this incident, Applicant’s fiancée believes that Applicant has been a wonderful 
father to her children, who do not have relationships with their biological fathers.  She 
also believes that since the incident Applicant has become a more thoughtful parent.9 
 
Through the court-mandated parenting classes, Applicant realized that he had to 
make significant changes to his parenting style. Before the class, Applicant believed in 
his absolute authority as a parent, which required his children to do as he said and to 
respect him. Applicant completed the parenting course in July 2011. According to the 
final assessment report he received from the program, the evaluating therapist 
concluded that Applicant benefitted from the program. She found that Applicant showed 
above average progress and demonstrated the application of the new skills he learned 
during the program. In her final assessment, the therapist concluded, 
 
[Applicant has] made several positive changes to his beliefs. He has 
learned to effectively use several non-controlling tools and behaviors. He 
is less controlling and more open to hear new information. . . . [He] will 
likely handle his children in a more effective and non-violent manner.10 
 
Applicant and his fiancée remain committed to raising their children together and 
have expanded their household to include Applicant’s youngest son, who is 13 years 
old. Applicant has no other history of criminal conduct, anger management issues, or 
child abuse issues.11 
                  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
9 Tr. 80, 86-87; Answer. 
 
10 Answer.  
 
11 Tr. 33.  
 
5 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
Criminal activity calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with 
law, rules, and regulations, as well as a doubts about a person’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness.12 In 2010, Applicant pleaded no contest to a child endangerment 
charge, which is disqualifying as a single serious crime.13 The SOR also alleges that 
Applicant is on probation until 2015. While the Government had a good faith basis for 
this allegation, Applicant has provided documentation that he was released from 
probation in October 2012.14   
Applicant’s conduct is mitigated by the passage of time. The incident occurred 
four years ago. Furthermore, this incident is a single act of misconduct that was out of 
character for Applicant. He has no history of criminal behavior or anger management 
issues. Applicant, a parent at his wit’s end, made a mistake. However, he has since 
demonstrated remorse and rehabilitation. Applicant has learned more about his step-
son, helping him understand the child’s actions and motivations. Because of the skills 
and strategies Applicant learned during his parenting class, it is unlikely that he will 
engage in similar conduct in the future. As such, the June 2010 incident does not reflect 
negatively on Applicant’s current security worthiness.15  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect or handle classified 
information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person 
concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). While those granted access to classified information 
are held to a high standard of conduct, they are not held to a standard of perfection. Nor 
is the purpose of a security clearance adjudication to punish applicants for past 
misconduct. All that is required is that an applicant’s past is not indicative of a current 
inability to properly handle and protect classified information. Here, it is not. Applicant 
has taken responsibility for his conduct. In doing so, he has successfully rehabilitated 
himself from an instance of poor judgment. Clearance is granted. 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 30. 
 
13 AG ¶ 31(a).  
 
14 AE B.  
 
15 AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d).  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
