 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00644 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 7, 2013, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP; SF 86). On April 8, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 16, 2014. He answered the 
SOR in writing on April 29, 2014, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request 
before May 21, 2014, when a letter to Applicant explaining the hearing process was 
sent to him from the Department Counsel. Then, Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on June 16, 2014. I received the case assignment on June 19, 2014. DOHA 
 
2 
 
 
issued a Notice of Hearing on June 26, 2014, and I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on July 23, 2014. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified and had no exhibits to submit at the hearing.  
 
 DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 4, 2014. I granted 
Applicant’s request to keep the record open until August 6, 2014, to submit additional 
matters. On that date, he submitted Exhibits A to G, without objection. The record 
closed on August 6, 2014. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his request 
for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He is unmarried. He works for a defense contractor and 
has since November 2013. Applicant has a bachelor’s degree that he obtained in 2011. 
He has four delinquent debts listed in the SOR totaling $15,784. Three debts are under 
$300 each and his education loan debt is $15,166. (Tr.15-17, 52; SOR) 
 
 Applicant had a security clearance in July 2007 while working for another 
defense contractor and attending college. He had no security violations while holding 
that clearance. (Tr. 18) 
 
 The student loan listed in the SOR is a private loan. Applicant could not make 
payments on that loan while in school because his part-time job did not generate 
sufficient income. The requested loan repayment amount was $400 monthly. His other 
student loans are deferred. For a long time he thought this loan was also a federal loan 
that could be placed in forbearance. Then he learning it was not such a loan. This loan 
is listed in Subparagraph 1.a of the SOR. The creditor offered Applicant a settlement of 
$6,800 payable with $400 monthly payments for April, May, and June of 2014. Then the 
payments increase to $622 monthly from July 2014 to March 2015. This debt is being 
resolved by an installment payment plan on a settlement amount. (Tr. 18-29, 42; 
Exhibits C, D) 
 
 Applicant owes two medical debts, both for $275, listed in SOR Subparagraphs 
1.b and 1.c. Applicant settled these debts for $469 total, and paid $234.50 each on April 
16, and May 16, 2014. These debts are resolved. (Tr. 29, 30, 42; Exhibits A, E) 
 
 The final SOR debt is for $68 owed on a medical debt listed in Subparagraph 1.d. 
Applicant has not been able to identify the creditor to whom this debt is owed. He has 
not resolved it. (Tr. 30-32, 47) 
 
 Applicant owes about $65,000 in total student loans. His annual salary is about 
the same amount. Applicant also has a budget he developed.  The budget shows his 
 
3 
 
 
monthly paycheck is $3,400 after taxes and other deductions.  He submitted it as an 
exhibit. He has $859 per month as net income after paying all debts and monthly 
expenses. (Tr. 33-37; Exhibit G)  
 
 Applicant did not submit any character statements or work place evaluations. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations are 
set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $15,784 in delinquent debt from 2010 to the present time 
that remains unpaid.  Applicant has four delinquent debts listed in the SOR. The largest 
debt for $15,166 is a student loan, which is not in forbearance as are his other student 
loans  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
  
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is  being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
Applicant is paying his debts in an orderly manner. He repaid two small SOR-
listed debts, and has an installment payment plan for a student loan. His other student 
loans are in forbearance and were not included in the SOR. Only a $68 debt remains 
unpaid and Applicant stated he will pay it when he finds the proper creditor to pay. This 
debt is small and of no security concern. Therefore, there are clear indications from the 
evidence that the financial problems are under control and being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) 
applies.  
 
Applicant paid two debts and has an installment payment plan for the student 
loan. He has about $600 remaining after expenses are paid each month to save or 
invest. He is managing his money responsibly as shown by the budget he submitted as 
an exhibit. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to repay his 
delinquent debts.  
 
The remaining mitigating conditions are not relevant under the facts presented. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When these problems first began, 
Applicant was a young man, still in college. He accumulated student loan debt to pay for 
his college education. Now, he has a responsible job and is managing his money 
carefully. He also had a security clearance without any problems while he worked for a 
time at a defense contractor when he was in college. Applicant made changes in his 
financial and professional life by getting a good job and living responsibly. There is no 
likelihood of any pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. The likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence is absent. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. I conclude the whole person concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
