 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
              DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00758 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kristen E. Ittig, Esq. 
 
 
October 29, 2014 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement security concerns that arose 
from his drug use from January 2003 to November 2013. He mitigated the Foreign 
Influence concerns that arose out of his parents-in-law’s Taiwanese citizenship and 
residence. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 7, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigative Processing (e-QIP). On April 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons on April 29, 2014, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on August 13, 2014. A notice of 
hearing was issued to Applicant on August 18, 2014, scheduling a hearing for 
September 23, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and called two witnesses. At the hearing, Applicant 
requested that the record be left open to allow him to submit additional evidence and his 
request was granted. Applicant presented three additional exhibits, marked AE G 
through AE I. Department Counsel had no objection to AE G through AE I, and they 
were admitted into the record. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
October 7, 2014.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Request to take Administrative Notice 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
Taiwan. Department Counsel provided a five-page summary of the facts, with citations 
to 19 Government documents pertaining to Taiwan, marked HE I. I take administrative 
notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters 
of general knowledge, and not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the 
Findings of Fact. 
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶¶ E3.1.2, E3.1.3, E3.1.7, and 
E3.1.13 of the Directive, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR ¶ 1.b to correct 
a typographical error, which alleged Applicant used mushrooms and LCD, 
approximately once a year, from 2006 to January 2012. Applicant had no objection to 
the amendment and I granted the motion. (Tr.18.) SOR ¶ 1.b was amended to read: 
 
1.b  You used mushrooms and LSD, approximately once a year, from 
2006 to January 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old natural born U.S. citizen. He is an employee of a 
government contractor, where he has worked since 2009. He has a master’s degree in 
an engineering field. Applicant was married for approximately 15 years to his first wife. 
They divorced in 2009. He married his second wife, a naturalized U.S. citizen, in May 
2012. They currently reside together. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 33-36, 59, 64.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in Taiwan. His mother-in-law and father-in-law are 
citizens of Taiwan and both currently reside in Taiwan.1 They are retired and divorced. 
Applicant’s wife has a strained relationship with her parents. She has brief phone calls 
with her mother approximately once per month. She sends no support or gifts to her 
mother. Her brother supports their mother. Applicant’s wife speaks to her father 
approximately once per year. She last saw her parents ten years ago. Applicant testified 
that his wife was “far from close” to either parent. He has not met his parents-in-law. He 
spoke to them each once on the phone, in separate conversations, but found the 
conversation difficult. He speaks no Chinese and they speak little English. (AE F; Tr. 38-
44.) 
 
 Applicant first used drugs in approximately January 2003. He tried cocaine in a 
social setting. After that, Applicant began experimenting with a variety of drugs to satisfy 
his “scientific curiosity” about drugs. (Tr. 46.) He explained that he had Asperger’s 
syndrome and had difficulty socializing. He provided a copy of his diagnosis into 
evidence. (AE I.) He experimented using illegal drugs as a social lubricant. He used 
drugs recreationally from 2003 to approximately 2012. His drug use included: cocaine, 
approximately four times per year from January 2003 to January 2011; ketamine, 
approximately once per year from January 2003 to January 2011; ecstasy, 
approximately four times per year from January 2003 to January 2011; mushrooms and 
LSD, approximately once per year from 2006 to January 2012; and marijuana 
approximately six times per year from January 2003 to 2011. He also used medical 
marijuana with a physician’s recommendation from at least 2012 to November 2013. 
(GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 45-53, 61, 66-75.) 
   
 After Applicant met and married his wife, he decided he no longer wished to be a 
social drug user. He stopped using cocaine, ketamine, ecstasy, mushrooms, and LSD. 
He terminated friendships with those that provided him drugs. He ceased going to 
parties, raves, and social gatherings where drugs were present. (Tr. 51-54, 97-99.) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged, during his January 7, 2014 personal subject interview, 
that he retained possession of a vial of liquid LSD that he had purchased prior to 
severing his friendships with other drug users. He indicated that he “may use” the 
remaining LSD in the future, but was “not sure” if he would use it. He testified he 
purchased the vial for approximately $400. He explained that during the interview he 
thought he might use LSD in the future because it was still in his possession, but he 
later discovered that the contents of the vial had dried up. He threw it away. He testified 
that after that vial was gone, he had no way to access drugs again. The act of throwing 
away the vile was the end of any intent to use drugs. (GE 2; Tr. 53-54, 99.) 
 
 Despite terminating his use of cocaine, ketamine, ecstasy, mushrooms, and LSD 
in approximately 2011, Applicant used medical marijuana until November 2013. He 
obtained two medical marijuana recommendations from doctors, according to the laws 
of his state, based on his diagnosis regarding his antisocial tendencies. He used the 
recommendations to purchase marijuana at a medical marijuana dispensary twice. He 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s father-in-law no longer resides in the Philippines.  
 
4 
 
smoked the marijuana while watching movies. He indicated during his January 7, 2014 
personal subject interview that he intended to continue his medical marijuana use. (GE 
2.) He now understands that, despite state laws authorizing the use of medical 
marijuana, its use is in violation of federal laws. Applicant had not previously applied for 
a security clearance and was unfamiliar with the rules and regulations. His medical 
marijuana card has expired. He no longer possesses marijuana or any drug-related 
paraphernalia. He has vowed never to use illegal substances again. Applicant self-
procured two 12-pannel drug screening tests on June 9, 2014, and July 18, 2014. Both 
tests were negative for all illegal substances. (AE B; AE C; Tr. 54-58, 76-90, 94, 100.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he knew it was illegal to use controlled substances, but 
that he wanted to find out for himself what the drugs were like. (Tr. 62.) He understood 
that he had no legal right to experiment with drugs, but believed it was consistent with 
his ethics to use cocaine. (Tr. 61-64.) He stated that he hated that it was illegal, but 
believed his drug use was not hurting anyone else. However, he explained that 
violations of security regulations were unlikely because he realized that he could 
potentially hurt someone through a breach. He promised to self-report any future drug 
use and testified about other instances in which he had reported problems at work. (Tr. 
102-104.) 
 
 Applicant signed a statement expressing his intent to abstain from illegal 
substances in the future. He has been honest and candid with the Government about 
his past drug use. (AE A; Tr. 55.) 
 
 Applicant enjoys hiking and other outdoor activities. He is an Eagle Scout. He is 
fiscally responsible and purchased his home without taking a mortgage. Additionally, he 
documented significant assets in the U.S. totaling more than $1,500,000. He pays his 
taxes and performs jury duty. (AE H; AE I; Tr. 33.) 
 
 Applicant is respected by those who know him, as verified by his supervisor and 
a senior vice president at his company, both of whom testified on Applicant’s behalf and 
submitted letters of support. They are aware of Applicant’s drug use. They consider 
Applicant to be honest, dedicated, reliable, and trustworthy. He has an exceptional work 
ethic. He is viewed by his employer as a rising star. (AE D; AE E; Tr. 115-147.) 
 
Taiwan 
 
 Taiwan was identified as an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence in the 
National Counterintelligence Center’s 2000 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage. Similarly, the 2008 Annual Report to 
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage lists Taiwan as 
being involved with criminal espionage and export controls enforcement cases in 2008. 
Additionally, there have been various court cases involving the illegal export, or 
attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted dual-use technology to Taiwan, including a 
criminal conviction of the Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian 
and Pacific Affairs for illegally removing classified materials. The PRC also maintains 
 
5 
 
intelligence operations in Taiwan through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals with 
Taiwanese connections. (HE II.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG 
¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f). Applicant possessed and used 
marijuana, cocaine, ketamine, ecstasy, mushrooms, and LSD over an eleven-year 
period. He admitted purchasing LSD. The facts established through the Government’s 
evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise security concerns under both of the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use occurred while he was a mature adult. It happened in 
social settings over an eleven-year period, up to 2013. He used illegal drugs because  
they aided him in socializing with others. As of January 2014, Applicant expressed an 
intent to continue medicinal marijuana use and did not rule out future LSD use. While he 
now pledges abstinence, his personal ethics allow him to use illegal substances as long 
as he believes he is not hurting others. He has not demonstrated that his drug use is 
 
7 
 
unlikely to recur. His past history of drug use continues to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is not fully applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) provides some mitigation. Applicant expressed his intent not to use 
illegal drugs in the future. He disassociated from drug-using friends and avoids the 
environment where he used drugs in the past. He signed a statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. Applicant’s reputation for honesty, 
coupled with his candor concerning his past drug use, adds weight to his commitment to 
abstain from illegal drug use. These factors weigh in the Applicant’s favor and are 
mitigating, in part. However, the recency of his last marijuana use, and his statements 
during the personal subject interview, indicate that Applicant’s commitment to 
abstinence is recent. It is too soon to determine whether Applicant will abstain from the 
use of illegal substances in the future, given his extensive history with drugs and his 
January 2014 statements that indicated he intended to continue using marijuana and 
possibly LSD. His two negative drug tests confirm abstinence shortly before this 
hearing, but are insufficient to mitigate questions about his ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations in the future, given his history of illegal drug 
use.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The following conditions could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 7:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. 
 
 
8 
 
 AG ¶ 7(a) requires the presence of family members (or business or professional 
associates, friends, or other persons) who are citizens and/or residents of a foreign 
nation, for which there is substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The heightened risk 
required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
Heightened risk denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. 
Taiwan is a country that actively collects industrial information and engages in industrial 
espionage, and therefore a heightened risk is present. Applicant’s mother-in-law and 
father-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
concerns under AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
  Applicant’s wife, with whom he shares a residence, has ties to her parents in 
Taiwan. Such relationships could potentially create a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion due to her bonds of affection to her 
Taiwanese parents and Taiwan’s history of efforts to commit industrial espionage. AG ¶ 
7(d) applies. 
 
  AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these people are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have applicability. Applicant’s wife has monthly 
communication with her mother, and less frequent communication with her father, both 
of whom are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Applicant has only spoken to his parents-
in-law once. His wife has strained relations with her parents who are retired and not 
supported by the Taiwanese government. There is little likelihood that Applicant’s 
relationships with his in-laws, who are citizens and residents of Taiwan, could create a 
risk for foreign influence or exploitation. Because he is unable to communicate with 
them and his wife is not close to them, there is little risk he would be placed in a position 
of having to choose between the interests of his in-laws and the interests of the United 
States.  
 
9 
 
 
A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant was born and raised in the United 
States. He achieved Eagle Scout status. He earned a graduate degree from a U.S. 
university. He owns a home in the United States. All of his investments are located in 
the United States. Based on his connections and history in the United States, Applicant 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. There is 
no conflict of interest in this case, as he has virtually no relationship with his wife’s 
parents. AG ¶ 8(b) applies.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s infrequent contact 
with his in-laws in Taiwan creates minimal concern. However, his history of drug 
involvement from January 2003 to November 2013 continues to cause concern under 
the security guidelines. He knowingly chose to disregard U.S. drug laws during those 
years. He was an adult throughout his use of illegal substances, and willingly put self-
interest above the laws that he knew forbade their use. Applicant is respected by those 
who know him. He has a reputation for honestly and trustworthiness. However, not 
enough time has passed to demonstrate Applicant will continue to abstain from illegal 
substances (including the use of medicinal marijuana). Other than personal assertions 
and two recent drug screenings, he presented no persuasive evidence of rehabilitation, 
such as participation in a substance abuse program or an evaluation by a duly qualified 
medical professional confirming abstinence from illegal drugs. The record evidence 
leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant should 
not be granted a security clearance. 
 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1f:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1b:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
