KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the record.  An ability to
argue for a different interpretation of the evidence is not sufficient to show that the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence was in error.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 14-00228.a1
DATE: 10/07/2014
DATE: October 7, 2014
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00228
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 18, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On July 30, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
2
Applicant  raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge made the following findings:  Applicant is 31 years old and unmarried.  He started
using the drug ecstasy in late 2000 while in high school.  In his own words, he became addicted to
the substance, using it at least once a month.  He continued to use it and purchase it until early 2013.
He also used marijuana on a sporadic basis.  He last used any illegal drug in February 2013.
In February 2002, Applicant was arrested for possession of a controlled substance.  At the
time of his arrest, he was in a hotel room with a group of underage girls, and everyone was
consuming some kind of drug, including ecstasy.  As a consequence of his arrest, Applicant was
sentenced to a one-year court-ordered drug rehabilitation program.  He successfully completed the
program in the spring of 2003.  Following the treatment program, Applicant remained drug-free for
about two or three years before relapsing and resuming his use of ecstacy and marijuana.
Applicant attended college from 2003 to 2013, where he lived close by and associated with
other drug users.  He held a job in a management position and never let his use of illegal drugs
interfere with his work.  Beginning in 2011, he began to focus on his education and became involved
in community outreach programs.  In 2013 he moved from coast to coast, stopped using ecstacy and
marijuana, and stopped associating with drug users.  Applicant wanted to make a better life for
himself and live a sober lifestyle.  He signed a Statement of Intent indicating that he would never
use illegal drugs again while consenting to the loss of his security clearance if he did resume use.
Two drug tests that he took in 2014 were negative.  He is not involved in any after-care drug
programs or Narcotics Anonymous.  A letter of recommendation from a person who has known
Applicant for three years indicates that Applicant has exceptional leadership skills and noble
qualities.  Applicant is involved in community outreach programs and philanthropic work.  
The Judge reached the following conclusions: The totality of the evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Based upon his past
drug history, simply because he has been able to remain drug-free for the past year or so does not
demonstrate that he can continue to remain drug free.  While it is commendable that Applicant has
abstained from drugs for more than a year, he was previously drug-free for several years before he
relapsed.  No pattern of abstinence has been established.  More time in rehabilitation is necessary
in order to guarantee the Government that he will not return to his old habits and place the
Government at risk.  The totality of the evidence, including his favorable letters of recommendation,
support a whole-person assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of
candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and other characteristics indicating
that Applicant may not properly safeguard classified information.    
Applicant argues that the Judge failed to consider all the evidence submitted by him, and that
this failure resulted in her improper application of the Mitigating Conditions under Guideline H.
Applicant also asserts that the Judge did not properly factor in the whole-person concept into her
decision.  He recites favorable aspects of his case, including his completion of a drug rehabilitation
3
program, his statement of intent not to use drugs, his willingness to refrain from future drug use by
ceasing communication with past drug users, his sobriety for over one year, solid job performance,
and favorable references attesting to his good character.  Applicant asserts that this positive evidence
establishes good judgment and trustworthiness, and strongly indicates that his drug use is unlikely
to recur.  Applicant has failed to establish error on the part of the Judge.   
A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless he or she
specifically states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009).
Applicant has failed to overcome that presumption.  The favorable evidence that Applicant cites in
support of this argument is specifically mentioned in the Judge’s decision.  
The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25157at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 4,
2008).  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Here, Applicant essentially argues for a different interpretation of the record evidence.  The
gravamen of the Judge’s decision is the fact that Applicant has only one year of abstinence after drug
use that spanned more than a decade, albeit with a period of approximately three years when he did
not use drugs.  He then relapsed, and the Judge focused on the relapse when concluding that
Applicant’s current period of abstinence is not sufficient to overcome the Government’s concerns
about future drug use.  The Judge’s conclusions are sustainable.  The Board finds no reason to
believe that the Judge did not properly weigh the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06622 at
4 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012).  We have considered the totality of Applicant’s arguments on appeal and
find no error in the Judge’s ultimate conclusions regarding mitigation.
In support of his appeal, Applicant points to decisions by the Hearing Office which he argues
support his request for a favorable determination.  The Board gives due consideration to those cases.
However, each case “must be decided upon its own merits.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶2(b).  Nothing
in the decisions cited by Applicant demonstrate error on the part of the Judge in this case.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
4
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
