1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-01843
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
In June 2013, Applicant was convicted of reckless driving after being arrested
and charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI) in February 2013. In October 2013, he
tested positive for cocaine in a random workplace urinalysis. Applicant admitted being
legally intoxicated when he was arrested for DWI, but he denied knowingly ingesting
cocaine. His explanation for how cocaine was found in his blood stream lacked
credibility. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant has held a security clearance since 1984. He last applied to renew his
eligibility for access to classified information when he submitted an Electronic
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (EQIP) on March 14, 2011. However, after
receiving reports from the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) between March
2013 and November 2013, adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD), could
not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were published in2
the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 See Directive, E3.1.7.3
2
Applicant’s access to classified information.  On June 13, 2014, DOD issued to1
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns
addressed in the adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for criminal conduct (Guideline J) and2
drug involvement (Guideline H).
Applicant timely answered the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision without
hearing. However, on July 28, 2014, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) requested a hearing.  The case was assigned to me on3
August 15, 2014, and I convened a hearing on September 9, 2014. The parties
appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel presented Government’s Exhibits (Gx.) 1
and 2, which were admitted without objection. The Government also called a rebuttal
witness. Applicant testified in his own behalf, and he submitted, post hearing, five
character reference letters admitted collectively, and without objection, as Applicant’s
Exhibit (Ax.) A. DOHA received a transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on September 17, 2014.
The record closed on September 22, 2014.
Findings of Fact
The Government alleged under Guideline J that Applicant was arrested in
February 2013 and charged with DWI; that he pleaded guilty in June 2013 to reckless
driving; that he was placed on probation for 11 months and 20 days; that he was
ordered to perform community service; and that he was assessed fines and court costs
totaling $607 (SOR 1.a). Applicant admitted this allegation.
The Government alleged under Guideline H that on October 21, 2013, Applicant
tested positive for cocaine through a random workplace drug test (SOR 2.a); and that
he used cocaine while holding a security clearance (SOR 2.b).  Applicant denied these
allegations. 
Applicant’s admission to SOR 1.a is incorporated in my findings of fact. Having
reviewed the response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I make the following
additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 57 years old and employed as a communications worker by a
defense contractor for whom he has worked since 1988. He has held a security
clearance since 1984. Applicant has an excellent reputation at work and in his
community. Character references submitted in his behalf describe him as reliable,
honest, professional, generous, and trustworthy. (Gx. 1; Ax. A; Tr. 6, 15, 18, 54 - 55)
Applicant has been married three times. His first marriage in 1975 ended by
divorce in 1978, and produced one child, now age 38. Applicant remarried in 1980, but
3
his second wife died in 2001. Together they had one child, who is now 20 years old.
Applicant and his third wife were married in 2006, but they have been separated since
September 2010. (Gx. 1; Tr. 15 - 17)
Not long after midnight on February 23, 2013, Applicant was stopped by police
while driving home from a bar about a mile from his apartment. He had been drinking by
himself at the bar since early the previous evening and had consumed about six mixed
drinks. Applicant was arrested and charged with DWI. On June 21, 2013, he pleaded
nolo contendere. He was fined and ordered to complete alcohol and driving awareness
classes, and to perform 50 hours of community service. Upon completion of the terms of
his sentence, Applicant’s charge was reduced to reckless driving. This was Applicant’s
only charged criminal offense, but he admitted that he was intoxicated when he was
stopped by police, and that there have been other times when he has driven after
drinking. Applicant has not consumed alcohol since his arrest. (Answer; Gx. 2; Tr. 26 -
34)
On Monday, October 21, 2013, Applicant was selected to take a random
workplace drug test. This was the first time since he was hired by his employer that he
was selected for testing. The results two days later showed positive for cocaine.
Applicant has adamantly denied knowingly ingesting any illegal drugs. After receiving
the test results, Applicant obtained his own negative test results. He also completed 12
weeks of company-mandated drug counseling, through which he was assessed as not
being drug dependent. He also claims he has been tested several times since October
2013, all with negative results. In December 2013, he was suspended from his job
pending resolution of his continued eligibility for a security clearance. (Answer; Gx. 2)
The previous Saturday, Applicant had played golf all day. When he returned
home to his apartment, his neighbor asked him to go to a party in an upstairs apartment
that evening. Applicant agreed and was one of about eight or nine people at the party. It
was hosted by a woman about Applicant’s age. Her daughter, her daughter’s boyfriend,
and two of their friends also attended. Aside from his downstairs neighbor, Applicant
had not previously met anyone there. Applicant played cards most of the evening. One
of the other card players was wearing a hat with the logo of a football team that was a
rival of Applicant’s favorite team. Applicant began kidding that person about the hat, but
his banter was not well received and he felt some of the people at the party were
bothered by his remarks. Applicant drank diet cola while he was playing cards and
thought at times that the drinks tasted odd. In hindsight, he theorized that the persons
who served him his drinks spiked them with quantities of cocaine sufficient to cause the
positive drug test results two days later. He believes they did this because they did not
like his comments about the rival football team. Applicant also stated that the hostess’s
daughter and her friends were using marijuana on the apartment balcony, so he knew
some of the guests at the party were drug users. (Answer; Tr. 38 - 51)
In support of Applicant’s version of events, he insisted that he had actually
volunteered to be tested the Monday after the party. Why, he reasoned, would anyone
willingly take a drug test so soon after intentionally using cocaine? However, his
supervisor testified that Applicant was selected by human resources through a standard
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
4
procedure that does not provide for voluntary testing. Applicant’s supervisor also
testified that he has never asked for volunteers to take a drug test. (Tr. 59 - 72)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent  with the national interest for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies5
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
5
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.7
Analysis
Criminal Conduct
Available information supports the SOR 1.a allegation that Applicant was
arrested for DWI, and was convicted of a lesser offense (reckless driving) even though
he knew he was legally intoxicated at the time of the traffic stop that led to his arrest.
This information is sufficient to raise the security concern about criminal conduct
expressed at AG ¶ 30, as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
More specifically, the record requires application of the disqualifying condition at
AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses). The fact that Applicant
was convicted of a lesser offense does not make his conduct less serious. He knowingly
violated a significant public safety law by driving after he had been drinking for several
hours. He had done so on other occasions before, but this time he was caught.
By contrast, there is support for application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶
32(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement). Applicant has not consumed alcohol since his arrest; he completed all of
the terms of his sentence and probation; and he has a good reputation among long-time
friends and co-workers for good conduct. Without more, it would seem that Applicant
has mitigated the security concerns under this guideline. However, due to my findings
about Applicant’s drug use, I am constrained against a finding that Applicant is fully
rehabilitated. This guideline is resolved against the Applicant. 
Drug Involvement
Applicant tested positive for cocaine in October 2013. Although Applicant was
adamant in his denials of both allegations under this guideline, the version of events he
presented was simply implausible. Also, his supporting claim that he volunteered for the
drug test was directly contradicted by his supervisor. I did not find Applicant credible,
and I conclude that he used cocaine as alleged. This information raises a security
concern articulated at AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
6
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, information about Applicant’s drug use requires application of
the following AG ¶ 25 disqualifying conditions:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
I also have considered the following AG ¶ 26 mitigating conditions, which may be
pertinent to these facts and circumstances:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation.
Applicant is known to have used cocaine once. He has an excellent reputation
among friends and co-workers, who have not known him to use drugs or engage in
other inappropriate behavior. However, Applicant has not presented information that
supports either AG ¶¶ 26(a) or (b). Rather, he has presented consistent, yet
unsupported denials of the conduct alleged. His version of events tends only to
undermine confidence in his judgment and reliability. On balance, I conclude security
concerns remain about his involvement with illegal drugs.
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed
in AG ¶ 2(a). I conclude that doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information. Because protection of the national interest is the principal goal of
these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance
is denied.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
