1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 14-00180
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant exercised good judgment in obtaining a loan modification agreement that
reduced his mortgage payment to a reasonable level, and allowed him to responsibly
address and resolve nearly all his delinquent debts. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP), Government’s Exhibit (GE) 1, on December 24, 2012. On March 13,
2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline (Guideline F). The action
2
was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department
of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR was notarized on May 19, 2014. The Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 11, 2014, for a
hearing on September 4, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government’s
four exhibits (GE) and Applicant’s 11 exhibits (AE) were admitted into evidence without
objection. The record remained open until September 12, 2012, to allow Applicant an
opportunity to provide additional documentation. No exhibits were submitted. The record
in this case closed on September 12, 2014. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September
16, 2014. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges 18 delinquent accounts and one judgment (SOR 1.e) under
Guideline F (financial considerations). The accounts and judgment are found in the 2013
and 2014 credit reports (GE 2; GE 3). In GE 1, Applicant indicated he had no delinquent
accounts. Ten of the delinquent accounts represent speeding and parking tickets and a car
impoundment. The total amount of debt is approximately $8,000. Applicant admitted all the
delinquent accounts except for the judgment. 
Applicant, 39 years old, has been married since October 1998, and has five children.
Four of his children still live at home. Recently, the oldest son moved out of the house and
began working. Applicant served in the United States Marine Corps from 1994 to 1998,
then the inactive Reserve until 2002. He has been employed as a systems administrator
since September 2012. Before his current job, he was employed as a senior computer
analyst for about five years. He has held a security clearance since 1994. 
In February 2000, Applicant’s financial problems surfaced after purchasing a house
with a high monthly mortgage he had trouble paying. According to the credit reports, in
approximately 2004, Applicant refinanced his home with an adjustable rate mortgage
(ARM). When the interest rate of the ARM suddenly increased the amount of his monthly
mortgage, he struggled to make regular payments on his other bills. After discovering his
mortgage payments were still too high with his first loan modification agreement (LMA), he
obtained a second LMA in early 2014. Even though he had to pay a large down payment
and a higher interest rate, his monthly mortgage payment has decreased by about $400
to $2,400. Applicant is current on his mortgage. (GE 2; AE K; Tr. 22-24, 30-32)
3
Applicant’s plan in addressing the delinquent debts was to contact each creditor and
pay the full amount of the debt or settle the debt. The delinquent accounts which Applicant
resolved will be discussed in the order they appear in the SOR:
SOR 1.a, $1,717, automobile installment loan. The debt was reported delinquent in
December 2012. On April 25, 2014, documentation verifies Applicant settled the installment
loan debt for his 2003 automobile. (AE A)
SOR 1.b, $1,163, collection account with the original creditor being a musical arts
center. On May 5, 2014, Applicant was advised by letter that the collection agency records
showed the account was settled. (AE B)
SOR 1.c, $230, collection account showing the original creditor is an insect spray
manufacturer. On May 6, 2014, Applicant was advised by letter the account was settled.
(AE C)
SOR 1.d, $435, credit card, collection account. The account was transferred for
collection in June 2010. On May 14, 2014, the collection agency advised Applicant by letter
that this account was settled. (AE D)
SOR 1.e, $200, unknown type of account. The account became delinquent in August
2010. On April 25, 2014, Applicant was notified by email that the account was paid. (AE E)
SOR 1.f, $800 judgment filed against Applicant in August 2007. The landscaping
proposal, dated April 24, 2006, identifies Applicant’s wife and the address where he and
his wife have lived since 2000. Though Applicant’s signature does not appear on the
proposal, his name must appear on the judgment to explain why the judgment appears in
his credit report. SOR 1.f has not been paid. (AE F) 
SOR 1.g, $1,011, cellular phone, collection account. The debt was transferred for
collection in March 2012. On May 1, 2014, documentation reflects that Applicant settled the
account for $700. (AE G)
SOR 1.h, $566, credit card, collection account. The account became delinquent in
December 2012. On May 6, 2014, the creditor notified Applicant that his final payment on
the settled the account. (Tr. 37; AE H)
SOR 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, and 1.s, are citations that Applicant
indicates are for speeding, parking, and an auto impoundment. The citations are posted by
number, not by offense violated. Therefore, there is no way of matching the numbers to the
offense. All the citations occurred between October 2009 and October 2012. The identifying
numbers in the SOR allegations, which also appear in GE 2, do not match the document
4
numbers that appear in AE I. One way to determine whether the traffic accounts have been
paid is to match the actual amounts in the SOR to the amounts appearing at AE I. Some
of the individual amounts are the same in the SOR and AE I while other individual amounts
are different. The total amount of delinquent traffic citations listed in the SOR is $1,690. AE
I indicates that on July 13, 2013, Applicant paid the motor vehicle division a total of $2,160
in fines. (AE I)
SOR 1.l, $290, car insurance. The account became delinquent in October 2012.
Applicant’s documentation shows he paid the account on May 2, 2014. (AE J)
To avoid similar financial problems from recurring in the future, Applicant has
implemented direct payment plans for several creditors. He schedules creditor payments
with his bank and goes online to ensure the payments are made. He reduced his credit
cards from five to two. Handling his finances online is one component of his revised
financial management. An equally important tool is a financial budget to maintain continuing
accountability over his earnings, his spending, and his savings. (AE K; Tr. 40-44)
Applicant and his wife earn about $150,000 a year. His personal financial statement
(PFS) dated April 21, 2014, indicates that he and his wife have combined net earnings of
$8,844 a month. His monthly payments total $7,741. His monthly remainder should
increase by $400 from $1,103 to approximately $1,500. Instituting a budget into his
financial practices will help Applicant use the extra funds more effectively. (AE K; Tr. 24,
43) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant's suitability for a security clearance, the administrative
judge must consider the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions of the AG. These
conditions should be evaluated in the context of nine general factors known as the whole-
person concept to bring together all available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision regarding security clearance
eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to the potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14., the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15., the applicant is
responsible for presenting "witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . ." An applicant
has the ultimate burden of persuasion of establishing that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him a security clearance. 
5
Analysis
Financial Considerations 
The security concern for financial considerations is set forth in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern
as it may lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that cannot
be explained by known sources of income is also a security concern. It may
indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
The applicable disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 are: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
An individual’s financial obligations to his creditors are generally personal matters
unless the evidence indicates that the individual is not repaying his debts as agreed.
Applicant’s delinquent debts, that are established by the 2013 and 2014 credit reports and
his admissions, raise security concerns under the financial guideline. Applicant
accumulated approximately $8,000 in delinquent debt. He accumulated these past-due
accounts between October 2009 and December 2013. His inability to satisfy the debts
demonstrates a history of not meeting financial obligations within the purview of AG ¶¶
19(a) and 19(c). 
Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially pertinent: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances;
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts. 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because of the large number of Applicant’s delinquent
accounts and recency in which those accounts became delinquent. He receives limited
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) even though his financial problems were caused by matters
within his control. When he considered purchasing a house in 2000, he should have
exercised better judgment in buying a less expensive house that would still give him more
discretionary funds to pay his other household bills. Moreover, he should have carefully
weighed the impact of a spike in his ARM interest rate on his monthly mortgage. While it
took some time, he was finally able to obtain a lower mortgage in the second LMA. He
acted responsibly by resolving his traffic citations in July 2013, about eight months before
he received the SOR. Though he did not pay the debts at SOR 1.a through 1.h until two
months after he received the SOR, he has implemented fundamental changes in the way
he pays his debts. He has instituted direct payment plans between several creditors and
his bank. He receives some mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) because his
satisfaction of most of his debts, except for the judgment, demonstrates that almost all his
debts are under control. There is sufficient evidence to conclude the landscaping debt
judgment is his responsibility.
Whole-Person Concept 
I have examined the evidence under the disqualifying and mitigating conditions of
the financial guideline. I have also weighed the circumstances within the context of nine
variables known as the whole-person concept. In evaluating the relevance of an individual's
conduct, the administrative judge should consider the following factors:
AG ¶ 2(a) (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress;
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
7
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be a commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of
the guidelines and the whole-person concept.
Applicant is 39 years old. When he discovered his mortgage prevented him from
paying his other bills, he took action. Though his first LMA was not successful, he was able
to obtain a second LMA in early 2014 and apply the extra funds from reduced monthly
mortgage payments to other financial obligations. He contacted the creditors and paid all
delinquent debts except for the judgment. He reduced his credit cards from five to two. He
has executed a “meaningful track record” of debt reduction. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482
at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) Having weighed the disqualifying and mitigating conditions
under Guideline F, and in the context of the whole-person concept, Applicant has mitigated
the security concerns arising from the financial considerations guideline. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.s: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
