1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00769
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
October 16, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on August 1, 2013.  On June 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline E for
Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG),
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 29, 2014.  She answered
the SOR in writing on July 2, 2014, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge.  The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the request
soon thereafter, and I received the case assignment on August 13, 2014.  DOHA issued
a notice of hearing on August 15, 2014, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on
September 17, 2014.  The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which were
received without objection.  Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits
2
(AppXs) A through F, which were received without objection.  DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (TR) on September 24, 2014.  The record closed on September
24, 2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in all the
Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations.  She also provided additional information
to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
Applicant, who was born, raised and educated in Iran, is 69 years of age.  (TR at
page 35 line 7 to page 36 line 2.)  She “immigrated to the U.S.” in 1977, and became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1986.  (TR at page 36 lines 2~8.)  She worked in real estate
for about 30 years as both an agent and a broker.  (TR at page 36 lines 16~24.)  With
the “financial meltdown” in 2008 she sought employment as a linguist, and was hired in
2009.  (TR at page 37 lines 2~20.)  However, her employment was terminated
September 6, 2011, as she “failed to meet the contractual language requirement,” as
noted on her Letter of Termination.  (GX 2 at pages 1 and 4.)  She initialed but refused
to sign this Letter of Termination.  (GX 2 at page 4.)  However, she did sign her written
warning and release on August 26, 2011.  (GX 2 at page 8.)
1.a.  In answer to “Section 13C - Employment Record” on her August 2013 e-
QIP, Applicant failed to disclose that she was “fired” from employment as noted above.
(TR at page 47 line 3 to page 50 line 21, and GX 1 at page 18.)  I find this to be a wilful
falsification.
1.b.  In answer to the “Employment” Section on her October 9, 2013
“Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening Questionnaire” (CFSQ), Applicant
again failed to disclose that she was terminated from employment as noted above,
claiming she “left this position because HER contract ended and SHE wanted to spend
time with HER family.”  (TR at page 50 line 22 to page 52 line 15, and GX 3 at page 14.)
I also find this to be a wilful falsification.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
3
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  (AG Paragraph 2.)  The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
According to AG Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG Paragraph 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
4
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . or similar form” may raise security
concerns.  Here, Applicant was not candid about her termination on her August 2013 e-
QIP.  Under Subparagraph 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information
concerning relevant facts to an . . . investigator, security official . . . or other official
government representative” may also raise security concerns.  Here, Applicant was
again not candid about her termination during her October 2003 CFSQ.  I find no
countervailing mitigating condition that is applicable here.  Applicant’s last willful
falsification was only about a year ago.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Although her former Team Leader is
favorable in her comments, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts
as to her eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  Applicant was repeatedly less
than candid about her termination as a linguist.  For this reason, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person concept arising from
her Personal Conduct.
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
