1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 14-00367
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on September 9, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 18, 2014, detailing security
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative
Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG),
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
AE G reflects that Applicant, as the facility security officer, was assigned to a specific program on August 27,1
2013 as part of his duties.
GE 1; AE A - AE D; AE F; AE G; Tr. 17-18.2
2
Applicant received the SOR on March 26, 2014, and he answered it on May 9,
2014. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge with the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on June 10, 2014, and I received the case assignment on July 31, 2014. DOHA issued
a Notice of Hearing on September 8, 2014, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on
October 1, 2014. The record closed on October 1, 2014. The Government offered one
exhibit marked as GE 1, which was received and admitted into evidence without
objection. Applicant and one witness testified. He submitted exhibits (AE) marked as AE
A through AE G, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection.
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 16, 2014.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the notice of the date, time and place of the hearing less than
15 days before the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8. of the
Directive to receive the notice at least 15 days before the hearing. Applicant
affirmatively waived this right under the Directive. (Tr. 9)
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a -
1.c of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He also
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following findings of fact.     
Applicant, who is 25 years old, works part-time as a sales person for a DOD
contractor. He began working full-time for his present employer in March 2013 as a
quality assurance tester. In April 2014, his employer transferred him to the full-time
position of facility security officer (FSO), a position he held until recently.  Shortly after1
Applicant became the FSO, the DOD conducted a vulnerability assessment of his
employer’s facility and rated it commendable on August 6, 2013. In October 2013, his
employer received from DOD full accreditation for its information systems based on its
master system security plan on which Applicant worked. Applicant completed the FSO
program management for possessing facilities curriculum on December 27, 2013. The
DOD conducted a second security vulnerability assessment of his employer’s facility
and rated it superior on July 25, 2014 while Applicant was the FSO.2
AE E; Tr. 19.3
GE 1; Tr. 19-20.4
Response to SOR; GE 1.5
Applicant was told the pill was a “molly” which he did not realize at the time was the illegal drug MDMA. Tr.6
35-36.
GE 1; Tr.  21-24.7
3
Applicant graduated from high school in 2007. He enlisted in the United States
Army in August 2007 and received an honorable discharge from active duty on
December 10, 2011 with the rank of sergeant and pay rate of E-5. While in the Army,
Applicant served three and one-half months in Iraq in 2009 and one year in Afghanistan
over three separate short deployments in 2008, 2010, and 2011. During his military
service as an infantryman, he received the Afghanistan Campaign Medal with
Campaign Star, three Army Commendation Medals, two Army Achievement Medals, the
Army Good Conduct Medal, National Defense Service Medal, the Global War on
Terrorism Service Medal, Iraq Campaign Medal with Campaign Star, and numerous
ribbons and badges. Applicant held a high level security clearance while in the Army. As
he understood, his clearance lapsed after his discharge.3
Applicant completed two semesters of college at a community college and
completed some college courses while in the Army. He is now a full-time college
sophomore at a major university. He is studying international affairs. He is single.4
The SOR alleges the use of cocaine on one occasion in February 2012 and of
MDMA (Ecstasy) on one occasion in March 2012, plus the sporadic use of marijuana
between February and August 2012. Applicant listed this drug use on his e-QIP and
acknowledged his drug use in his response to the SOR.5
Two months after his discharge from the Army, Applicant spent an evening sitting
with friends. During the evening, he experimented with MDMA (Ecstasy) once. He found
it enjoyable, but decided that one use was enough. He did not solicit this drug nor did he
pay for it. Rather, a former soldier provided the drug in pill form to him in October 2011
and before he left the Army.  He set the pill aside and found it when he unpacked after6
his discharge from the Army. He stated that he was not motivated by alcohol to use this
drug nor was he thinking about the future when he used it. He tried it as he was
transitioning to civilian life. He has no intent to use the drug again.7
About one month later, in March 2012, Applicant visited friends in a city near
where he had been stationed in the Army, He and his friends celebrated St. Patrick’s
Day at local bars and pubs. He consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication. While in
the intoxicated state, someone offered him cocaine, which he used once in the men’s
room in a bar. He did not solicit the drug nor did he purchase it. He described his
decision to use cocaine as unwise, uninformed, and regrettable. He did not like the
GE 1; Tr. 24-26.8
GE 1; Tr. 26-29,9
GE 1; Tr. 40-41.10
Tr. 42-47.11
4
negative effect of this drug and decided not to use the drug in the future as this was not
the lifestyle he wanted to live.8
In early 2012, Applicant met his now former girlfriend, who regularly used
marijuana. Between February 2012 and August 2012, he experimented with marijuana
out of curiosity. He explained that it was a popular recreational drug, and he decided to
try it. He smoked small amounts, between five and ten times. The marijuana left him
with dizziness and made him lethargic. On his last use of marijuana, he smoked more
than he had smoked previously, which made him more lethargic than earlier. At this
point, he decided that using marijuana was pointless and that it was not something he
wanted to do. He last used marijuana in August 2012. He persuaded his former
girlfriend to stop using marijuana, which she did in August 2012. He and his girlfriend
ended their relationship in January 2014.  9
As he learned the role and duties of an FSO, Applicant realized that he needed
to report his drug use. He requested his assistant FSO to file an incident report about
his drug use. He also reported his drug use to those in his company whom he believed
needed to know. Applicant does not associate with any one who uses marijuana or any
other illegal drug. He indicated on his e-QIP that he did not intend to use drugs in the
future. Applicant credibly testified at the hearing about his past drug use and about his
future intent not to use drugs.10
Applicant’s supervisor testified. He interacts with Applicant on a daily basis at
work and once a week outside of work. Because of Applicant’s work as the FSO, the
company received a superior rating on its facility in July 2014. Applicant self-reported
his drug use to him. He described Applicant as an outstanding person and a person of
integrity. He considers Applicant trustworthy, dependable, honest, and reliable. He has
not seen Applicant use drugs when they socialize. He supports Applicant for a security
clearance.11
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
5
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
6
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); and
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
In 2012, Applicant experimented with cocaine and MDMA (Ecstasy) on one
occasion each. He also used marijuana sporadically between February 2012 and
August 2012. To use, these drugs, he possessed them. Applicant did not purchase or
sell any of these drugs. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) are applicable.
The drug involvement guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 26(a) through ¶
26(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
7
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
Applicant last used illegal drugs more than two years ago. His experimentation
with marijuana lasted about six months in 2012. He tried  cocaine and MDMA (Ecstasy)
once and decided against any further use. He convinced his girlfriend not to use
marijuana during their relationship. He and his girlfriend ended their relationship, and he
does not associate with drug users. He credibly testified to his intent not to use drugs in
the future. He recognized that he made a poor decision to use these drugs, and he
regrets his use of them. He demonstrated remorse for his decision to experiment with
these drugs. It is highly unlikely that he will use these drugs again. His past use does
not reflect on his current, reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. He has
mitigated the security concerns under AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
experimented with marijuana for about six months and with cocaine and MDMA
8
(Ecstasy) once each. He decided against any further use of cocaine and MDMA
(Ecstasy) immediately. After several uses of marijuana, he decided that this drug would
not be a part of his life and that drug use was not a lifestyle he wanted. He credibly
testified about his drug use, his poor decision-making on drug experimentation, and his
intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. He self-reported his drug use to DOD and to
his senior management. He worked hard and successfully as his company’s FSO for a
year. His work resulted in the implementation of a master security plan which received
full accreditation from the DOD. He raised his company’s vulnerability assessment from
commendable to superior in less that one year. Applicant has been forthright about his
drug use through the investigation process and at the hearing. His decision to
experiment with illegal  drugs more than two years ago does not reflect negatively on
his current reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness or his ability to hold a security
clearance.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use under
Guideline H.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
