 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-01336 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 4, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 23, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On June 9, 2014 and July 1, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR by two 
separate responses. On August 28, 2014, Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed. On September 3, 2014, DOHA assigned the case to me.  On September 25, 
 
2 
 
 
2014, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing by video-
teleconference for October 7, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through AE C, which were received into evidence without 
objection. I held the record open until October 21, 2014, to afford the Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE D through AE 
G, which were received into evidence without objection. On October 15, 2014, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and 2.a. There 
being no objection from the Applicant, I granted Department Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 14-
16, 59-62, 89-90.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old mail specialist, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since May 2001. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance, which is a 
requirement of his continued employment. Applicant has continuously held a security 
clearance since 2001. (GE 1, Tr. 27, 30-31.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1994. He was awarded an 
associate of arts degree in music education in May 1996. (Tr. 28-30.) Applicant 
married in June 1996 and has an 18-year-old son, who is a sophomore attending a 
community college. Applicant’s wife is employed as a substitute teacher. Applicant did 
not serve in the armed forces. (GE 1, Tr. 31-34.)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
With three allegations withdrawn, seven allegations remain under this concern 
consisting of four collections accounts, two past-due accounts, and one charged-off 
account. Applicant was able to demonstrate significant progress in regaining financial 
responsibility. The following summary provides the current status of Applicant’s debts.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Collection credit card account for $1,311.  Applicant set up a 
payment plan with the creditor and is making $100 monthly payments. (Tr. 42-44, AE 
A, AE E.) SOR ¶ 1.b – Charged-off truck loan for $7,735, which represents the 
 
3 
 
 
deficiency after truck was repossessed. Applicant set up a payment plan with the 
creditor and is making $400 monthly payments. (Tr. 45-47, AE B, AE E.) SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
and 1.e – Collection student loan account for $19,522 and past-due amount of $1,938 
for a student loan account, respectively. Applicant contacted the creditor to negotiate 
affordable monthly payments. He was able to do so and his payments are $29 per 
month. (Tr. 47-50.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – Past-due mortgage amount for $3,893. Applicant unsuccessfully 
attempted to modify his monthly payments after his wife became ill. In June 2014, he 
moved out of his home and is attempting to sell his home by short sale. Applicant has 
kept his lender up-to-date on his actions. (Tr. 50-56.) SOR ¶ 1.g – Collection cable 
account for $1,058 – Applicant contacted the creditor and is attempting to work out a 
payment plan. (Tr. 56-58.) SOR ¶ 1.h – Collection magazine account for $126. 
Applicant paid this account in full. (Tr. 58-59, AE C, AE E.) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to a six-month loss of income 
following his wife’s back surgery and complications approximately two years ago. (Tr. 
55, 69-71.) Additionally, Applicant retained the services of a credit counselor, who has 
developed a budget for him. His credit counselor’s long-term plan is to revise 
Applicant’s budget every month and make adjustments as needed. Applicant’s budget 
reflects that he is living a modest lifestyle and is doing his best to regain financial 
responsibility with his available resources. (AE F, AE G.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant falsified his February 2013 e-QIP by failing to 
list the extent of his indebtedness as reflected above. He credibly testified that his 
failure to list his debts was caused by confusion and his inability to understand the 
questions.1 He further testified that there was no one to assist him in completing his e-
QIP and that he answered the questions to the best of his ability. (Tr. 36-40.) One 
month later, during his Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview 
(OPM PSI) in March 2013, Applicant volunteered that he had financial issues and 
proceeded to discuss his debts in detail with the OPM agent. He was completely 
forthright during his testimony concerning his debts. (GE 2, Tr. 40-42, 62-65.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor submitted a favorable reference letter on his behalf. She 
stated that Applicant was been employed by their company for 13 years and described 
him as dependable, knowledgeable, punctual, and reliable. She fully supports him in 
obtaining a security clearance. (AE D.) 
 
 
                                                          
1
Applicant qualified for an employment program that specializes in placing individuals with 
various forms of disabilities. He described his employer as “an association that helps those with 
disabilities become independent on their job.” (Tr. 66-67.) 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
5 
 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by Applicant’s admissions and the 
evidence presented. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. 
Therefore, his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). However, he receives partial 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
Applicant receives full credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because his wife’s back surgery 
and subsequent unplanned six-month loss of her income was beyond his control. He 
attempted to negotiate settlements with his creditors and the majority of his creditors 
were willing to work with him. With his available resources, he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. Even though he did not have the funds for full repayment, he 
remained in contact with his creditors and took reasonable steps to resolve his debts.2 
  
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable because Applicant sought financial counseling. His 
financial counselor has developed an adjustable budget that will help him regain 
financial responsibility. Applicant has provided documentation demonstrating that his 
financial problems are being resolved. Furthermore, there is sufficient information to 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).3 Applicant has resolved most of his SOR debts 
                                                          
2
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether she maintained contact with her creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
3
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
 
7 
 
 
by either repaying them in full or setting up payment plans. Given his financial 
situation, Applicant has done all that can reasonably be expected of him. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
not relevant. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
           Posing potential security concerns are Applicant’s documented omissions of his 
indebtedness on his February 2013 e-QIP. His omissions are, however, attributable to 
an honest mistake. While Applicant could reasonably have been expected to be more 
diligent about checking on the status of his debts, his judgment lapses are not enough 
to impute knowing and willful falsification under Guideline E. There being no 
misconduct substantiated, there is no need to discuss extenuation or mitigation. Cf. 
ISCR Case No. 02-13568 (February 13, 2004). I conclude he did not knowingly 
attempt to mislead the Government when completing his e-QIP. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guidelines F and E are incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However, further comments are warranted. 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s 13 years of honorable service with his defense contractor employer 
weigh heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of 
society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses and lives within his means. The 
Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial 
cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s debts have been paid, are in a payment plan, or are in the process 
of being addressed. Due to circumstances beyond his control, his debts became 
delinquent. Despite Applicant’s recent financial setback as a result of his wife’s 
surgery and loss of her work income, it is clear from his actions that he is on the road 
to a financial recovery. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery and steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, the mature and 
responsible manner in which he dealt with his situation, his reference letter, and his 
testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, 
and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he 
has mitigated the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
 
9 
 
 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a 1 – 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Withdrawn 
 
Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.j:  Withdrawn 
   
                   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:  Withdrawn 
 
   Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
