 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00537 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 29, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On April 7, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility - Division A (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 6 ((SF 86), dated August 29, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make a 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 22, 2014. In a statement, notarized April 22, 
2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations.2 By separate e-mail, dated June 24, 
2014, he elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.3 A 
complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant on July 28, 2014, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 
days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of 
the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the 
FORM on August 6, 2014. A response was due on September 5, 2014, but as of 
October 7, 2014, he had not submitted any response. The case was assigned to me on 
October 8, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). Applicant’s 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a cable fabricator with his current employer since December 2012.4 He was 
previously unemployed on two lengthy occasions: from January 2006 until September 
2006, and from March 2012 until December 2012.5 Applicant has also been an enlisted 
member of the Air National Guard since March 1997.6 A June 1996 high school 
graduate, Applicant attended a local community college for one year, but did not obtain 
a degree.7 He was granted a secret security clearance in 1998.8 He has never been 
married.9  
                                                          
2
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated April 22, 2014). 
 
3
 Item 5 (Applicant’s Supplemental Answer to the SOR, dated June 24, 2014). 
 
4
 Item 6, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
5
 Item 6, supra note 1, at 11-13. 
 
6
 Item 7 (Personal Subject Interview, dated October 1, 2013), at 1; Item 6, supra note 1, at 11, 14-16. 
 
7
 Item 6, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
8
 Item 6, supra note 1, at 25-26. 
 
9
 Item 6, supra note 1, at 18. 
 
3 
                                      
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that when he incurred his debts, he foolishly spent all of 
his money on a “very high-maintenance” girlfriend.10 It is unclear when Applicant’s 
finances became so unmanageable that he was unable to maintain his monthly 
payments, resulting in his accounts becoming delinquent in 2007 and 2008. Applicant 
acknowledged to the investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
that he “did not experience any financial hardships” due to his periods of unemployment 
because he resided with his parents and was financially supported by $500 per week in 
unemployment compensation.11 He also explained that because of insufficient funds 
due to the absence of steady employment, he was unable to pay off his accounts.12 At 
some point, because of insufficient money to continue making his monthly payments, 
some of his accounts became delinquent, were placed for collection, or were charged 
off. His wages were garnished to reduce some outstanding balances.13 Applicant 
contemplated filing for bankruptcy, but has not done so.14 In October 2013, he indicated 
an intention to contact each creditor to set up repayment plans in order to settle the 
debts as soon as possible.15 There is no evidence that he has ever done so. 
 
The SOR identified four purportedly delinquent debts totaling $35,894 that had 
been placed for collection or charged off, as generally reflected by a September 2013 
credit report16 and a June 2014 credit report.17 None of the accounts listed in the SOR 
reflect account numbers. Those debts and their respective current status are described 
below. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): There is an unsecured credit union loan account with a high credit 
of $21,759 and an unpaid balance of $20,338 that was placed for collection and 
eventually charged off.18 Applicant contends the account was placed for collection and 
after the matter was brought to a civil court, his wages were garnished.19 He has not 
submitted any documentation to support his contention that any payments were made 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 5. 
 
11
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 1-2; Item 6, supra note 1, at 7-8. 
 
12
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 3-4. 
 
13
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 3-4. 
 
14
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 3-4. 
 
15
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 3-4. 
 
16
 Item 9 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated September 25, 2013). 
 
17
 Item 8 (Equifax Credit Report, dated June 4, 2014). 
 
18
 Item 9, supra note 16, at 7, 11; Item 6, supra note 17, at 2. 
 
19
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 3. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
through garnishment. He has not submitted any documentation reflecting any action or 
activity to contact the creditor or collection agent in an effort to set up repayment 
arrangements. The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): There is a bank credit card account with a past-due balance of 
$3,159 and an unpaid balance of $3,418 that was placed for collection and eventually 
charged off.20 Applicant contends the account was placed for collection and his wages 
were garnished.21 He has not submitted any documentation to support his contention 
that any payments were made through garnishment. He has not submitted any 
documentation reflecting any action or activity to contact the creditor or collection agent 
in an effort to set up repayment arrangements. The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): There is a bank credit card account with a past-due balance of 
$8,363 and an unpaid balance of $9,938 that was placed for collection and eventually 
charged off.22 Applicant contends the account was placed for collection and his wages 
were garnished.23 He has not submitted any documentation to support his contention 
that any payments were made through garnishment. He has not submitted any 
documentation reflecting any action or activity to contact the creditor or collection agent 
in an effort to set up repayment arrangements. The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): There is a credit union personal loan account with a past-due 
balance of $2,200 that was placed for collection and eventually charged off.24 Applicant 
contends the account was placed for collection and after the matter was brought to a 
civil court, his wages were garnished.25 He has not submitted any documentation to 
support his contention that any payments were made through garnishment. He has not 
submitted any documentation reflecting any action or activity to contact the creditor or 
collection agent in an effort to set up repayment arrangements. The account has not 
been resolved. 
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
counseling. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did 
not submit a personal financial statement to indicate his net monthly income, his 
monthly rent, debt, or household expenses, or whether or not he has any funds 
remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. Applicant contends 
he has no other delinquent accounts.26  
 
                                                          
20
 Item 9, supra note 16, at 10; Item 6, supra note 17, at 1. 
 
21
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 4. 
 
22
 Item 9, supra note 16, at 10; Item 6, supra note 17, at 1. 
 
23
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 4. 
 
24
 Item 9, supra note 16, at 7; Item 6, supra note 17, at 2. 
 
25
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 3. 
 
26
 Item 7, supra note 6, at 5. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”27 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”28   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”29 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.30  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
27
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
28
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
29
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
30
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”31 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”32 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. Applicant has had a long-standing problem with his finances which 
generally started in 2007 or 2008. He found himself with insufficient funds to continue 
making his routine monthly payments and various accounts became delinquent, and 
were placed for collection, or charged off.  AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
    
                                                          
31
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
32
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Evidence 
that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.33  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. The 
nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since about 
2007 or 2008 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent.” Applicant was previously unemployed from January 2006 until September 
2006, and from March 2012 until December 2012. However, as he noted, he did not 
experience any financial hardships due to his periods of unemployment because he 
resided with his parents and was financially supported by $500 per week in 
unemployment compensation. To the contrary, as he also noted, Applicant’s financial 
problems were in some measure caused by irresponsible spending when he foolishly 
spent all of his money on a very high-maintenance girlfriend. There is also some 
question as to why Applicant incurred the original loans and balances as he apparently 
had few expressed expenses while residing with his parents.  
 
Applicant’s four accounts became delinquent and were first placed for collection 
and then charged off. Although Applicant was gainfully employed from September 2006 
until March 2012, and by his current employer since December 2012, it remains unclear 
as to what actions he has yet taken to address any of his delinquent accounts. He 
acknowledged some garnishments, but offered no evidence of any voluntary payments. 
He offered no evidence of a good faith effort to resolve his debts and has essentially 
ignored them. There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
                                                          
33
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
counseling. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be, or if he has any 
funds remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. There is no 
evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial problems are close to being under control. 
Applicant has not acted responsibly in failing to address his delinquent accounts and by 
making little, if any, efforts of working with his creditors.34 Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting him cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.35 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.36   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has 
honorably served with the Air National Guard. He was unemployed from January 2006 
until September 2006, and from March 2012 until December 2012. He has repeatedly 
declared his intention of resolving his delinquent accounts.  
  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s financial problems were in some measure caused by irresponsible spending 
                                                          
34
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
35
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
36
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
when he foolishly spent all of his money on a very high-maintenance girlfriend. Once he 
was gainfully employed, he made little, if any, efforts to pay his creditors, generally 
ignoring them and allowing the system to obtain funds from him through garnishment. 
His long-standing failure to repay creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to 
arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be, or if he 
has any funds remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. 
Thus, there are no indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. 
Applicant’s actions under the circumstances confronting him cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Considering the relative absence of debt 
resolution and elimination efforts, Applicant’s financial issues are likely to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:37 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring them.  Overall, the evidence leaves 
me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from her financial considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through 
AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
  
                                                          
37
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
