Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-8 and Applicant’s Response to the FORM1
(Response).
DoD acted under the 9 April 1993 memorandum of agreement between the Composite Health Care System2
Program Office (CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant Secretary
of Defense for Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence (ASD C I) to conduct trustworthiness3
determinations for contractor personnel employed in Information Systems Positions defined in DoD Regulation
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated January 1987. ADP cases are adjudicated under
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive) and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
1
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 14-00685
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s eligibility for trustworthiness1
positions.
On 14 April 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) raising trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
2005, and effective within the DoD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
closed 19 August 2014, the day Department Counsel indicated no objection to
Applicant’s Response to the FORM. DOHA assigned the case to me 28 August 2014.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted SOR financial allegations 1.-1.f, 1.m, and 1.o-1.q. She denied
allegations 1.g-1.l and 1.n. However, during a September 2013 subject interview with a
Government investigator, she admitted debts that she now denies: SOR 1.g, 1.k-1.l, and
1.n. The only debts she denied in both places are SOR debts 1.h-1.j. She is a 58-year-
old customer service representative employed by a defense contractor since September
2013. This is her first application for a position of trust. She will have access to sensitive
medical data.
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits substantiate, 17 delinquent debts
totaling over $14,000. Applicant admits 10 debts for $6,500, and has previously
acknowledged four additional debts for $4,000 (Item 6). The three debts she denies
total $3,600.
Applicant attributes her debts to her mother’s funeral expenses, although she has
not said when her mother died, and the loss of her mother’s income to help with the
debts. She was also unemployed from April to September 2013, during which time she
received unemployment compensation. Her Response shows that she paid SOR debt
1.m in May 2014 and has been paying $13 monthly on SOR debt 1.o for two or three
months. She also documented that two accounts not alleged in the SOR are in good
standing. However, it appears that she is only making the minimum monthly payment on
those accounts.
Applicant submitted a handwritten budget with her Response that reflects $92
monthly positive cash flow. The budget provides for the monthly payment on SOR debt
1.o. It also shows $95 monthly payments to credit cards, but does not specify if those
payments are to delinquent or current credit cards. Applicant has not documented any
credit or financial counseling. She provided no work or character references.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to sensitive information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶ 19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.4
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is unlikely to recur.
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications7
that the problem is being resolved or is under control.
3
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Trustworthiness decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s public trust position. The
Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the
SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
Government’s case.  Because no one has a right to a public trust position, the applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. While some of Applicant’s financial
difficulties may be reasonably attributable to her six-month’s unemployment in 2013 and
her mother’s death, she submitted insufficient information to determine she acted
responsibly under the circumstances. She documented little efforts to resolve her debts,
and did not provide a proposed plan to address them.4
Applicant potentially meets only one of the mitigating factors for financial
considerations. Her financial difficulties are both recent and multiple.  While her5
unemployment (and her mother’s death, if documented) are clearly circumstances
beyond her control, she got a new job in September 2013, and she has documented
very few efforts dealing with the debts alleged in the SOR, or documenting any efforts to
resolve them.  In addition, there is no evidence that she has sought credit counseling or6
otherwise brought the problem under control.  There is little documentary evidence of7
 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8
4
any good-faith effort to satisfy the debts alleged in the SOR.  Finally, given her8
unwillingness to seek or use financial counseling, there is nothing in the record to
suggest that Applicant will put her financial problems behind her. I conclude Guideline F
against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-q: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a public trust
position for Applicant. Eligibility for a public trust position denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
