 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00710  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, the Government’s File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), and Applicant's Response, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised under the personal conduct guideline. Accordingly, her request 
to retain her security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 1), pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The SOR listed 
security concerns addressed in the Directive under Guideline E (personal conduct) of 
the AG. In her May 12, 2014 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the two allegations 
in the SOR, and requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 3) 
 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
prepared a presentation of the Government’s case in a FORM dated July 10, 2014.1 It 
contained the Government’s argument and five documents (Items 1-5) in support of its 
preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request for a security clearance. Applicant 
received the FORM on July 23, 2014. She failed to submit a response to refute or 
mitigate the allegations in the SOR. The case was assigned to me on October 9, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 22 years old, single, with no children. She completed a bachelor’s 
degree in 2013. In September 2013, she began her current position of associate 
software engineer with a defense contractor. This is her first application for a security 
clearance. (Item 4)  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana in summer 2013. (Item 1) In her 
Answer, she explained that she used it once, because her boyfriend suggested it, and 
because she wanted to relieve pain she was experiencing from a biopsy. She 
experienced an anxiety attack when she used it, and decided she did not want to use it 
again. She stated that this was her only use of marijuana. (Items 3, 5) 
 
 About three months later, in October 2013, Applicant completed her security 
clearance application. Section 23 concerned illegal drug use, and asked, “In the last 
seven years, have you illegally used any drugs or controlled substances?” Applicant 
answered “No.” (Item 4)  
 
 In January 2014, Applicant met with a DOD investigator as part of her security 
investigation.2 She disclosed her marijuana use, explaining that she took two puffs 
when her boyfriend encouraged her to try it. She said she did not report this use on her 
security clearance application because it had not been recorded anywhere; she was 
ashamed of it; she thought listing her marijuana use would indicate she had been 
arrested; and she thought she would not be granted a security clearance if she 
disclosed it. (Item 5)  
 
 However, in her May 2014 Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she did not 
answer “Yes” to the drug question because she was uncertain about the illegality of her 
marijuana use as “[i]t was decriminalized in [state], where the incident occurred.” She 
also said,  
                                                          
1 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7.  
 
2 DOHA provided Applicant with a copy of the summary of her January 15, 2014 security interview with an 
authorized DOD investigator. She was asked to review the contents and correct any inaccuracies. She 
made no changes or corrections, and on March 21, 2014, she adopted the summary as accurately 
reflecting her interview. (Item 5) 
 
3 
 
 
 
I believed that the single instance where I used marijuana did not 
constitute as [sic] an illegal act. In [state], the use of cannabis is quantified 
as only a misdemeanor. Due to this, I was inclined to answer “no” to this 
question because this act was not criminal or illegal according to my 
understanding. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant's statement indicates that sometime after she had her security interview, she 
discovered marijuana use was misdemeanor-level criminal conduct. She also states 
that she believed a misdemeanor is not illegal conduct, and therefore, did not fall under 
the illegal drug use described in the security clearance application. 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline E (personal conduct). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
                                                          
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
4 
 
 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions are relevant under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine 
security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person's personal, professional, or community standing. . .  
 
Disqualifying condition ¶ 16(a) involves a knowing and deliberate decision not to 
disclose relevant information on a security clearance application. When Applicant 
completed her application in October 2013, she did not disclose her marijuana use, 
which occurred three months earlier. In her security interview, she stated she concealed 
her drug use because she knew it had not been documented and therefore, presumably, 
she believed it could not be discovered by the government. She also hid the fact 
because she was ashamed, and because it might prevent her from obtaining a security 
clearance. It is clear from her statements that Applicant made a knowing and conscious 
choice to conceal the information. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (e) apply. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are relevant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
                                                          
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) applies because Applicant has disclosed the illegal conduct and she is 
unlikely to be vulnerable to exploitation based on her drug use. However, as to AG ¶ 
17(a), there is no evidence that Applicant made efforts to change or correct her answer 
on the application during the security clearance process. Although she disclosed her 
marijuana use to the DOD investigator during her security interview, the Appeal Board 
has held that subsequent honesty at an interview does not negate the security 
implications of initial dishonesty on security clearance applications.7 AG ¶ 17(a) does not 
apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) also cannot be applied. Applicant’s failure to be candid during her 
security clearance investigation is not minor: She concealed material and relevant 
information from the Government. Her actions undermine the security clearance process, 
which depends in part on honest self-reporting by applicants. Her intentional decision to 
hide her illegal drug use reflects poorly on her reliability and judgment. Moreover, 
Applicant provided different reasons for the concealment during her security interview 
and in her Answer to the SOR. Her May 2014 Answer is the first time she claimed that 
she failed to disclose because of her uncertainty about the illegality of her conduct. Her 
explanation is further undermined because she states that marijuana use has been 
decriminalized in her state, but then explains that it is considered a misdemeanor, which 
in fact, constitutes criminal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No.02-23073 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar 20, 2004). 
 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant’s lack of marijuana use since 2013 is a positive sign. However, it is 
outweighed by her more recent negative conduct: her falsification of her security 
clearance application in October 2013. Moreover, Applicant undermined her credibility 
by providing varying reasons for her falsification in her security interview and in her 
Answer to the SOR. Applicant’s conduct demonstrates a willingness to place her own 
needs before the Government’s need for honesty. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
