 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00683 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant demonstrated lack of judgment by committing a security violation in 
2012. Notwithstanding the clear evidence of his security violation, he continues to make 
false statements denying it. His security violation and his false statements are likely to 
recur and cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Clearance 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
November 14, 2012. On April 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline K 
(handling protected information) and Guideline E (personal conduct).1  
 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 27, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 2, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the hearing notice on 
September 2, 2014, convening a hearing on September 18, 2014. At the hearing, the 
Government presented one witness and offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant 
testified and submitted two exhibits (AE 1 and 2). All exhibits were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 2, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer, Applicant denied all the SOR allegations. After a thorough review 
of the evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is the president and chief executive officer of a company contracting 
with the Government since 1980. He will be 80 years old in December 2014. Applicant 
received his bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering in 1956, and sporadically 
completed specialized college courses throughout his career. He served in the Inactive 
Reserve in the U.S. Navy between 1956 and 1960, and received an honorable 
discharge. Applicant has been married to his wife for 25 years. He has five adult 
children, two from his first wife, and three from his current marriage. 
 
Applicant possessed a security clearance from 1981 to May 2012, when his 
clearance expired. He requested the continuation of his clearance in November 2012, 
which was denied because of the security concerns alleged in the SOR. There is no 
evidence to show that he was ever involved in any security violations, except for the 
SOR allegations.  
 
In September 2012, Applicant attended, as he had been doing during the last 12 
years, a classified, yearly trade conference sponsored by a defense industry 
association. Attendees are required to have a current secret clearance to attend the 
conference. Applicant failed to submit a “visit request” prior to the conference for 
security personnel to confirm that he had a current security clearance. 
 
The conference security personnel recognized Applicant as a recurrent 
conference attendee. Applicant asked for, and was granted, an unclassified badge to 
attend the Monday ice breaker and other social events taking place on the first day of 
the conference. The unclassified badge had a red stripe at the bottom of the badge to 
identify him as an uncleared participant. He was informed he could not attend classified 
briefings or participate in conversations concerning classified information. Security 
personnel asked Applicant to return to the registration desk on Tuesday morning to be 
issued a cleared badge after his security eligibility was resolved.  
 
On Tuesday morning, Applicant failed to report to the security personnel desk as 
requested. Instead, he clipped (or had someone clip) the red stripe off his badge and 
attended classified seminars on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday morning. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was seen coming out of a classified briefing Thursday morning. He was 
confronted by a security officer and asked to surrender his badge. The security officer 
noted that Applicant had clipped off the red stripe from the badge, and asked him why 
he had clipped the badge, and whether he knew he was in trouble. Applicant did not 
deny clipping the red stripe from the badge. Applicant responded by saying something 
to the effect that he did not think too much about it because he knew he had a 
clearance. Applicant was asked to leave the premises. 
 
The subsequent security violation investigation revealed that Applicant’s security 
clearance expired in May 2012. He had not submitted an SCA requesting the 
continuation of his clearance, and he never submitted a visit request to attend the 
conference. Security personnel filed a serious incident report. Applicant’s facility 
security officer (FSO) was involved in a car accident in late 2011-early 2012, and after a 
long period in the hospital, she passed away. Applicant became his company’s FSO. He 
failed to submit a visit request prior to the conference, and to check his access eligibility 
in the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) database before attending the 
conference. 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator on December 31, 2013, 
concerning his attendance at the September 2012 classified conference, and his 
security violation. Applicant denied that he clipped off the red stripe of his badge and 
that he attended classified briefings during the conference. (Tr. 46) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant explained that he had possessed a security clearance 
without any blemishes since 1981, and that he had attended the trade conference 
during the last 12 years. He acknowledged knowing that the conference was classified, 
and that attendees were required to have at least a secret clearance. He also knew that 
he was required to submit a visit request prior to the conference to have his clearance 
eligibility confirmed. He believed he had a valid security clearance to attend the 
conference, and that his FSO had submitted the required visit request. He admitted that 
he attended classified briefings at the September 2012 conference. He again denied 
that he clipped off the red stripe of his badge. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
 
4 
 
 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
In September 2012, Applicant clipped (or had someone clip) a red stripe of an 
uncleared badge issued to him by security personnel at a classified conference and 
illegally attended classified briefings. He knew he was required to have a valid secret 
clearance to attend the conference. He was told by security personnel not to attend 
classified briefings until his security eligibility was confirmed. He used the clipped badge 
to conceal that he lacked a clearance. 
 
Applicant’s security violation triggered disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 34 
that raised a security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
5 
 
 
 
(d) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view classified or other protected 
information outside one’s need to know; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information. 
 
AG ¶ 35 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the mitigating conditions 
apply. Applicant’s security violation is recent and it happened under normal 
circumstances – his clearance expired and he failed to request its renewal. Applicant 
deliberately clipped (or was aware it had been clipped) the red stripe off his badge to 
attend classified conferences after he was told that there were problems with his 
security clearance. Security personnel told him not to attend classified conferences. He 
deliberately attended briefings knowing that he was not cleared to attend. 
 
  Applicant expressed no remorse for his security violations. On the contrary, he 
continued to make false statements to investigators and at his hearing denying that he 
clipped the red stripe off his uncleared badge. He has taken no responsibility for his 
actions. Because of his many years possessing a security clearance and attending the 
classified trade conference, Applicant was fully aware that he was engaging in a 
security violation. Applicant’s behavior demonstrates a lack of regard for his security 
responsibilities. I find Applicant’s security violations are likely to recur and cast serious 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
6 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 In December 2013, Applicant deliberately made false statements to a 
government investigator when he denied that he had altered his uncleared badge to 
attend classified briefings. Applicant had control of the badge since it was issued to him, 
until it was confiscated from him. He either altered the badge or had someone alter the 
badge for him to circumvent the conference security and attended classified briefings 
without the required security clearance. Applicant’s deliberate false statement trigger 
the applicability of personal conduct disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(b) “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative.”  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the seven personal 
conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 17(a) through (g) apply. Applicant’s false 
statement to a government investigator is a felony offense under 18 USC 1001. 
Moreover, at his hearing Applicant continued to make false statements when he denied 
clipping the red stripe of his uncleared badge.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) Applicant, 79, honorably served four years in the U.S. Navy 
Inactive Reserve. He provided services to the Government as a contractor and 
possessed a security clearance from 1981 to 2012.  
 
Applicant committed a security violation in September 2012, which he continues 
to deny, notwithstanding clear and convincing evidence of it. His security violation is 
recent. He expressed no remorse for his past security violation, and took no 
responsibility for his actions. Applicant demonstrated lack of judgment by committing the 
security violation in 2012, and by continuing to make false statements denying his 
misconduct. I find his security violation and his false statements are likely to recur and 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:      Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
