1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-01044
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by circumstances beyond her control.
Her timely response to her financial problems reflects well on her judgment and
reliability. Applicant did not incur her debts through any misconduct. Her personal
finances will continue to improve, and she is taking steps to ensure she is not likely to
incur such financial problems in the future. Her request for a security clearance is
granted.
Statement of the Case
On December 10, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for a security clearance required for
her job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by the Directive, as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were2
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 Directive, E3.1.7.3
 In accordance with Directive E3.1.17, Department Counsel moved at hearing to amend the SOR 1.t4
allegation to reflect a balance past-due of $5,555. W ithout objection, I granted the motion. Applicant was given
additional time after the hearing to submit information about that debt; however, no post-hearing submission
was received. (Tr. 73 - 75)
2
investigation, DOD adjudicators were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a clearance.  1
On May 12, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which, if proven, raise security concerns addressed through the
adjudicative guideline (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F). On June 16,2
2014, Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a decision without a
hearing. However, on July 14, 2014, the Government requested a hearing.3
The case was assigned to me on August 5, 2014, and I convened a hearing on
September 10, 2014. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 3. Applicant testified and
presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - D. All exhibits were admitted without objection. I
left the record open after the hearing to receive from Applicant additional relevant
information. However, no post-hearing submission was made, and the record closed on
September 22, 2014. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 25,
2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant accrued 20 delinquent
or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.t) totaling $46,015. Applicant admitted, with
explanations, the allegations at SOR 1.a, 1.c - 1.e, and 1.p - 1.t.  She denied, with4
explanations, the remaining SOR allegations. Based on all available information, I make
the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 39 years old and has worked as an accountant or bookkeeper for
various employers since about 2004. She has worked in a similar capacity for her
current employer since May 2013. (Gx. 1)
Applicant has been married twice. She married her first husband in January
2002, and they divorced in December 2007. They had one child, now age 12. Applicant
married her current husband in December 2012. Together, they have two children under
the age of three. (Gx. 1)
3
When Applicant submitted her EQIP, she disclosed several delinquent or past-
due debts comprised mostly of medical bills and student loans. She also disclosed that
she had three delinquent credit card accounts and a car repossession from a defaulted
auto leasing agreement. A credit report obtained subsequent to her application
documented the debts alleged in the SOR. Of her total debt, her medical bills and
student loans make up about 83 percent of the total debt at issue here. (Gx. 1; Gx. 3)
Applicant’s financial problems arose from a combination of periodic
unemployment, lack of medical benefits, and unforeseen medical problems for her, her
husband and one of their children. Additionally, her first husband has not met his child
support obligations. Applicant’s second pregnancy was difficult and required more than
the usual medical attention. Applicant had little medical coverage in 2012, and, until she
was hired by her current employer, she had insufficient health care coverage. After the
child was born, she only had short-term disability benefits for time off from work.
Additionally, that child has required surgery for macro-facial issues and for other
congenital health issues. Finally, late in 2013, as Applicant was trying to repay her
debts, her second husband was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes. His condition causes
severe pain in his legs and feet. He has lost significant time at work because his job
requires him to be on his feet most of the day and he could not work a full schedule. As
a result, his income dropped by about $10,000. However, he and his employer recently
worked out a more flexible schedule under accommodations delineated in the Family
and Medical Leave Act (FMLA). Applicant’s husband’s need for intermittent rest and
meal periods during the day is now part of a full-time schedule that will allow him to earn
the income he had before he became ill. Applicant’s health care benefits will be adjusted
in the fall of 2014, when she can make changes during “open season” that will cover all
the expenses for her children and her husband. (Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. D; Tr. 14 -
57)
Applicant has taken college courses at two different schools – one between
August 1994 and May 1998, the other between July 2005 and February 2007. She
financed all of her studies through student loans. The debts alleged at SOR 1.j - 1.o,
which now total $2,512, are past-due student loans for tuition at her first school. The
debts alleged at SOR 1.f - 1.i, which now total $34,912, are past-due student loans for
tuition at the second school. Her monthly payments lapsed when she and her husband
encountered the medical issues discussed above. However, Applicant established that
she is once again in good standing, having completed loan rehabilitation programs with
both lenders. (Gx. 1 - 3; Ax. A - C; Tr. 57 - 59)
As to her credit cards, Applicant has been making regular payments on the debts
at SOR 1.b and SOR 1.d since August 2013. Her intention is to continue to pay down
these debts as she also repays her student loans. When her husband’s income
increases, she will begin repaying her medical bills (SOR 1.e and 1.p - 1.r) before
moving on to resolve her remaining credit card debts (SOR 1.a, 1.s and 1.t). (Answer;
Ax. A; Ax. C; Tr. 64 - 67)
 See Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
4
Applicant and her family live completely within their means. With their current
medical expenses and her husband’s reduced income, they have little money remaining
each month after expenses. They use only one 14-year-old car that is paid for, and they
do not use credit cards for expenses outside their monthly necessities. (Answer; Gx. 2;
Tr. 68 - 69)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
5
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed at AG
¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), the record shows
Applicant has been unable, not unwilling, to repay her past-due debts.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s financial
problems continue, in that she is still repaying her debts and other debts remain
unaddressed. However, the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b) applies, because her
debts arose from a combination of circumstances beyond her control. To her credit, she
has been in contact with her creditors and has been able to rehabilitate her student
loans. She also has a track record of payments to two of her past-due credit card
accounts. Her response to her financial problems suggest that her efforts at resolving
her debts will continue. In the same vein, her efforts have earned some consideration
6
under AG ¶ 20(d). Applicant has done everything possible given the resources she has
to repay her past-due debts. Her financial difficulties are not the result of poor judgment
or careless management of her money. On balance, I conclude she has presented
sufficient information to mitigate the Government’s concerns under this guideline.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s response to her financial problems
supports a presumption that she is mature and responsible. She demonstrated a good
command of her finances and the challenges she and her husband face as they try to
overcome their debts. Although she still has a significant amount of debt to resolve, the
presence of unpaid debts does not end this inquiry. I also have assigned a great deal of
weight to her demonstrated good judgment and resolve in this matter. A fair and
commonsense assessment of all available information shows that Applicant’s finances
no longer present an unacceptable security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.t: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
