 Exhibit 4. 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-----------------------------------  ) ADP Case No. 14-00816
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him eligibility for a
public trust position. The evidence shows Applicant has a history of inappropriate
behavior in the workplace, which resulted in job terminations in 2010 and 2013.
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate the trustworthiness
concern stemming from his unfavorable employment history. Accordingly, this case is
decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted an application for a position of public trust on
August 7, 2013.  After reviewing the application and information gathered during a1
background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD), on April 17, 2014, sent
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) detailing a trustworthiness concern under
Guideline E for personal conduct. The action was taken under Department of Defense
 The AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The2
AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s brief and supporting documents, some of3
which may be identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (restating existing4
caselaw that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible). 
 Department Counsel’s brief at 2. 5
2
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel
Security Program (Jan. 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG)  implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The SOR2
recommended submission of Applicant’s case to an administrative judge to determine
his eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position to support a
contract with the DOD.  
Applicant answered the SOR on May 3, 2014. He admitted, with explanations,
the two personal conduct allegations under Guideline E. On May 13, 2014, he
requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Likewise,
Department Counsel did not request a hearing.  
Thereafter, on June 26, 2014, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and
material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant3
material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it July 3, 2014. To date, he has
not replied to the FORM. The case was assigned to me October 8, 2014.
Ruling on Evidence 
Exhibit 5 is a report of investigation from the background investigation of
Applicant. The four-page document is a summary of an interview of Applicant on
September 5, 2013. Under the rules that govern these cases, a report of investigation
may be received and considered as evidence when it is authenticated by a witness.4
Although Applicant, who is not law trained and representing himself, has not raised this
issue, I am raising it sua sponte. Exhibit 5 is not authenticated in any way, and
Department Counsel has not made an argument to support its admissibility.  According,5
it is not admissible and I have not considered it. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy
a position of public trust for a customer service job with a health care company that has
 Exhibit 6. 6
 Exhibit 4 at 19. 7
 Exhibit 4 at 19. 8
 Exhibit 3. 9
 Exhibit 4 at 15–17.10
3
a contract with the DOD. He has had this job since August 2013. It appears he is
working in support of a contract with the Defense Health Agency.   6
Applicant married in 2011. His educational background includes obtaining a high-
school diploma in 2005, attending college during 2005-2007 without obtaining a degree,
and attending a vocation school where he completed a pharmacy technician program of
study in 2008. 
Applicant was employed as a pharmacy technician for a large, retail pharmacy
from September 2009 to May 2010. His employment ended when he was fired after an
allegation of theft of Ritalin. This matter is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
In his August 2013 application, Applicant stated that he left the job because he
was let go after allowing an ongoing dispute with his manager go too far.  He further7
explained that the reason he was fired was “[t]he manager always criticized me and
condescended to me constantly, I was frustrated and accidentally left the pharmacy with
medication in my smock and was fired for theft.”8
In his May 2014 answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a fuller explanation for
the job termination as follows:
I admit I was let go from this position. But the reason why I took the
medication was because the pharmacy manager singled me out daily and
always told me my job performance was bad and that I was incompetent. I
was the only male that worked in her pharmacy because I was transferred
there. She cut my hours because of personal reasons and I did not qualify
for benefits. I could not afford the medication I needed to perform my job
duties to her expectations. And because I could not meet her
expectations, she continued to cut my hours and berate/insult me in front
of fellow staff and even customers. [The pharmacy] followed up to verify. I
paid them back what I owed for the medication, voluntarily surrendered my
[state] pharmacy technician license, and they never filed criminal
charges.9
After the termination from his job at the pharmacy, Applicant worked a variety of
jobs.  Then in January 2012, he took a job as a field representative with a company10
 Exhibit 4 at 14. 11
 Exhibit 4 at 14. 12
 Exhibit 3. 13
4
engaged in health and sports nutrition. That job ended when he was terminated in
March 2013 for seeking employment with a vendor. This matter is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.
In his August 2013 application, Applicant stated that he left the job because he
was let go after seeking employment with a vendor to the company.  He further11
explained that the reason he was fired was for seeking employment with a vendor and
that he and his supervisor were not getting along.12
In his May 2014 answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a fuller explanation for
the job termination as follows:
I admit I was terminated from this position. The regional manager was
flying out to the east coast to film her parts for a movie and was neglecting
her job duties here. I received many complaints from vendors we worked
with so I reported her to upper management. She was given warnings and
soon discovered that I sent in reports. At this point she started to micro-
manage me on purpose to an extent that I grew to hate my job. So I
reached out to vendors seeking employment and was terminated for that
reason once my regional manager found out.13
Applicant has not submitted any type of supporting documentation in response to
the SOR or the FORM. 
Law and Policies
This case involves an adjudication of Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP
position, not an adjudication of eligibility for a security clearance. In deciding ADP
cases, we follow the procedures contained in the Directive, and we apply the 2006
adjudicative guidelines. The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive
duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning
the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the interests of national
security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural
protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination is made.
Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. And in all cases, the protection of the national security is the
paramount consideration. 
Discussion
Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the concern is that “[c]onduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
 AG ¶ 15. 14
 AG ¶¶ 16(c) and (d).15
 AG ¶¶ 17(a)–(g). 16
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).17
5
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect [sensitive] information.”14
Here, the SOR alleges and the evidence shows that Applicant was fired twice,
the first time in 2010 after an allegation of theft of prescribed medication, and the
second time in 2013 after he sought employment from a vendor to the company. These
matters amount to inappropriate workplace behavior and fall under two Guideline E
disqualifying conditions.  The terminations are indicative of questionable judgment,15
untrustworthiness, unreliability, failure to follow rules and regulations, or dishonesty. 
Guideline E contains several conditions that could mitigate the trustworthiness
concern.  I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and none, individually or in16
combination, is sufficient to mitigate the concern stemming from Applicant’s
inappropriate workplace behavior. The terminations occurred in the span of about three
years. He attributed the terminations to problems with management. The first
termination in 2010 is quite serious. It involved the theft of a prescription drug, which
was certainly contrary to his responsibilities as a licensed pharmacy technician. The
second termination in 2013 is less serious. He was terminated for a breach of business
etiquette by seeking employment with one of his employer’s vendors. Taken together,
the terminations are suggestive of a pattern of conduct in which Applicant has difficulty
in the workplace with management and then acts out in inappropriate ways in response
to the difficulty. And that pattern of conduct is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security. 
To conclude, the evidence leaves me with doubt about Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a public trust position. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence
as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable
evidence or vice versa. I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  For all17
these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct concern.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.b: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for an ADP position. Eligibility for access to
sensitive information is denied.
        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
