 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00102 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns related to Guideline F. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On March 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an April 30, 2014, response, Applicant admitted both allegations raised in the 
SOR with comments attached. He also requested a decision without hearing. Counsel 
for DOD prepared a Form of Relevant Material (FORM) containing 12 attachments to 
support the Government’s position in this matter. Applicant did not submit a response or 
any additional information within the specified time period following his receipt of the 
FORM. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me 
on October 9, 2014. I have thoroughly reviewed the FORM and other case file 
 
 
 
 
2 
materials. Based on the materials submitted, I find that Applicant failed to meet his 
burden in mitigating financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old vehicle test operations technician who has worked for 
the same defense contractor since October 1996. He has earned a high school diploma 
and an associate’s degree. He served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force for four years 
before being honorably discharged. Applicant is divorced and has three adult children.  
 
 The March 2014 SOR alleges two delinquent debts, for a collection account in 
the amount of $13,499 and a 180-days past-due balance of $38,033, respectively, as 
allegations 1.a-1.b. Applicant admitted both allegations. He wrote that the debt at 1.a 
had been reduced to $12,499. He also wrote that he did not believe the balance shown 
at 1.b was correct. He argued that he had submitted to the creditor evidence that the 
balance shown was satisfied by a default insurance policy, but provided no such 
corroborating evidence with his response to the SOR.  
 
 Up until 2007, Applicant and his wife lived comfortably in a house he bought with 
$8,300 down and a loan for $261,700. His mortgage payment fluctuated between 
$1,700 and $2,000 a month. Between 2007 and 2008, Applicant found it difficult to meet 
expenses when his wife was unable or refused to work. (Response to the SOR; FORM, 
Item 6, at 4) This impacted his timely home mortgage payment. In 2008, he discovered 
she was involved in illegal drug use. At the same time, items began disappearing from 
the home and his wife would leave home for a day or two unexpectedly. Soon, she was 
openly using drugs with her friends in their garage. Her drug abuse made her returning 
to the workplace out of the question. In October 2008, his $12,439 minivan was 
repossessed. When interviewed in 2013, Applicant stated that he believed the debt 
related to this vehicle was absolved because it was sold, denied knowledge of a debt 
related to this automobile, and orally disputed the debt. FORM, Item 7, at 3.  
 
Meanwhile, Applicant fell behind on the mortgage for three or four months. In 
October 2008, he tried to refinance his mortgage. The lender complied, but in such a 
way that the monthly payment increased. By February 2009, Applicant was in no better 
shape financially. He consulted another lender, which advised him to default on his loan 
while it found him a refinanced mortgage deal. No deal could be struck. Meanwhile, 
Applicant’s wife stole his checkbook and wrote $3,000 in checks, leaving Applicant 
without money. By April or May 2009, Applicant received the foreclosure notice on the 
property and quit making payments on the loan. Foreclosure was commenced in 
September 2009, and Applicant was given until January 31, 2010 to vacate the home. 
On May 12, 2011, Applicant told investigators that the residence was ultimately sold for 
$270,000, and the lender was satisfied with payment of default insurance. However, he 
provided no evidence to them of that assertion. His monthly gross income is 
approximately $6,417 and his total monthly expenses are about $4,065. His monthly 
discretionary funds amount to $217. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Applicant and his family moved into their new home in May 2010, after a 
protracted stay in a hotel. The couple separated in July 2010. Applicant’s wife ultimately 
quit using drugs. Today, Applicant makes monthly payments on his new home and $270 
monthly spousal-support payments.  
 
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
 
 
 
4 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has two 
delinquent debts. Such facts are sufficient to invoke two of the financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 There is no documentary evidence showing that any progress has been initiated 
or made by Applicant with regard to these accounts. With regard to their creation, 
spousal or domestic discontent that has adverse financial repercussions may not be 
unique, but it can be unforeseeable despite an applicant’s best behavior. At the time of 
his wife’s drug abuse, there is no indication Applicant himself, acted irresponsibly, nor is 
this scenario likely to recur. Given these considerations, AG ¶ 20(a) and AG ¶ 20(b) 
apply with regard to the creation of the debt at issue.  
 
There is, however, no substantiating documentary evidence showing Applicant 
has addressed or otherwise made progress on the debts created. There is no 
documentary evidence showing that he received financial counseling, that the past-due 
accounts have been addressed, a good-faith effort has been put in place to address 
those debts, or reflect a legitimate dispute. Therefore, none of the remaining mitigating 
conditions apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
limited facts and circumstances noted in this case. I incorporate my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, others may have warranted additional comment.  
 
Applicant a 51-year-old vehicle test operations technician who has worked for the 
same employer for 18 years. He has earned an associate’s degree and served 
honorably in the U.S. military. He helped raise three children. His marriage began to 
falter and he started to face financial difficulties when his former wife refused to work. 
Instead, she devoted her time to drugs and selfishly irresponsible behavior. Reduced to 
one income and with her abuse of the family coffers, Applicant became delinquent on 
his home loan and a vehicle loan.  
 
 In his defense, Applicant provides a plausible explanation with regard to the 
home loan: that default insurance satisfied whatever debt was owed after the home was 
foreclosed upon. In relying on an administrative determination based on the written 
record, however, Applicant neglected to introduce documentary evidence substantiating 
his assertion. Similarly, documentary evidence is lacking with regard to the other debt at 
issue. Lacking such evidence, I cannot find that financial considerations security 
concerns have been mitigated. Therefore, clearance is denied.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
