 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00295   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Lyn R. Agre, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him a security 
clearance to work in the defense industry. He has mitigated the foreign influence 
concern raised by his familial contacts with his wife, a U.S. permanent resident who is a 
citizen of Israel, and his parents-in-law, who are citizens and residents of the same. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 13, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing 
convened on August 18, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, over 
Applicant’s objection.2 Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B were admitted without 
objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on August 27, 2014. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Israel. This request was granted over the objection of Applicant’s 
counsel. The written summary, along with its attachments, is appended to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 31, has worked for a federal contractor off and on since 2002. He has 
worked in his current position as a security supervisor in an international airport since 
2010. Since working at the airport, Applicant has been recognized for his security 
consciousness. In 2006, Applicant encountered a military member attempting to fly with 
classified information. Applicant worked with the military member to ensure the secured 
items received proper screening without compromising the contents of the package. He 
has also received certificates of appreciation from the Transportation Security 
Administration and his employer. Applicant’s supervisors and government client 
endorse his security clearance application.4 
 
Born in Ukraine, Applicant immigrated to the United States as a child with his 
parents and grandparents in 1994. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2001. 
Applicant married his wife, an Israeli citizen, in January 2008. Applicant met his wife 
through a mutual friend in November 2007, while she was in the United States visiting a 
family member. They married after a brief courtship. Before immigrating, Applicant’s 
wife completed compulsory military service in 2000. She worked as a secretary and her 
duties did not require access to classified information. After immigrating to the United 
States, Applicant’s wife worked as a teacher for one year before becoming a stay-at-
home mother. Currently, Applicant’s wife holds permanent resident status and she has 
applied for U.S. citizenship. Applicant and his wife have three children under five years 
old, all of whom are U.S. citizens by birth. Although they are entitled to Israeli citizenship 
through their mother, Applicant and his wife do not have any plans to seek Israeli 
citizenship for them.5  
                                                          
2 Applicant objected to GE 2, citing improper foundation and incompleteness. The exhibit contains 
information regarding the company that employs Applicant’s father-in-law. The parties stipulate that 
Applicant’s father-in-law is employed by a defense technology firm. 
  
3 Tr. 18. 
 
4 Tr. 27-34; GE 1, AE A –B. 
 
5 Tr. 20-22, 38-40, 43, 48-50, 53-56, 60-62, 66-68, 72; GE 1.  
 
3 
 
Applicant’s parents-in-law are residents and citizens of Israel, a parliamentary 
democracy with strong historic and cultural ties with the United States. Commitment to 
Israel’s security has been a cornerstone of U.S.-Middle East policy since Israel’s 
inception. Both countries have a mutual interest in a peaceful, secure Middle East. On 
July 27, 2012, President Obama signed the United States-Israel Enhanced Security 
Cooperation Act. The goal of this legislation is to strengthen the military edge that Israel 
enjoys over its regional enemies. Despite the favorable relationship between the 
countries, Israel aggressively targets sensitive U.S. technology. There have been some 
cases of U.S. government employees who have been prosecuted and convicted of 
spying against the United States for Israel. There have also been cases involving the 
illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S restricted, dual-use technology to 
Israel.6 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law works as a home health aide; his father-in-law is an 
employee of an Israeli defense technology company. Although the company is a 
provider of technological solutions to the Israeli Defense Forces, the company operates 
internationally developing defense solutions for export abroad. Applicant’s father works 
as a technician, but neither Applicant nor his wife know significant details of her father’s 
employment or if he has a security clearance from the Israeli government. Conversely, 
Applicant’s in-laws are aware that Applicant works at an airport, but do not know the 
specifics of his employment. Applicant testified that he and his father have never 
discussed their professions. Although not alleged, Applicant’s wife also has two siblings 
who are citizens and residents of Israel. Her brother is a musician and her sister works 
as a secretary for a private company. Both have completed their compulsory military 
service. From the record, it does not appear that either Applicant or his wife maintain 
regular contact with her siblings.7  
 
However, Applicant’s wife does maintain frequent contact with her parents. They 
speak on the phone several times a week. Applicant’s wife is teaching their children 
Hebrew so that they can communicate with their grandparents. Applicant and his wife 
have traveled to Israel together three times to visit her parents. Applicant’s last trip 
occurred in 2009 and he has no immediate plans to return. Applicant’s parents-in-law 
have been to the United States four times. The first visit occurred after Applicant and his 
wife became engaged. Their last three visits have corresponded to the births of each of 
their grandchildren. Applicant does not have independent relationships with his in-laws 
due to the language barrier. Applicant is not fluent in Hebrew, his parents-in-law’s native 
tongue, and his in-laws are not proficient in English. Applicant sends his in-laws 
occasional emails to share pictures of his children.8 
 
Neither Applicant nor his wife has any foreign or financial property interests. They 
own their home in the United States. Their bank accounts are U.S-based. Applicant 
                                                          
6 HE I. 
 
7 Tr. 25-26, 43, 57-60, 62-66, 68-70.  
 
8 Tr. 22-25, 40-44, 46, 55-56, 61, 69-70.  
 
4 
 
does not provide any financial support to any members of his wife’s family living in 
Israel.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
9 Tr. 23, 35-37, 47-48, 64-65. 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”10 The record shows that 
Applicant has familial ties to Israel, an active collector of U.S. defense technologies. 
Applicant’s foreign contacts, in particular those with his father-in-law, an employee of a 
large Israeli defense technology company, creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.11  
 
 Although Applicant’s communication with his in-laws is infrequent, primarily due 
to the language barrier between them, his ties to them cannot be dismissed as casual. 
Applicant’s wife remains close to her parents and she is fostering the same closeness 
with their children. It is possible that Applicant could be induced or coerced through 
pressure placed on his wife.  However, based on the administrative materials provided 
by the Government, this is an unlikely scenario. 
 
Applicant does not maintain any independent ties, personal or financial, with 
Israel, nor has he sought to create any. Applicant has not sought Israeli citizenship for 
his children and has no plans to do so. His wife, a U.S. permanent resident, is in the 
process of applying for U.S. citizenship. Applicant closest personal ties, his parents, 
children and wife, as well as all of his financial resources are in the United States.  
Applicant’s relationship with his in-laws does not create a conflict of interest because his 
loyalties and relationships are so deeply rooted within the United States that he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. interests.12  
 
I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect classified information. I have 
also considered the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has 
demonstrated that he does not have divided loyalties between the United States and 
Israel. Furthermore, he has worked in an area directly related to national security since 
2002 and has received accolades and awards for handling of security issues. Based on 
the evidence, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence concern. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 6.  
 
11 See AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
12 See AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.                                              
 
 
 
______________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
