 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00258 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
October 23, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to seven creditors in the approximate amount of $354,876. He has acted 
responsibly with respect to his debts by resolving all but one of the delinquencies. He 
has hired an attorney and together they are actively working to resolve the remaining 
delinquency. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 18, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 28, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 22, 2014. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 
30, 2014, scheduling the hearing for September 22, 2014. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered hearing exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, and they were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A 
through R, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. 
The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. On October 2, 
2014, Applicant presented six additional exhibits marked AE S through AE X. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE S through AE X, and they were admitted. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 3, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer for the past 29 years. He has held a security clearance since 1985, without 
incident. He is married and has three daughters, ages 15, 16, and 20. He possesses 
three professional degrees. (GE 1; AE H; Tr. 24-25, 53-54.) 
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be in debt to seven creditors in 
the approximate amount of $354,876. Applicant admitted all of the debts listed in the 
SOR subparagraphs, with explanations. His debts are found in the credit reports 
entered into evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4.) 
 
 Applicant’s SOR-listed debts are attributable to his investments in two real estate 
companies that, unbeknownst to Applicant, were conducting fraudulent operations. 
Applicant learned of a real estate investment opportunity in 2004 through an 
advertisement in a newspaper. He met with the owners and in 2005 invested $100,000 
into the first business. He was told his investment was backed by properties. He 
invested $150,000 with a second, similarly structured, real estate investment company 
that he met through other investors involved with the first investment in approximately 
2006. He received monthly statements from both of the investment groups until 
sometime in 2007. (Tr. 25-36.) 
 
 Applicant financed his first investment by taking interest-free cash advances on 
credit cards. Those credit card debts are the delinquent accounts reflected in SOR 
subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, and 1.g. He intended to repay the credit card debt with 
the money he earned from his investment. He financed his second investment with 
Home Equity Lines of Credit (HELOC), which are the delinquent debts reflected in SOR 
subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e. (Tr. 33-62.) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant stopped receiving monthly statements on both investments. 
Shortly thereafter, Applicant was notified by the Department of Justice that he was a 
victim of fraud and that the owner of the first investment company has been arrested. 
He also received notice from the Postal Inspector that his second investment was under 
investigation for fraud and the owner of the second company had also been arrested. 
 
3 
 
Eventually, he was called to testify against the owner of the second company. The 
owners of both investment companies were convicted and sentenced to jail. Applicant 
received judgments against both owners, but to date, he has only received $88 in 
restitution. (AE E; AE T; AE U; AE X; Tr. 27-32.) 
 
 Applicant continued to make the minimum payments on his credit cards and 
HELOCs through 2009 in hopes he would be able to collect restitution and repay his 
debts. In 2009, his accountant advised him to address his debts one by one, which he 
did.  Applicant provided documentation to show each of the debts in allegations 1.a, 1.b, 
1.c, and 1.e, have been fully resolved through payment of settlement agreements. (AE 
A; AE B; AE C; AE P; AE Q; AE S; Tr. 37.) The debts identified in 1.f and 1.g were 
cancelled by the creditor. He was issued a 1099-C for each of them, and they were 
included in his Federal income tax return. They are resolved. (AE V; Tr. 37.) 
 
 Applicant hired an attorney to resolve his one remaining delinquent account, 
identified in SOR subparagraph 1.f. He anticipates that the attorney will be able to 
negotiate a settlement on this debt. Applicant has set aside approximately $85,000 in a 
savings account toward the repayment of this $94,312 debt. He is committed to 
resolving this debt as soon as possible. (AE D; AE R; Tr. 41-44.) 
 
 In order to repay his debts, Applicant’s wife entered the workforce. He also used 
his savings of approximately $50,000 to $60,000. Applicant testified that he will never 
participate in risky investments again. He now utilizes the services of a Certified Public 
Accountant (CPA) and a financial advisor to plan for the future. He limits his 
investments to his 401K and stocks. He has amassed approximately $1,000,000 in his 
retirement savings since 2009. He has a monthly net remainder of $3,700 after his 
expenses are met. No new debts have been incurred. (GE 4; AE F; AE G; Tr. 48, 56, 
60-62.) 
 
  Applicant presented six letters of recommendation from colleagues and friends. 
They recognized Applicant for his outstanding performance at work, quality, respect, 
and integrity. They noted that he was honest and reliable. Applicant has received 
recognition from his employer for his contributions. (AE I; AE J; AE K; AE L; AE M; AE 
N; AEO.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
 
4 
 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2009 when he stopped 
making minimum payments on his debts. He was unable to satisfy or resolve them at 
that time. The evidence raises both security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 Two Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 fully apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused in part by his unwitting investment in 
two fraudulent enterprises. However, some of his financial problems were also due to 
irresponsible borrowing to finance investments which he could not fully afford. Since 
making those investments in 2005 and 2006, Applicant learned a difficult lesson. He lost 
over $200,000. He has worked diligently to resolve his delinquencies and has only one 
delinquent account remaining. He has $85,000 in a savings account to use toward the 
repayment of this remaining $94,312 debt. He credibly asserted that he will not make 
risky investments in the future. He now enlists the assistance of a CPA and a financial 
advisor to help him prepare for his future. He has significant retirement savings and an 
ample monthly remainder to avoid financial delinquencies in the future. Financial 
problems are unlikely to recur and he will likely demonstrate good judgment in the 
future. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
 Additionally, there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are 
resolved or are being resolved. The debts alleged in SOR subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 
and 1.e, have been fully resolved through payment of settlement agreements. The 
debts identified in SOR subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g were resolved through cancellation 
by the creditor. Applicant has demonstrated he has taken action to resolve SOR 
allegation 1.d, though it is still pending. He will continue to work to resolve this debt until 
it is satisfied. 
  
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is well 
respected by his colleagues who wrote letters in support of him. He performs well at his 
job. He served as a government contractor for almost 30 years. He has never had a 
security violation, though he has held a clearance since 1985. His financial difficulties 
are attributable to two ill-advised investments, and he has acted responsibly by repaying 
all but one of his debts. He is working to resolve the remaining account. No new debts 
have been incurred. There is little likelihood of recurrence. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
7 
 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
