 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00885 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On April 29, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter dated May 14, 2014, Applicant admitted the two SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on June 26, 2014. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on July 23, 2014, setting the hearing for August 21, 2014. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1-2 and a request 
for administrative notice regarding certain facts concerning the Republic of Korea 
 
 
 
 
2 
(South Korea) was offered as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. They were accepted without 
objection. Applicant offered testimony and was given until September 2, 2014, to offer 
any post-hearing submissions. The transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) was received on 
September 2, 2014, and two documents were received from Applicant, which were 
accepted into the record without objection as exhibits (AX) A-B. The record was then 
closed.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about the nation of South Korea. It was accepted into evidence without 
objection as HE 1. HE 1 was reviewed in its entirety. Relevant facts derived from HE 1 
are contained infra under the Findings of Fact.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in 
Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b. in the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Guideline - Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant is a 23-year-old staff auditor who has worked for the same defense 
contractor for about one year. This is his first job out of college and he earns 
approximately $60,000. Applicant has earned a bachelor’s degree in accounting and 
finance. Applicant, who was born in the United States, is single and has no children. His 
younger brother is also a United States citizen. Their father worked for the South 
Korean government at the time of Applicant’s birth. Applicant lived in South Korea with 
his mother from infancy until age five, then again from ages 10 to 12.  
 
By 2005, when Applicant was about 15, his parents had separated. His mother 
brought him and his brother to the United States to live permanently. She was born a 
United States citizen and she owns the house in which they live. Applicant believes that 
she is divorced from his father under state law. (Tr. 25) His father has made no social 
trips to the United States. Applicant knows that his father works for a South Korean 
governmental entity, but is unsure of his father’s title or position. (Tr. 25)   
 
Because his father was a South Korean citizen, Applicant is considered a dual-
citizen. He considers himself to be solely a citizen of the United States. He relinquished 
a foreign passport obtained on his behalf in his youth that has since expired. He 
maintains a United States passport. He is seeking assistance to formally relinquish any 
ties he may still have with South Korea in terms of citizenship. (Tr. 27-28, 41) Applicant 
has not been to South Korea in over a dozen years. He sees his father for brief periods 
during his father’s business trips about one to three times a year. (Tr. 31) Neither father 
nor son discuss their work. They rarely email and only speak by telephone occasionally. 
 
 
 
 
3 
Neither Applicant, his mother, or his brother is dependent on Applicant’s father 
financially. Applicant noted:  
 
[W]ith my father I mean neither me, my brother and I, like we don’t have a 
great relationship with him. He’s never been the best family figure. He puts 
his work ahead of his family so I mean . . . it’s the most basic 
communication that you can think of . . . . It’s more like he’s my father but 
just by blood and not really any personal affection towards my father or 
any personal relationships. He doesn’t know who my girlfriend is, who my 
friends re. How I spend my days. . . . [E]ver since my parents separated 
too, I mean, I don’t have the best view of him as well. So we’re a very 
distant relationship. (Tr. 34-35)  
 
He also noted, “I have no sense of obligation to [my father] or South Korea because 
even in a sense of just countries the U.S. has done much more for me that what South 
Korea has done for me. . . . [In addition,] all my friends and who I consider family, 
besides my grandparents, are here.” (Tr. 50) “I have zero friends in Korea. . . .” (Tr. 51) 
It is his intent to stay in the United States. (Tr. 54)  
 
 Applicant maintains contact with his maternal grandparents, who are citizens and 
residents of South Korea. At one point, including the time of Applicant’s mother’s birth, 
they lived in the United States. Applicant does not know what circumstances brought 
them to the United States or why they returned to South Korea. Both grandparents are 
retired and in their 70s. Applicant believes his grandfather worked for a bank and that 
his grandmother was a homemaker. They visit Applicant and his family in the United 
States every few years. They speak by telephone once or twice a year.   
 
 Neither Applicant, his brother, nor his mother own any foreign real estate or 
possess any foreign financial holdings. Their home, automobiles, investments, and 
possessions are all in the United States. Having been in the United States since his 
teens, Applicant’s friendships and associations are based in this country. He is in a 
committed relationship here. He owns his own car. Meanwhile, he is preparing for the 
certified public accountant (CPA) exam, a certification that he hopes will enhance his 
value to domestic employers. He was selected for his current position straight out of 
college. He is considered a valued employee. 
 
 
South Korea has a history of collecting protected U.S. information. It ranks as 
one of the seven countries most actively engaging in foreign economic collection and 
industrial espionage against the United States.  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
 
 
4 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
 
 
 
 
5 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Here, Paragraphs ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are applicable: 7(a) “contacts with a foreign 
family member . . . who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion”; and 7(b) “connections to a foreign person . . that create a potential conflict of 
interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person . . . by providing that information.” 
Applicant’s father and maternal grandparents are citizens and residents of South Korea. 
Moreover, Applicant’s father works for the South Korean government.  
 
These disqualifying conditions are clearly countered, however, by the first and 
second mitigating conditions, as ¶ 8(a) “the nature of the relationships with foreign 
persons, . . . are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual . . . and the interests of 
the U.S.”; and ¶ 8(b) “there is no conflict of interest [as] the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Apart from his 
relationships with his father and grandparents, Applicant has no significant nexus to 
South Korea. In contrast, Applicant, his mother, and brother, are citizens and residents 
of the United States. They live together in a home their mother owns, and they have 
built a life within their community. Applicant has gone from high school student to young 
professional within their community, where he is planning to take the CPA exam and 
expand his domestic career opportunities. He freely renounces all ties with South Korea 
and has no intention of leaving the United States. His loyalties are clearly with the 
United States and the life he has created here.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
 
 
6 
Applicant is a young professional who has built his life and started his career in 
the United States. His childhood connections to South Korea are limited to his 
relationships with his father and his maternal grandparents, with whom he maintains 
mostly superficial relationships. His family, work, girlfriend, friends, and planned future 
are all in the United States. He has no financial ties abroad. I have considered these 
facts with all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from 
his alleged Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
