 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-00360 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard Morris, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline B (foreign 
influence). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 17, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86). On April 
17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence).  The 
SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
 
2 
 
 
it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On May 31, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On July 14, 2014, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On July 18, 2014, 
DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On July 30, 2014, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for August 
26, 2014. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which 
were received into evidence without objection. (Tr. 13-15.) Applicant called three 
witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through P, which were 
received into evidence without objection. (Tr. 16.) On September 5, 2014, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c with 
explanations. He denied SOR ¶ 1.d with explanations. Applicant’s answers and 
explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old manager, who works in information technology 
operations and service, and has been employed by a defense contractor since 
January 2013. Before his current job, he worked for two defense contractors from 
June 2003 to June 2011 and from June 2011 to January 2013, respectively. Applicant 
has continuously held a security clearance since 2003. He seeks to retain his security 
clearance, which is a requirement of his continued employment. (GE 1, SOR answer, 
Tr. 11, 39-41.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1995. He intermittently attended 
college or took classes from 1995 to 2013 and has earned approximately 128 credit 
hours, but has not yet been awarded a college degree. The focus of his studies has 
been in computer-related areas. (GE 1, Tr. 37-39.) Applicant has never married and 
has no dependents. He has not served in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1, GE 2, Tr. 41-
42.) 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 The basis of foreign influence concerns arise from the friendship, financial 
support, and frequent contact that Applicant has and continues to have with a 24-year-
old male Romanian resident citizen (RRC). In approximately April 2012, Applicant met 
RRC on line in an internet chat room and established a connection after conversations 
over mutual interests in Japanese animation and soccer. Their friendship developed 
over time and they began communicating frequently by telephone, Skype, or e-mail. 
 
3 
 
 
They discussed topics such as sports, family life, and other life events. RRC told 
Applicant of his strong desire to move to the United States and make a better life for 
himself. At the time Applicant met RCC, RCC was unemployed; however, RCC 
recently began working for a private company in marketing. Applicant has never met 
RCC in person. (August 2013 Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject 
Interview (OPM PSI), SOR ¶ 1.a, SOR answer, Tr. 43, 46, 47, 53-54, 58-59, 62.)  
  
 Over the course of their friendship, Applicant provided RCC with approximately 
$30,000 to $35,000 primarily in $350 monthly increments to help with rent, food, air 
conditioning, medical expenses, and cell phone. He occasionally sent RCC larger 
amounts to cover expenses such as $750 for a cell phone. Applicant did not realize 
the total amount of money he had sent RCC was so large because he provided “small 
amounts at a time.” Applicant saw this as an opportunity to help someone, who was 
less fortunate than he was and viewed his gifts of money as an act of charity. RCC 
has parents and younger siblings in Romania. Applicant sent the money by Western 
Union to an address in Romania. (OPM PSI, SOR ¶ 1.b, SOR answer, Tr. 44, 50-56.) 
 
 In October 2012, Applicant provided RCC with $1,600 to defray application fees 
associated with applying for a U.S. Visa. Applicant explained that this too was an act 
of charity to help RCC make a better life for himself. RCC subsequently received his 
Visa to enter the United States, but is waiting to ensure his family “was stable and well 
taken care of before leaving them to pursue his dreams in the United States.” The 
SOR alleged that Applicant continues to send RCC $500 a month to cover his rent 
and cell phone debt. After Applicant received his SOR, he informed RCC that his 
providing money was “putting his future at risk.” After discussing the situation with 
RCC, Applicant no longer sends money to RCC. (OPM PSI, SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d, SOR 
answer, Tr. 55, 63-66.) 
 
Applicant credibly stated that there was absolutely no way for anyone to 
influence his loyalty to the United States. (Tr. 46.) Applicant reported his contact with 
RCC to his Security Officer in July 2013 during his periodic security clearance 
background investigation. (Tr. 48-50, 53-54.) Applicant has not discussed the specifics 
of his job with RCC other than he works on computers at a U.S. Government agency. 
RCC has not made inquiries of Applicant regarding the details of his work nor has he 
ever asked Applicant to do anything disloyal to the United States. RCC has not done 
or said anything that would cause Applicant to believe that RCC was interested in 
pursuing anything other than friendship. (OPM PSI, Tr. 57-58, 60-61, 70.) 
 
Applicant has no financial or property interests in Romania nor has he ever 
visited Romania. His only connection with Romania is through his internet-based 
friendship with RCC. Applicant does not have a U.S. passport and has never left the 
United States apart from an overnight trip to Canada in December 2001. (OPM PSI, 
SOR answer, Tr. 44.) 
 
Applicant comes from a family of five, grew up on a farm, and was raised with 
“really strong values.”  He is the oldest of three children – he has a younger brother 
 
4 
 
 
and sister. Applicant lives near his immediate family and remains in close and frequent 
contact with them. He also has extended family members with whom he remains in 
contact.  (GE 1, Tr. 37, 68-70.) 
 
Applicant’s connections in the United States are substantial and numerous as 
opposed to having no connections to Romania other than his friendship with RCC. For 
example, Applicant’s U.S. connections consist of: (1) owns a home in the United 
States valued at $165,000; (2) has a checking and savings account in the United 
States; (3) has a 401(k) retirement account valued at $50,000 to $70,000; (5) is 
registered to vote and exercises his right to vote in the United States; and (6) has an 
estimated net worth of $250,000. Applicant has no real or personal property in 
Romania. (Tr. 66-68, 71, AE C, AE D.)  
  
Character Evidence 
 
 Three character witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf: (1) a female coworker 
(CW), who holds a secret security clearance and has worked with Applicant for the 
past three years, and interacted with him on a daily basis; (2) a female college friend 
(CF), who has maintained a continuous and close relationship with Applicant for the 
past 20 years; and (3) Applicant’s younger sister. CW and Applicant were co-
managers at two different companies doing the same or similar job. CW described 
Applicant with adjectives such as “very honest,”  “excellent judgment,” “reliable,” and 
“extremely” loyal to the United States. CF corroborated what CW said and added that 
she trusts Applicant to the point that she made him the beneficiary of her life insurance 
policies. Applicant’s sister also corroborated CW and CF’s testimony. She added that 
she, the Applicant, and her family maintain a close relationship and maintain frequent 
contact.  All three witnesses stated that generosity was part of Applicant’s character. 
(Tr. 12-35.) 
 
 Applicant submitted ten character reference letters from a variety of individuals 
to include his mother, friends, and professional colleagues. The collective sense of 
these letters describe Applicant as hard working, contributes to the national defense, 
superb employee, responsive, loyal, generous, and trustworthy. It is clear that 
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation, personally and professionally, from a wide 
range of individuals who enthusiastically support him for a security clearance. (AE H – 
AE P.) Applicant also submitted evidence that he was certified as a project 
management professional, had never been arrested, has a good driving record, and 
has a 728 credit score. (AE A, AE B, AE E, AE F.) 
   
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
5 
 
 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant 
concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the 
Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
6 
 
 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or she] may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but 
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information 
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire 
to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
The Government established its case under Guideline B through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented. Applicant has and continues to maintain a 
friendship with RCC and has provided him approximately $35,000 over a two-year 
period. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
friends or family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against 
the United States, or the country has a significant problem with lawless elements or 
 
7 
 
 
terrorists. The Government did not present evidence regarding the relationship 
between the United States and Romania – positive or negative. Nevertheless, 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist RCC living in Romania.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Romania or terrorists 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or 
from RCC. Nevertheless, his relationship with RCC living in Romania creates a 
potential conflict of interest. His relationship with RCC is sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist him by providing sensitive or classified 
information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s 
contacts with RCC living in Romania. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is 
necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business 
or are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats 
from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact 
with and maintains a close friendship with RCC and provided him with a substantial 
amount of money over a two-year period. He is not able to fully meet his burden of 
showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationship with RCC who is a Romanian 
citizen and living in Romania] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be 
weighed against the potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with RCC 
living in Romania. Although there is no evidence that terrorists or criminals have 
approached or threatened Applicant because of his work for the United States, he is 
nevertheless potentially vulnerable to threats and coercion made against RCC living in 
Romania. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has established that “[he] can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant was 
born in the United States. He has worked for defense contractors for 11 years. All of 
Applicant’s assets are in the United States in contrast to having no assets in Romania. 
He does not have a U.S. passport and has never visited Romania. Through 
Applicant’s many years of service as a defense contractor, he has repeatedly shown 
his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States.  The remaining mitigating 
conditions are not relevant. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections through his friend, RCC, living in Romania are 
much less significant than his strong connections to the United States. His 
connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the 
foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are important factors supporting a foreign influence security concern and 
tending to support revocation of Applicant’s security clearance because of Applicant’s 
connections to Romania, and the risk that his friend, RCC, face in the event that 
terrorists or criminals discover Applicant’s relationship to RCC.  
 
The whole-person factors weighing towards granting Applicant’s security 
clearance are more significant. He was born in the United States 37 years ago. He 
has been employed by defense contractors for 11 years with an established work 
history. All of Applicant’s assets are in the United States as opposed to having no 
assets in Romania. His employer lauds his duty performance and contributions to 
mission accomplishment. He is mature and responsible. Applicant has close family 
ties to his community as opposed to having no family connections in Romania. 
 
Applicant’s strong connections to the United States, community, and his 
employment establish “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
U.S., [he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” See Discussion of AG ¶ 8(b), supra. To conclude, Applicant presented 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns raised. 
Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors”1 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
