The Government chose not to present a case under Guideline B. Thus, the SOR 2.a allegation is found      1
in favor of Applicant.
The Government submitted six items in support of its case.      2
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ADP Case No. 14-00786
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On May 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence).  The action was taken1
under  DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated July 14, 2014.  Applicant received the FORM on July 29, 2014.2
He did not submit additional information for the record. I received the case assignment
on October 9, 2014. Based on a review of the case file, I find Applicant has not
mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised. Eligibility for a position of trust is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations under
Guideline F, ¶¶ 1.a-1.c with explanations. (Item 2) 
Applicant is 39 years old. He is a disbursement supervisor employed with an
insurance company. Applicant is married, and he and his wife are expecting their first
child in 2014. He graduated from high school and attended college until December
2004.  (Item 4)  Applicant has been employed with his current employer since October
21, 2013.  On October 14, 2013, Applicant submitted an official application for eligibility
for a position of trust.  (Item 3)
 The SOR alleges three delinquent debts totaling approximately $200,000. These
debts include two mortgage loan debts and a collection account. (Item 1) Credit reports
confirm the debts. (Items 5, and 6) 
Applicant explained in his Answer that his mortgage debts are no longer being
serviced by the lenders. (Item 2) He elaborated that he purchased a property in 2006,
which went to foreclosure in March 2008. The property had two mortgages. Applicant
bought the home as a rental property, but due to the faltering economy, he was not able
to find  renters or obtain a short sale for the house. He could not afford the rental home
mortgage in allegation SOR 1.a. He noted that he did multiple searches to contact the
lender, but was not successful. He states that he acquired a telephone number for the
lender and believes they are out of business. (Item 2)
 Applicant obtained two mortgages on the same property. He called the lender
noted in allegation SOR 1.b because he thought they might have some information on
the mortgage loan. A representative told him that the loan is “no longer in the files.”
When Applicant followed up with the representative a few days later he learned that the
loan was not in the system. (Item 2) Applicant confirmed with the representative that the
mortgage loan was foreclosed in September 2008. He notes that after seven years, the
account will disappear from any reports. (Item 2) 
As for the allegation in SOR 1. c, Applicant explained that the collection account
in the amount of $348 was paid on May 28, 2014. He states that it was for an
outstanding ticket that he had forgotten and late fees had been assessed. (Item 4) He
listed a receipt number, but did not provide the actual receipt. 
There is no information in the record concerning Applicant’s income or expenses.
There is no record of financial counseling. Applicant did not provide any documentation
to support his claims concerning the mortgage loans.  He also did not elaborate on his
particular circumstances at the time of the 2006 purchase in order to evaluate if the
situation was one beyond his control. He also did not provide any record of what
payments were made on the two mortgage loans.
3
Policies   
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3. 1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for
assignment to sensitive duties is that the persons’s loyalty, reliability, and
trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly
consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of
Defense contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶C8.2.1
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate  the
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition,
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant eligibility for a
public trust position. 
4
 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The trustworthiness concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
Applicant’s admissions and credit reports establish his delinquent debts.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a)
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to
overcome the case against him and mitigate trustworthiness concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” An unpaid debt is a
continuous course of conduct for the purposes of security clearance adjudications. See,
ISCR Case No. 10-11083 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2012). Applicant still has unresolved
delinquent debt. He has not provided documentation to support his assertion
concerning the two mortgage loans, but relies on a period of time when they will not
appear on his credit report. The delinquent obligations remain. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Applicant provided no
information to evaluate the circumstances and determine whether he acted responsibly.
He still has a large amount of debt that he has neither resolved nor shown that he is in
the process of resolving. In response to the FORM, Applicant did not  present new
documentation or an update on the status of his debts.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. Applicant had a receipt number
for the debt in SOR 1.c. He did not present evidence that he received financial
counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem) does not apply. He has not addressed the other debts in a timely manner.
5
Consequently, I find that  there are not clear indications that his financial problems are
being resolved and are under control. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position
of trust  must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden
of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a public trust position. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person
factors. Applicant is 39 years old. He  has worked for his current employer since 2013.
He purchased a home as a rental property in 2006, but by 2008 the home was
foreclosed. Applicant did not explain his specific situation concerning his purchase.
Therefore, it is not possible to evaluate the circumstances and consider mitigation for
any conditions that were beyond his control. He noted the lack of renters and short
sale attempt, but he did not provide documentation.  The fact that he claimed the loan
providers are no longer “servicing” the loans and that in a seven-year period, the
accounts will not appear on a credit report is not sufficient to mitigate the security
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.  
  Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled without a hearing, I am
unable to evaluate his credibility. In relying on the written record, he failed to submit
sufficient information or evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material
facts regarding his circumstances, articulate his position, and fully mitigate the financial
considerations concerns.  
The clearly consistent standard indicates that trustworthiness determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials. A denial of his trustworthiness does not
necessarily indicate anything adverse about Applicant’s character or loyalty. It means
that the individual has presented insufficient mitigation to meet the strict standards
controlling access to sensitive information. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a position of public trust.
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
