 Exhibit 1. 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-01312
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his security
clearance to work in the defense industry. A 39-year-old consultant, Applicant has a
history of financial problems or difficulties. He met his burden to present sufficient
evidence to explain and mitigate the financial considerations security concern.
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a security clearance application on October
28, 2013.  After reviewing the application and information gathered during a background1
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD), on June 10, 2014, sent Applicant a
statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,2
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Exhibits F, G, and K. 3
 Exhibit F. 4
 Exhibit H. 5
 Exhibits I and J. 6
2
consistent with the national interest to grant him access to classified information.  The2
SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action under the security
guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. Applicant answered the
SOR on July 10, 2014.      
The case was assigned to me August 11, 2014, to conduct the hearing requested
by Applicant. The hearing was held as scheduled on August 26, 2014. At the hearing,
Department Counsel presented Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted. Applicant
presented Exhibit A, a multi-part document, which was admitted. The transcript (Tr.)
was received September 4, 2014.
The record was kept open until September 9, 2014, to allow Applicant to present
additional documentary matters. They were timely received and are admitted, without
objections, as Exhibits B–K.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security clearance
that was granted to him when he was a soldier on active duty in the U.S. Army. He is
employed as a consultant for a federal contractor. He has held this job since March
2009, which was shortly after his discharge from the Army. He earns an annual salary of
about $90,000. He has a good record of employment in this job.  His job duties consist3
of developing and implementing new scenarios for classroom instruction, writing and
finalizing lesson plans, and teaching. In addition, as the site lead for the contract, he is
responsible for supervising seven employees. According to his supervisor, Applicant
frequently handles classified information and does so “with the utmost care and
concern, and he has never violated any policies or procedures regarding the handling of
classified information.”  4
Outside of work, Applicant is involved in a fraternal organization that supports
charitable work in the local community.  He is a longtime member of his church and he5
currently serves in a leadership position.  6
 Exhibits B and C.  7
 Tr. 60. 8
 Tr. 52–53. 9
 Tr. 53–54. 10
 Tr. 33. 11
 Exhibit A at a.b–1 and a.b–2. 12
 Exhibits D and E. 13
 Tr. 56–58.14
 Exhibit 2. 15
3
Applicant was on active duty in the Army for nearly six years during 2003–2009,
when he was honorably discharged with a non-combat related disability.  After basic7
training, he was trained in the field of human-intelligence collection. He also attended a
military language school where he studied two Middle Eastern languages.  He served a8
one-year deployment during 2005–2006 in Afghanistan where he worked in intelligence
operations and interrogation.  He described one notable achievement that stemmed9
from a series of interrogations in which he participated.10
Applicant is the sole breadwinner in his household, which consists of his spouse
and five children, ages 12, 10, 8, 3, and 1. The fourth child, a son, was born with a rare
medical condition that has required extensive medical care resulting in nearly $1 million
in medical expenses, as estimated by Applicant.  Because of the child’s condition, the11
state determined in early 2013 that the child was eligible for medical and long-term care
through the state’s health care cost-containment system.  Although the child’s medical12
and long-term care expenses are fully covered, Applicant has experienced financial
hardship due to additional costs incurred for his son’s medical care (e.g., travel
expenses, hotels, etc.). 
In addition to his salary, Applicant receives service-connected disability
compensation from the Department of Veterans Affairs.  He receives a monthly amount13
of $1,934 as of January 2014, or about $23,208 annually for 2014. Also, he is one of
three partners in a newly formed private detective business.  He estimates that he will14
gross about $10,000 this year, which is firm’s first year of doing business. 
The SOR alleges and there is substantial evidence to show that Applicant has a
history of financial problems or difficulties. The 13 delinquent debts in the SOR total
about $28,500, and they are established by a November 2013 credit report.  The debts15
are grouped together and discussed as follows: (1) five consumer accounts that were
placed for collection; (2) two medical collection accounts; (3) a collection account from
the Defense Department; and (4) five student loan accounts in collection. 
 Tr. 31–32, 60–63; Exhibit A at a–1 and a–2.  16
 Tr. 35–36. 17
 Exhibit A at d–1.18
 Tr. 43–44.19
 Exhibit A at l–1.20
 Tr. 36–38. 21
 Tr. 32–35; Exhibit A at b.c–1 and b.c–2.22
 Tr. 44–46, 63–65. 23
4
(1) Concerning the five consumer accounts, Applicant disputes one collection
account, he settled a collection account for a lesser amount, he entered into a
repayment agreement on a collection account, and two collection accounts are
unresolved. 
He disputes a $923 collection account, which stems from leased military housing
he and his family occupied at his last duty assignment in 2009. He explained the basis
for the dispute, the refusal to pay, and presented relevant documentation.16
He explained that he settled a $1,128 collection account in June 2014 for about
50¢ on the dollar.  He also presented documentary proof of settlement.17 18
He explained that he entered into a repayment agreement on a $1,666 collection
account in June 2014.  The agreement calls for him to make $75 monthly payments.19
He also presented documentary proof of that agreement.20
He explained that he has yet to address the two remaining collection accounts in
amounts of $2,867 and $3,662.  His intention is to resolve the accounts in the near21
future by negotiating settlements for lesser amounts.
(2) The two medical collection accounts, in amounts of $65 and 541, stem from
medical expenses incurred for his son’s care and treatment.  Applicant has been22
instructed by the state that these bills should be paid for by his son’s medical coverage
and he should continue to submit any such bills to the insurer for payment.
(3) The $1,858 collection account owed to the Defense Department stems from
an overpayment made to Applicant upon his discharge from the Army in 2009.  This23
account appears twice in the November 2013 credit report, as shown by the account
 Exhibit 2 at 5, 13.24
 Exhibit A at m–1.25
 Tr. 38–43. 26
 Exhibit A at g–k.27
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to28
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.29
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 30
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 31
5
number that contains the same initial five digits.  He presented documentation from the24
Defense Department that the account is paid-in-full.25
(4) Applicant disputes his current liability for the five student loan accounts in the
total amount of $15,875. He explained that he obtained the loans to attend college
before his military enlistment.  He explained that upon enlistment he waived eligibility to26
participate in the Montgomery GI Bill program in exchange for participation in the Army’s
loan repayment program. It is his understanding that the five student loan accounts now
in collection should have been repaid under this program. And he is beginning the
process of contacting the Army bureaucracy to resolve this matter. He presented
documentary proof of his enlistment, his waiver, and the loan repayment program.  If27
his understanding is incorrect, his intention is to repay the debt over time. 
At the hearing, Applicant was serious and respectful, he answered questions
directly without equivocation, and his presentation was focused and on point. I was
favorably impressed by Applicant and had no concerns about his credibility. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As28
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt29
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An30
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  31
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).32
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.33
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.34
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.35
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 36
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).37
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.38
6
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting32
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An33
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate34
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  35
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s36
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.37
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it38
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 39
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant40
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  41
 AG ¶ 19(a).  42
 AG ¶ 19(c). 43
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).44
7
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant39
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 40
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  41
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. Taken together, the evidence indicates inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning42 43
of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions,
and the facts also suggest a degree of inattention or irresponsibility.
 In mitigation, I have considered six mitigating conditions under Guideline F,  and44
I have especially considered the following as most pertinent:
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
8
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved and is under control;
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.   
The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20(b) applies because of the serious and rare
medical condition of Applicant’s three-year-old son. The child’s medical and long-term
care expenses are fully covered, but Applicant has experienced financial hardship due
to additional costs incurred for his son’s medical care (e.g., travel expenses, hotels,
etc.). Moreover, this does not account for the general hardship such a circumstance
imposed upon Applicant and his family. A young child suffering a serious medical
condition can be devastating and overwhelming to the parents. While Applicant appears
well balanced, I’m sure his son’s medical condition consumed large amounts of time
and energy and contributed to his inattention to financial matters. 
The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20(c) applies because there are clear indications
that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved and are under control.
Importantly, Applicant is not incurring new delinquent debt. He has also take steps to
reduce his delinquent debt. He settled one collection account, he has a repayment
agreement on another, and he paid a third collection account (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.l, and
1.m). The two medical collection accounts will be resolved in due course based on his
son’s health care insurance (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c). The two unresolved collection
accounts total less than $7,000, he intends to resolve them via settlements, and he has
sufficient cash flow to do so (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and1.f). Taken together, these circumstances
show a favorable upward trend, and I am persuaded that Applicant will stay the course
until his delinquent debt is resolved.
The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20(d) applies under essentially the same
rationale as discussed above for AG ¶ 20(c).
The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20(e) applies to the leased military housing
account in collection and the student loan accounts in collection (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and
1.g–1.k). Applicant’s explanations set forth a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the leased military housing account and to dispute his current liability for the student
loan accounts. He also provided sufficient documentation to support his explanations
and disputes. Moreover, if his understanding of the student loan accounts is incorrect,
he intends to repay the loans over time, he has sufficient cash flow to do so, and I am
persuaded he will if he does not prevail in the dispute.  
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).45
9
Applicant’s financial record is less than perfect. But the evidence also supports a
conclusion that he has established a meaningful track record through actual debt
reduction. He also has a plan to resolve the remaining debt and taken steps to
implement that plan. 
Applicant’s history of financial problems does not justify current doubt about his
reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due
consideration to the whole-person concept.  In particular, I considered the following45
matters as significant in my analysis: (1) Applicant’s honorable military service, which
includes a year-long deployment to a war zone where he performed important service
as an interrogator; (2) his record of good employment with his current job; (3) his record
of holding a security clearance for the past ten years without reports of a security
infraction or violation; (4) his reputation for exercising utmost care while handling
classified information in his current job; and (5) his constructive community involvement
through membership in a fraternal organization and a leadership position in his church.
Taken together, these matters show that Applicant is a reliable, trustworthy, and stable
person who can be relied upon to properly handle and safeguard classified information.
Accordingly, I conclude that he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to
classified information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.m: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
