 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01350 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant should have been more diligent addressing her delinquent debts and 
student loans. Notwithstanding, she started her efforts to resolve her debts in 2012, 
before receipt of the 2014 statement of reasons (SOR). Applicant’s financial situation is 
stable. Her income is sufficient for her to address her financial problems. I find that her 
omissions in her security clearance application were not intentional or made with the 
intent to deceive. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 23, 
2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline E 
(personal conduct) on May 16, 2014.1 Applicant answered the SOR on July 9, 2014, 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on July 30, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the 
notice of hearing on August 6, 2014, convening a hearing on August 29, 2014. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered three exhibits (GE 1 through 3). Applicant 
testified, and presented exhibits AE 1 through 8. AE 8 was received post-hearing. All 
exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 9, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her answer, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, with 
comments. Her admissions are hereby incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of all the evidence, including her testimony and demeanor while testifying, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old project analyst working for a defense contractor. She 
graduated from high school in June 2005, and received her bachelor’s degree in 
sociology and criminal justice in June 2010. She has never been married, but she has a 
daughter, age four, and a son, age one.  
 
Applicant financed her college education with student loans (alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b through 1.m). During her first two years of college, she attended an out-of-state 
university. During her last two college years, Applicant returned to her home state and 
worked part time to help finance her education. While in college, she opened the credit 
card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and used it to pay for books and her day-to-day 
living expenses.  
 
Applicant’s daughter was born during her senior year in college in January 2010. 
As a result, she was not able to work for approximately nine months. Because she was 
unemployed, she did not have the financial means to pay her debts and her day-to-day 
living expenses. The father of her first child was in prison, and he never provided any 
financial support for Applicant or their daughter. Applicant testified that she never was 
fully aware of the extent of her college debt. Apparently, one of her aunts prepared all 
her student loan applications, and Applicant just signed them. 
 
Applicant was hired by a private company in March 2011. She started to make 
payments on her student loans in 2012. Her grandfather paid over $6,000 to help her 
bring her student loans current. (AE 8) Applicant’s aunt helped her to establish a budget 
and promised to help her with some of her debt payments. (Tr. 47) Applicant entered 
into a student loan rehabilitation program in late 2012-early 2013, and was paying $200 
monthly until July 2013. She stopped making payments because she moved into her 
own apartment, and with the additional expenses she did not have the money to 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
continue the loan rehabilitation payments. She started working for her current employer, 
a government contractor, in April 2013. However, with the medical expenses associated 
with her second pregnancy and the birth of her son, she was unable to work for a 
period, and did not have the financial means to address her delinquent debts. 
 
After receipt of the May 2014 SOR, Applicant became concerned about her 
ability to hold a security clearance and retain her job. She attempted to reinstate her 
student loan rehabilitation plan, but the creditor required her to pay $400 a month, and 
she did not have the financial means to make that payment. On May 2014 and 
September 2014, Applicant requested forbearance on some of her delinquent student 
loans. The forbearance was granted until September 2015, on U.S. Department of 
Education student loans owing close to $32,000 and Sallie Mae student loans owing 
close to $12,000. (AE 1, 2, 8) She testified that she continued to make a $240 monthly 
payment for interest accrued on some of the student loans. Applicant also requested a 
deferment on other student loans. In July 2014, the creditor denied the deferment 
because her monthly income exceeded the poverty guidelines. (AE 8)  
 
Concerning the delinquent account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant agreed to 
start making monthly payments of $400 in October 2014. Applicant noted that she paid 
other delinquent accounts not alleged in the SOR. During both of her pregnancies, she 
did not have medical insurance and incurred numerous medical debts. She paid a 
delinquent credit card in February 2012 after it was charged off; and she paid another 
delinquent credit card debt in February 2013. Additionally, Applicant paid three 
delinquent debts for medical services ($135, $100, and $206) in March 2014. (GE 2, GE 
3, Tr. 49) 
 
Applicant has been making lifestyle changes to ensure that she will have the 
financial means to resolve her financial problems. She no longer uses credit cards and 
pays for his necessities using cash or a debit card. To save money and be able to pay 
her delinquent debts, Applicant does not own a car, and she travels via public 
transportation. She is receiving financial counseling from her aunt and uncle. Her aunt 
helped her to prepare a budget.  
 
Applicant’s budget shows that her gross monthly income is $3,200. After paying 
her monthly expenses, her monthly disposable income is around $400. However, she 
indicated that her aunt and uncle promised to help her with her debt payments. 
Applicant acknowledged that she should have been diligent addressing her financial 
difficulties. She attributed some of her financial problems to her young age, immaturity, 
and lack of experience handling financial matters.  
 
Applicant promised to be more responsible addressing her financial problems. 
She believes that with her current income and her aunt’s help she will be able to 
continue addressing her debts. She intends to pay her student loans one at a time. She 
now understands the Government’s financial concerns, and that she is required to 
maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a security clearance.  
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant submitted her first SCA in September 2013. She testified that she 
received no instruction or help to complete the SCA. She filed the SCA at home and did 
not call anyone for assistance. Section 26 (Financial Record) of her 2013 SCA asked 
her to disclose whether in the past seven years she had defaulted in any type of loan; 
had a credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; and 
whether she had been, or currently was 120 delinquent on any debt. Applicant 
answered “no” to the above questions and disclosed no financial problems. The 
subsequent background investigation disclosed the 13 delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR, comprised of one delinquent credit card owing over $9,500 and 12 student loans 
totaling over $64,000. 
 
Applicant claimed that her failure to report her delinquent debts was an innocent 
mistake, and not with the intent to deceive the Government. She explained that she did 
not disclose the credit card debt and her student loans because she did not know the 
exact account balances. She believed she was required to provide accurate balance 
information in her SCA, and because she did not know her balances, she answered 
“no.” She also believed that because the student loans were Government guaranteed 
loans, the Government would have ready access to all the information concerning her 
student loans.  
 
A government investigator interviewed Applicant shortly after she submitted her 
2013 SCA. The investigator did not have Applicant’s credit report available, and 
Applicant was not confronted with her delinquent student loans. Nevertheless, Applicant 
discussed her student loans with the investigator. She told the investigator that she had 
omitted her delinquent student loans because she did not have accurate information 
concerning the balance of her loans and was afraid of reporting wrong information. She 
also believed the Government had all the information concerning her student loans, and 
she did not disclose them on the SCA because she was concerned she would be in 
trouble if she provided inaccurate balance information. (Tr. 55-57) 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
 
5 
 
 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
While in college, Applicant acquired a credit card (SOR ¶ 1.a) and 12 student 
loans that later became delinquent. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.m) Because of both of her 
pregnancies and childbirths, she was unable to work full time for two periods of time, 
and had no medical insurance. She acquired medical debts that later became 
delinquent, and was unable to repay her credit card and student loans. Neither of her 
children’s fathers provided any financial support. AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that financial considerations 
mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (d) partially apply. Applicant’s financial problems 
are recent and ongoing. However, the debts became delinquent under circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur. Applicant graduated from college and she is currently fully 
employed. She is now the proud mother of two children, and a more mature person. 
She is aware that she is required to maintain financial responsibility to be eligible for a 
security clearance and to retain her job. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant is receiving financial counseling and assistance 
from her aunt and uncle, and a student loan counselor. She is following a budget and 
there are clear indications that her financial problem is being resolved. I note that 
Applicant paid three debts in 2012-2013 before being fully employed with her current 
employer, and attempted to rehabilitate her student loans. Additionally, her grandfather 
helped her by paying $6,000 toward her student loans. More recently, Applicant paid 
three small medical debts, established a payment plan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a, and has been in contact with the student loan creditors trying to bring some of her 
student loans current. She intends to pay her student loans one at a time. Considering 
the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant made efforts to address her delinquent debts. 
 
 Applicant should have been more diligent monitoring and paying her student 
loans. However, considering her circumstances, it appears she did not have the 
financial means to fully address her delinquencies. The evidence does not establish that 
she abandoned or intended to default on her financial obligations. In light of Applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
payment history, limited income, and child care responsibilities, and her recent efforts to 
resolve her financial problems, I find that there are clear indications that her financial 
problems are being resolved, and she will continue to make progress resolving her 
delinquent debts. The remaining mitigating conditions are not applicable to the facts in 
this case.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant failed to disclose in her 2013 SCA (Financial Record) that in the last 
seven years she had defaulted on student loans; had bills turned over to collection 
agencies; had a credit card charged off or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; and 
that she had been, or currently was 120 delinquent on her debts.  
 
 Applicant’s omissions, if deliberate, would trigger the applicability of the following 
disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, and having observed Applicant’s 
demeanor while testifying, I find that her omissions were not deliberate or made with the 
intent to mislead the Government. Applicant was young, immature, and lacked 
experience completing a security clearance application. It does not appear that she 
received any instructions or help completing her 2013 SCA. 
 
 A government investigator interviewed Applicant shortly after she submitted her 
2013 SCA. The investigator did not have Applicant’s credit report available, and 
Applicant was not confronted with her delinquent student loans. Nevertheless, Applicant 
discussed her student loans with the investigator. She told the investigator that she had 
omitted her delinquent student loans because she did not have accurate information 
concerning the balance of her loans and was afraid of reporting wrong information.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
 
8 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
  In light of the record evidence, I find that mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(a) applies 
and the personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c))  
 
Applicant acquired the debts alleged in the SOR to finance her college education. 
She anticipated repaying the debts as soon as she started working after college. Her 
plans were delayed by the birth of her two children, her inability to work while pregnant 
or taking care of her children, the lack of financial support from the children’s fathers, 
and her inability to find a good paying job until April 2013, when she was hired by her 
current employer. 
 
Applicant started her efforts to repay her creditors and to bring her student loans 
current in 2012-early 2013. She paid three delinquent debts, established a student loan 
rehabilitation program, and paid $6,000 toward her student loans to bring them current. 
This first attempt was unsuccessful. After receipt of the 2014 SOR, Applicant became 
 
9 
 
 
fully aware of the Government’s financial concerns and stepped up her efforts to repay 
her creditors and to bring the student loans current. She paid three medical debts, 
established payment plan for a credit card debt, and obtained deferments and 
forbearance for some student loans. She intends to pay her student loans one at a time. 
 
Applicant should have been more diligent addressing her delinquent debts and 
student loans. Notwithstanding, she has been making efforts to resolve her financial 
problems since 2102. Applicant’s financial situation is stable. Her income is sufficient for 
Applicant to pay her family’s day-to-day living expenses and address her debts.  
 
Applicant was young, immature, and lacked experience completing her 2013 
SCA. She has learned her lesson by going through the security clearance process. She 
now understands that her financial responsibility is a security concern. She is aware that 
her failure to maintain financial responsibility will adversely impact her ability to possess 
a security clearance in the future. Moreover, she is fully aware that her failure to be 
truthful and candid during the security clearance process will disqualify her from 
eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    For APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
