1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-00443
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
October 27, 2014
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on July 7, 2013. (Government Exhibit 1.) On April 22, 2014, the Department of
Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed security
concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 9, 2014, and requested a decision
be made without a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel
requested a hearing in this case on May 29, 2014, pursuant to Paragraph E3.1.7. of the
Additional Procedural Guidance at Enclosure 3 of the Directive. Department Counsel
was prepared to proceed on July 10, 2014. This case was assigned to me on July 21,
2014.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 25, 2014. I convened the hearing as
scheduled on September 10, 2014. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1
2
through 5, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf.
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on September 19, 2014. Applicant
asked that the record remain open for the receipt of additional evidence. On September
24, 2014, Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibit A, which was received without objection.
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 55, married, and has a master’s degree. He is a retired lieutenant
colonel in the US Army. He is employed by a defense contractor and seeks to retain a
security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for a
clearance because he used intoxicants to excess. Applicant admitted the factual
allegations of the SOR under this paragraph. Those admissions are findings of fact. 
Applicant began drinking alcohol when he was in high school in the 1970s. His
drinking increased in college and then was fairly stable during his 22-year Army career.
While his drinking had no particular pattern, he testified that it was primarily on
weekends and at home. He would drink a bottle of wine or a six pack of beer when he
did drink. (Government Exhibit 3; Tr. 33.)
Applicant has never been arrested because of his drinking. He states it did not
cause a problem during his Army career or during his ten-year career with his current
employer, until May 2013. Earlier in 2013 Applicant, beginning to think that his alcohol
use may be a problem, sporadically attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). This was
after discussions with a co-worker who was also a member of AA. (Government Exhibit
3; Tr. 32-33, 44-46, 58-60.)
On May 17, 2013, Applicant showed up to work with alcohol on his breath. His
employer required Applicant to participate in a mandatory recovery program for alcohol.
As part of this program Applicant contacted his employer’s Employee Assistance
Program (EAP). The EAP counselor referred Applicant to a local therapist. (Government
Exhibits 2, and 4; Tr. 39-41.)
Applicant contacted this therapist, who recommended that Applicant abstain from
drinking and attend 90 AA meetings in 90 days. Applicant stopped drinking on May 27,
2013, and has remained abstinent since then. The therapist diagnosed Applicant as
being alcohol dependent. He recently stated that Applicant’s prognosis is, “Excellent as
[patient] was compliant with recommendation to attend regular Alcoholics Anonymous
meetings and maintain sobriety.” The EAP organization also reported that Applicant had
completed all their recommendations, which primarily concerned attendance at AA.
(Government Exhibits 2, and 3; Tr. 42-43.)
3
As stated, Applicant stopped drinking in May 2013. He continues to attend AA
meetings at least five times a week, and is an active participant in the program. His wife
is fully supportive of his sobriety. He expressed a deep commitment to life long sobriety.
(Tr. 46-58, 62-64.)
Mitigation
Applicant had a successful military career, in which he was decorated several
times. He received the Legion of Merit when he retired in 2002, which specifically
referred to his “caring and courageous actions on September 11, 2001 in response to a
terrorist attack on the Pentagon.” (Applicant Exhibit A; Tr. 28-31.)
He also has a successful ten-year career with his current employer. The most
recent evaluation from his employer shows that he “Meets” or “Exceeds” standards for
all of his competency ratings. (Applicant Exhibit A.)
 
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which
are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to
classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
4
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out
in AG & 21:      
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
Applicant has a long history of alcohol abuse, which resulted in his being
counseled by his employer for having alcohol on his breath at work. As a result he has
abstained from drinking any alcohol since May 2013, obtained therapy, attended 90 AA
meetings in 90 days, and continues to attend meetings at least five times per week.
There are three Disqualifying Conditions that apply to this case under AG ¶ 22:
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent; and
5
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program.
Under the particular facts of this case, the following mitigating conditions
currently apply to Applicant’s situation pursuant to AG ¶ 23:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness or
good judgment;
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
Applicant, by his own admission, was a problem drinker for many years. Early in
2013 he began to realize that fact. When he was confronted by his employer for having
alcohol on his breath at work, he realized he needed to solve the situation. He went to
his company’s EAP program, then followed their care recommendations and those of
the therapist they recommended he see. Applicant has abstained from drinking for over
a year, continues to attend AA on a regular basis, and credibly states he will not abuse
alcohol in the future. 
In finding for Applicant I have particularly considered the span of time of
Applicant’s sobriety against the time of his use of alcohol. What is particularly
noteworthy is the fact that, other than the single allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b., the record
does not show any adverse alcohol-related incidents of any type in his life. 
All the above mitigating conditions apply. When they are viewed along with the
whole-person concept discussion below, the facts support a finding for Applicant under
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
6
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. My Guideline G discussion is
applicable here as well. 
Applicant had a long history of alcohol use, at times to excess. Finally, in May
2013, he was confronted by his employer for having alcohol on his breath. Rather than
deny that fact, or rationalize it, Applicant took the steps necessary to determine that he
had an alcohol problem. At that point he decided to abstain from drinking for life and to
become an active member of AA. 
Applicant’s conduct was serious, but there is considerable evidence of
rehabilitation. Applicant is an intelligent, trustworthy, and responsible man with a long
history of outstanding achievement. Based on the state of the record, I find that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, I find that
there is no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); and
that there is very little likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his Alcohol
Consumption. On balance, I conclude that Applicant has successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
