                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00955
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
October 22, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on December 17, 2013.  On April 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
H for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on May 14, 2014, and
requested an Administrative Determination by an administrative judge.  Department
Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 13, 2014.  Applicant
submitted nothing in response to the FORM.  The case was assigned to me on
September 15, 2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated May 14, 2014, Applicant admitted all the factual
allegations in the three Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations.
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
Appellant is 25 years of age.  (Item 4 at page 5.)  He is a college graduate, and
currently is in a Master’s Degree program.  (Item 4 at pages 15~16.)  He seeks a
security clearance in connection with his employment as Senior Geospatial Analyst.
(Item 4 at page 17.)
1.a.  Applicant used Marijuana from about February of 2007 until about February
of 2013, a period of six years.  (Item 4 at page 56.)  He describes his usage in the
following terms: “At most, used once or twice a month with friends, but often not used
for months at a time.  Use was primarily while attending college.”  (Id, see also Item 5 at
page 3.)  In his Answer, Applicant averred that he “did not intend to use marijuana
again.”  (Answer at page 1.)
1.b.  Applicant used MDMA (Ecstacy), an illegal stimulant, “on two separate
occasians (sic) socially,” once in December of 2011 and again on March of 2012.  (Item
4 at page 56.)  He “bought the drug both times for $20 a tablet. . . . The drug made . . .
[applicant] feel excited, energetic and happy.”  (Item 5 at page 3.)  In his Answer,
Applicant averred that he “did not intend to use MDMA again.”  (Answer at page 2.)
1.c.  Applicant used Adderall, a prescription drug, without a prescription, “a few
times throughout college to study for exams,” between about September of 2009 to
December of 2010.  (Item 4 at page 57.)  He “purchased the drug for $5 a pill.”  (Item 5
at page 3.)  In his Answer, Applicant also averred that he “did not intend to use Adderall
again.”  (Answer at page 2.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, in making a decision.
3
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
Paragraph 24:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
The guideline also notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.
Under Subparagraph 25(a), “any drug abuse” may be disqualifying.  In addition, “any
illegal . . . purchase” under Subparagraph 25(c) may be disqualifying.  Here, Applicant
used marijuana over a period of six years, with his last usage in February of 2013, only
about 14 months prior to his Answer to the SOR.  He also illegally purchased and used
MDMA, and Adderall, without having a prescription for the purchase, on numerous
occasions.
4
I find no countervailing mitigating conditions that are applicable here.  Under
Subparagraph 26(a), it may be mitigating where Applicant’s “behavior happened so long
ago . . . or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur . . .”
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s drug usage, which ended in February of
2013.  Furthermore, it is too soon to say it will not happen in the future.  However, if
Applicant continues his abstinence from illegal drugs for a few more years, he should
not hesitate from applying for a security clearance in the future.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Subparagraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Subparagraph 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The Applicant has submitted nothing
further in support of his request for a security clearance.  The record evidence thus
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a
security clearance.  For this reason, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns arising from his Drug Involvement.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
5
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
