 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00206 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s illegal use of drugs after possessing a top secret security clearance 
violated the trust placed in him by the Government. His criminal behavior raises serious 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, willingness to comply with the 
law and follow regulations, and his ability to protect classified information. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA on January 17, 2013. The Department 
of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline H (drug involvement) on April 26, 2014, which was amended on June 
30, 2014.1 Applicant answered the SOR on May 19, 2014 and July 25, 2014 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
(respectively), and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on July 7, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued the notice of hearing on August 11, 2014, scheduling a hearing for September 4, 
2014.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered one exhibit (GE 1). Applicant testified 
and submitted 19 exhibits (AE 1 through 19). All exhibits were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 16, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, with 
explanations. He denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1.c. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old principal contract administrator working for a 
government contractor. He was awarded a bachelor’s degree in May 1997, and 
received a master’s certificate from a prestigious U.S. university in 2012-2013. He has 
never been married and has no children.  
 
Applicant worked for two large government contractors from November 2006 to 
December 2008. He was hired by his current employer, a government contractor, in 
January 2009. He submitted his first security clearance application (SCA) in 2006, and 
participated in his first background interview in November 2007. He has possessed a 
top secret security clearance since June 2008. 
 
On January 17, 2013, Applicant submitted his most recent SCA requesting the 
renewal of his eligibility for a security clearance. In his answer to Section 23 (Illegal Use 
of Drugs or Drug Activity), Applicant claimed that he had never used any illegal drugs.  
 
On May 4, 2013, Applicant attended a public concert and illegally smoked 
marijuana. He did not report his illegal use of marijuana to his facility security officer 
(FSO). On May 16, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator 
conducting his security clearance background interview. During the interview, Applicant 
disclosed that he illegally smoked marijuana on May 4, 2013. He told the investigator 
that he took two draws off a marijuana cigarette provided to him by an acquaintance. He 
averred this was the first time in his life he used illegal drugs. He considered his illegal 
use of marijuana a momentary lapse in judgment. Applicant stated that he considered 
smoking an unhealthy habit, and he did not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. He 
explained that he had been drinking and was not thinking clearly about the possible 
security clearance consequences of his illegal use of marijuana. 
 
On April 18, 2014, Applicant and his partner went on vacation to a state where 
the use of marijuana is legal under state law. After being picked up at the airport, 
Applicant’s partner was offered candy laced with marijuana, and Applicant asked to try 
 
3 
 
 
it. He ingested the candy laced with marijuana, and claimed that he got a headache and 
did not ask for more. 
 
Two days later, Applicant and his partner attended a public party where they 
were offered chocolates laced with psychedelic mushrooms. At the time he eat the 
chocolate, Applicant believed it contained illegal mushrooms. Because he did not feel 
the expected effects of the mushrooms, Applicant now believes that the chocolate did 
not have mushrooms. At his hearing, Applicant explained that because he was on 
vacation, away from his job, and in a state where marijuana is legal, he did not analyze 
what he was doing. He was not thinking about his security training while on vacation. 
After receipt of the April 2014 SOR, Applicant disclosed to his facility security officer 
(FSO) his illegal drug use on April 18 and 20, 2014. He wanted to bring all of his illegal 
use of drugs into the open and have a clean start.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged knowing that the use of illegal drugs, 
including marijuana and psychedelic mushrooms, constitutes a federal criminal offense 
and it is incompatible with possessing a security clearance. He also knew that the use 
of illegal drugs was against DOD policies, the policies established by the three 
government contractors he worked for since 1998, and that government contractors 
regularly conduct training and urinalysis tests to determine whether prospective or 
current employees use illegal drugs. He has known that the use of illegal drugs creates 
a Government security concern since he submitted his first SCA in 2006, and was 
interviewed by government investigators about his possible illegal drug use in 
November 2007.  
 
Applicant stated that his illegal use of drugs was a “dumb decision that showed a 
lack of judgment.” He had his responsibilities laid before him, and he forgot to apply his 
training. Applicant explained that he has known his partner two years. When he first met 
his partner, he did not know that he used illegal drugs. He learned about his partner’s 
illegal drug use about a year into their relationship. Applicant believes he is in a difficult 
situation because he has feeling for his partner and he does not want to separate from 
him. Applicant is trying to make his partner understand the adverse consequences he 
will face if his partner uses illegal drugs around him. Applicant stated: “I have discussed 
my wish to remain clear of these substances with my significant other and he 
understands that he cannot use them while I am present.” Applicant claimed that his 
partner agreed to abstain from using illegal drugs around him. His partner’s roommate 
also used illegal drugs in front of Applicant. He has known the roommate for 
approximately one year. 
 
Applicant believes that going through the security clearance process has been a 
learning experience. He understands the reasons for the security clearance rules. He 
believes he is now a better person for having gone through this experience. He 
repeatedly stated that illegal drugs are not part of his life. He believes that his use of 
illegal drugs are examples of aberrational behavior, which he promised not to repeat. 
He expressed remorse for straying from his responsibilities as a cleared person. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant sought counseling through his employer’s employee assistance 
program. He has participated in nine counseling sessions since May 21, 2014. His 
counselor believes that Applicant’s illegal drug use was not the norm, and that Applicant 
demonstrated remorse for his lapse in judgment. Additionally, he is taking training 
courses at work to learn to manage his time. He promised to make better and healthier 
choices. 
 
Applicant considers himself to be an outstanding, hard-working employee who is 
responsible, trustworthy, and mindful of rules. He claims to take responsibility for his 
wrongdoings. His performance evaluations (exceeding expectations), achievement 
awards, and his references’ statements confirmed his excellent performance, 
accomplishments, honesty, and commitment. Applicant noted that he has possessed a 
security clearance for around six years without any security concerns, except for those 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant submitted the results of a negative drug screening test he 
took on July 24, 2014. He volunteered to take drug screening tests in the future to prove 
his commitment to remain drug free. Applicant submitted a statement of intent never to 
use illegal drugs again with automatic revocation of his security clearance if he fails to 
do so. (AE 19) 
 
Applicant believes that his illegal use of marijuana was infrequent and it is not 
recent. He averred that he has abstained from any illegal drug since April 2014. 
Because of his counseling, rehabilitative efforts, and his promise to abstain from illegal 
drugs in the future, Applicant believes that his illegal drug use is unlikely to recur.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
 
5 
 
 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana in May 2013 and April 2014, and consumed 
psychedelic mushrooms in April 2014. He used illegal drugs while possessing a top 
secret security clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and are disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides two potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
 
6 
 
 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; 
 
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s most recent 
illegal drug-related behavior occurred in April 2014. As such, his drug-related behavior 
is recent. At the time he used illegal drugs, Applicant was 39 years old, had worked for 
government contractors for over 15 years, and possessed a top secret clearance for six 
years. He voluntarily used illegal drugs in public social settings without regard for the 
law, DOD policies, his training, and the Government’s security concerns. I find that 
Applicant’s illegal use of drugs occurred under ordinary circumstances and it is likely to 
recur.  
 
Because of his age, education, and his experience working for a government 
contractor and possessing a security clearance, Applicant knew or should have known 
of the adverse legal and security clearance consequences he would face as a result of 
his illegal use of drugs. Applicant’s illegal use of drugs is a violation of the trust placed in 
him by the Government. It demonstrates a lack of judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, 
and an unwillingness to comply with the law and follow regulations. 
 
Applicant promised to never use illegal drugs in the future, and submitted a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; 
however, his promises hold little weight. He was aware of the criminal prohibition 
against the illegal use of drugs, and that did not stop him from using illegal drugs in May 
2013. Applicant did not immediately report his illegal use of marijuana. He waited until 
he was interviewed by a government investigator to disclose his May 2013 use of 
marijuana. He called it an aberrational, one-time lapse of judgment, and promised never 
to use illegal drugs ever again. Notwithstanding, in April 2014, Applicant not only used 
marijuana again, but also psychedelic mushrooms. 
 
Moreover, Applicant continues his close association with known drug-users and 
presented little evidence of lifestyle changes made to avoid the environments where 
illegal drugs are used. I find that his short period of abstinence is insufficient to show a 
demonstrated intent not to use illegal drugs in the future.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guideline H in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a competent and valuable principal contract administrator working for 
a government contractor since January 2009. He has possessed access to classified 
information at the top secret level during the last 6 years. He has established an 
excellent reputation based on his outstanding performance and accomplishments.   
 
 Notwithstanding his personal qualifications and past contributions to the 
Government and his employer, Applicant’s illegal use of drugs violated the trust placed 
on him by the Government. His criminal behavior while possessing a security clearance 
raises serious questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, ability to comply 
with the law, and his ability to protect classified information. He failed to mitigate the 
Guideline H security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
