 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 14-01078 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter dated May 21, 2014, Applicant admitted all five allegations raised and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on June 30, 2014. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on August 14, 2014, setting the hearing for September 11, 2014. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered four documents, which were accepted without objection 
as exhibits (Exs.) 1-4. It also introduced an evidentiary schematic as a hearing exhibit, 
 
 
 
 
2 
which was accepted without objection as HE1. Applicant offered testimony and 11 
documents, which were accepted as Exs. A-K. He was given until September 22, 2014, 
to submit any additional materials. On September 18, 2014, the Government forwarded 
a 17-page packet of materials from Applicant. The transcript of the proceeding (Tr.) was 
received on September 25, 2014. Noting no objection, I accepted the packet as Ex. L 
and the record was closed. Based on my review of the testimony and materials, 
Applicant met his burden in mitigating Guideline F security clearances. Security 
clearance is granted.   
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Appellant is a 58-year-old senior electrical technician who has been with the 
same defense contractor since October 2013. He has a high school diploma and an 
associate’s degree in electronic engineering. He has been married since 1981. 
Applicant and his wife have three adult children. Applicant served in the United States 
Marines from 1974 until he was honorably discharged in 1994. During that time, he held 
a security clearance.  
 
Applicant has endured a series of layoffs. He worked as a machinist from 
October 2003 to January 2005, then quickly found work later that month until he was 
laid off again in October 2006. To secure a new job, he relocated away from his family 
in November 2006, where he was employed as a maintenance supervisor at a plant 
until January 2013, earning between $90,000 and $100,000 a year. The plant then 
closed and Applicant quickly accepted work as an electronics mechanic at another 
company making just under $45,000. That job lasted until October 2013, when he 
began his present position. He currently earns approximately $62,000 a year. He is now 
seeking a security clearance, his first since his honorable discharge from military 
service. His wife, who used to earn a salary and bonus compensation package of about 
$48,000 as a store manager, has been on disability for the past four years. She is 
currently drawing about $1,247 in monthly disability income. Tr. 27. 
 
At issue are the following delinquent debts, as noted in the SOR:  
 
1.a   $514 delinquent since July 2013. Paid. This account was closed when 
Applicant relocated in 2006. Applicant guesses that an automatic withdrawal went 
through after he closed this account and before his new account elsewhere was 
established. Tr. 28-29. Applicant was unaware of the debt until he was interviewed by 
investigators in January 2014. The lender admitted it sent the bill to a wrong address 
and reduced the debt to the actual amount owed ($309). Ex. A; Tr. 30-31. Applicant’s 
evidence does not reflect the same account number as the one noted in Applicant’s 
credit report, but collection account numbers often vary. Moreover, Applicant’s evidence 
otherwise indicates a debt with this same lender for $513.68 was resolved for $309. 
Further, Applicant has had only one account with that lender. Tr. 31-32. I find that there 
is sufficient evidence to conclude that this debt was recently resolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
1.b $1,301 delinquent since December 2010. Satisfied. This debt is 
associated with a timeshare Applicant and his wife owned before she became disabled. 
When they could no longer make payments on the timeshare due to her lack of income 
and his fluctuating salary, they cancelled their timeshare contract and surrendered their 
benefit to the development company. Applicant provided evidence of this transfer of 
timeshare benefit back to the developer, which notes that collections activities have 
been stopped. Ex. B. This account has the same number as the one noted in the credit 
report. Tr. 33-35.   
 
1.c/1.d    $3,696 delinquent since December 2010 and $9,127 delinquent since 
December 2013. Formally Disputed. Applicant persuasively argued that these two 
debts are for the same obligation. They arise from a debt related to another timeshare. 
Applicant cancelled this timeshare when his wife became disabled. Tr. 36. This should 
have left him with a debt to the timeshare company of about $3,600, which Applicant 
agrees to satisfy. One of the company’s other financing arms, however, pursued its own 
claim after Applicant for $9,127, which Applicant formally disputed 2010. Tr. 37-44; Ex. 
C. After the hearing, Applicant submitted materials reinforcing his argument that these 
are two claims for the same debt, and noting questionable practices by the second 
lender pursuing the higher claim against him. Tr. 41-43; Ex. L. Applicant will pay the 
$3,696 balance after the claim for $9,127 is resolved. Tr. 41, 46.  
 
1.e $1,414 state tax obligation delinquent since April 2013. In repayment. 
Applicant learned of this tax year 2011 underpayment as he struggled to pay his son’s 
state college tuition in early 2013, just after Applicant’s salary hit its nadir. Tr. 53. His 
son resorted to taking student loans to help with the state school bills, and got an on-
campus job, to lessen the financial burden on Applicant. Applicant then sought financial 
counseling and worked with a community tax advisor to set up a repayment plan with 
the state. Tr. 54. Applicant has not yet received a copy of the agreement from the state. 
He did, however, provide evidence of his first two payments. The first payment for $350  
is noted at Ex. D. His second payment is reflected in Ex. L at 2. Consequently, to date, 
he has satisfied at least half of the obligation. See also Ex. D. The entire bill should be 
satisfied in the next two months. Applicant is committed to completing this agreement 
and has the financial resources to do so expediently. Tr. 54-56; 59. 
 
Applicant is living within his means and applying what he learned in financial 
counseling. He recently renegotiated his mortgage terms with his lender. Their monthly 
home payment has been reduced to $1,700 from almost $2,100. Tr. 57. Applicant is 
eliminating a manageable balance on his last remaining credit card. Once satisfied, his 
only regular monthly debts will be his home mortgage and utilities. He noted, “[b]asically 
right now we’re in better shape . . . We’re probably in the best shape now. Now that 
we’ve gotten a loan modification, we have quite a bit of money we’ve saved.” Tr. 62. He 
reiterated his commitment to eschew the unnecessary use of credit. Tr. 62-63. At 
present, Applicant has a net monthly remainder of about $1,500.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 states that the security concern under this guideline is that 
failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant was 
delinquent on five debts, including one tax-related obligation. Such facts are sufficient to 
invoke two of the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to  dispute the  legitimacy  
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Over the past decade, Applicant experienced multiple periods of unemployment 
due to layoffs. His string of positions varied wildly in salary, from the low $40,000s to 
about $100,00. In the interim, his wife became disabled and withdrew from the 
 
 
 
 
6 
workforce. As a result of these incidents, four obligations became delinquent, two of 
which represent the same obligation and most of which Applicant was not aware of their 
existence until well after they had been incurred and become past due. Otherwise, 
Applicant was generally able to manage his finances through sensible actions, such as 
returning timeshare interests to the corporate owners and accepting his son’s efforts to 
help pay for his education. Whenever he discovered a delinquent debt, he has 
addressed it directly. With regard to 1.c and 1.d, he has formally disputed what looks 
like are competing collections on one timeshare, which Applicant is willing to pay once 
the conflict between the collections is resolved through dispute. Since receiving financial 
counseling, Applicant has done much to improve his overall finances, including the 
elimination of unnecessary credit and the modification of his home loan. Today, he lives 
within his finances. All debts at issue have been addressed. The tax issue is half repaid 
at present, and should be completely repaid in the next two months. In light of these 
considerations, I find Financial Considerations Mitigating conditions AG ¶ 20(a)-¶ 20(e) 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the three guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant emphasis or additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old senior electrical technician who has been with the 
same defense contractor since October 2013. He has an associate’s degree in 
electronic engineering, is married, and the father of three grown children. He has been 
married since 1981. Applicant and his wife have three adult children. Applicant served in 
the United States Marines for 20 years before he was honorably discharged.  
 
Despite a series of layoffs and his wife becoming disabled, Applicant has 
minimized the debt he has incurred. Most of the debt at issue had eluded him, and he 
quickly moved to address the debts as they were revealed. Financial counseling and 
hard work have restructured his personal finances. He lives modestly within his means, 
with a newly modified home loan and increased net monthly remainder. The debts at 
issue are addressed and largely satisfied. His tax repayment plan is half satisfied, with 
two modest payments yet to be made in the next 60 days. He is committed to 
completely honoring that balance and any debt found to be owed that is currently being 
 
 
 
 
7 
disputed; importantly, he has the motivation and the financial resources to do so.  He 
has devised a workable plan for addressing his obligations, implemented it, and all 
indicators at this point indicate success. Therefore, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
security concerns arising under Guideline F.       
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
   
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
