 Exhibit 1. 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------------- ) ADP Case No. 14-00124
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a
public trust position. Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate the
trustworthiness concern stemming from her financial difficulties. Accordingly, this case
is decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted an application for a position of public trust on
July 30, 2013.  After reviewing the application and information gathered during a1
background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD), on March 20, 2014, sent
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) detailing a trustworthiness concern under
Guideline F for financial considerations. The action was taken under Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan.
2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R,
 The AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The2
AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Exhibit 1 at 12–25. 3
 Tr. 45–47; Exhibit F. 4
 Tr. 70–71.5
2
Personnel Security Program (Jan. 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG)  implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The2
SOR recommended submission of Applicant’s case to an administrative judge to
determine her eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) position to
support a contract with the DOD.  
Applicant answered the SOR on April 20, 2014. Her answer was mixed; she
admitted many of the delinquent debts; she was unaware of others; and she stated she
had made payments on some of the debts.
The case was assigned to me July 30, 2014, to conduct the hearing requested by
Applicant. The hearing was held as scheduled on August 27, 2014. Department
Counsel presented Exhibits 1–3, which were admitted. Applicant presented Exhibits
A–G, which were admitted.
The record was kept open to allow Applicant an opportunity to present additional
documentary information. Initially, the deadline was September 10, 2014, but then it
was extended and eventually closed on October 9, 2014. Applicant’s additional
documentary information is admitted as Exhibits H and I. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee who is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy
a position of public trust for her employment with a health care company that has a
contract with the DOD. She has had this job since September 2013. She previously
worked for the same employer during 2012–2013, but left due to personal illness. She
earns $15.50 per hour in her current job and works a full-time schedule. Her
employment history in her application shows she has had a variety of jobs, and she has
had multiple periods of unemployment.3
In addition to her current job, Applicant has worked a second full-time job since
July 2014 in which she earns about $13 per hour.  She took the second job to earn4
extra income to repay her debts, and she intends to maintain the second job for as long
as necessary.5
Applicant’s educational background consists of earning a high school diploma
and attending some college. She has never married. She has two children in her
 Exhibits 2 and 3. 6
 Tr. 43–45. 7
 Exhibit A. 8
 Exhibits B and D. 9
 Exhibit C. 10
 Exhibits E and E-1. 11
 Exhibit G. 12
3
custody, ages six and seven. She does not receive any child-support payments on her
children’s behalf.
The available documentary evidence shows that Applicant has a history of
financial problems or difficulties.  As alleged by the SOR and confirmed by credit6
reports, that history consists of the 17 delinquent accounts for a total of about $29,410.
The delinquent accounts include an unpaid judgment as well as collection and charged-
off accounts.
Applicant explained that her financial difficulties stem from the decision she made
to end an unacceptable relationship when she separated from her son’s father.  The7
result was Applicant was basically homeless for two years or so until early 2014. 
Applicant presented documentary information showing she entered into a debt-
repayment agreement for the $6,130 delinquent account in SOR ¶ 1.c.  She did so in8
September 2013, and the agreement calls for biweekly payments of $65.
Applicant presented documentary information showing she paid in full the $185
collection account in SOR ¶ 1.g.  She did so in April 2014.9
Applicant presented documentary information showing she entered into a
promissory note for the $3,013 collection account in SOR ¶ 1.m.  She did so in April10
2014, and she agreed to pay $50 down and $50 every two weeks thereafter.
Applicant presented documentary information showing that a garnishment action
was begun in 2014 to satisfy the unpaid judgment of $2,117 in SOR ¶ 1.a.  11
Applicant presented documentary information showing she retained the services
of a credit-repair firm to help her resolve her financial difficulties and improve her credit
profile.  She retained the firm in August 2014.  12
 
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 13
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant14
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  15
 AG ¶ 19(a).  16
 AG ¶ 19(c). 17
4
Law and Policies
This case involves an adjudication of Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an ADP
position, not an adjudication of eligibility for a security clearance. In deciding ADP
cases, we follow the procedures contained in the Directive, and we apply the 2006
adjudicative guidelines. The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive
duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning
the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the interests of national
security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural
protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination is made.
Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. And in all cases, the protection of the national security is the
paramount consideration. 
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant13
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 14
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect [sensitive] information.  15
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. The evidence is also sufficient to indicate inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within16 17
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions. 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a)–20(f). 18
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 19
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 20
5
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F.  I have18
especially considered the following mitigating conditions as most pertinent to the facts
and circumstances of Applicant’s case: 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control; and
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
In addition to the mitigating conditions, I note that the purpose of this case is not
aimed at collecting debts.  Rather, the purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment,19
reliability, and trustworthiness consistent with the guidelines in the Directive. In
evaluating Guideline F cases, the Appeal Board has established the following standard:
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan
be the ones listed in the SOR.20
Here, Applicant explained the central reasons for her financial problems, and she
presented documentary information showing her good-faith effort to repay her
delinquent debts. She also presented documentary information showing she is seeking
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).21
6
professional assistance to help her in this endeavor. Further, she is working a second
full-time job to increase her ability to repay creditors. Without a doubt, Applicant’s
overall financial situation is still messy and largely unresolved. Nevertheless, I am
persuaded that she is doing all she can with limited financial means to clean up her
financial house as a single parent with two young children. Doing so will take time. And
doing so will not necessarily be without set backs. But this case is a reminder that life is
often difficult and does not play out like an article in a personal finance magazine. 
Moreover, I was impressed with Applicant at the hearing. She was serious, she
accepted responsibility for her situation, and she expressed a firm resolve to address it.
 
To conclude, I have no concern about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a
public trust position. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  For all these reasons, I21
conclude Applicant sufficiently explained and mitigated the financial considerations
concern.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.q: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for an ADP position. Eligibility for access to
sensitive information is granted. 
        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
