1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00820
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on September 29, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 17, 2014, detailing security concerns
under Guideline F, financial considerations and Guideline E, personal conduct. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for
Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Item 5.2
2
Applicant received the SOR on April 29, 2014. He submitted a notarized, written
response to the SOR allegations dated June 13, 2014, and he requested a decision on
the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on August 22, 2014. Applicant received the FORM on
September 10, 2014. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted a response dated
September 18, 2014. DOHA assigned this case to me on October 5, 2014. The
Government submitted nine exhibits, which have been marked as Items 1-9. Items 1-5
and 7-9 are admitted into the record. Applicant’s response to the SOR has been marked
as Item 4, and the SOR has been marked as Item 1. His written response to the FORM
is admitted into the record as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, Item I - VII.
Evidentiary Ruling
Applicant objects to the admissibility of Item 6, the summary of his November 15,
2013 personal subject interview (PSI), on the grounds that this document, which is part
of the Report of Investigation, has not been reviewed and authenticated as required by 
Enclosure 3, ¶3.1.20 of the Directive. Department Counsel has not responded to
Applicant’s objection. Item 6 indicates that Applicant’s statements to the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) are unsworn. Applicant’s objection is valid. Item 6 will
not be admitted into the record.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in the SOR.1
He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 51 years old, works part-time as a technician for a Department
of Defense contractor. Applicant began this employment in April 2013.2
Item 5.3
Item 5.4
Item 5.5
Item 4.6
Item 8; Item 9.7
3
Applicant was born in a country which was part of the former Soviet Union. He
and his wife married in their former homeland in 1986. They have 27-year-old daughter.
Applicant and his family emigrated to the United States in July 1992. He became a
United States citizen in September 1999. His wife and daughter are naturalized United
States citizens. His parents emigrated to the United States and are now United States
citizens.3
Applicant completed his formal education prior to emigrating to the United States.
Since his arrival in the United States more than 20 years ago, Applicant has worked
many jobs, including dispatcher, technician, delivery driver, real estate agent, and
programmer. He broke his hip causing him to miss work time in 2007. He was
unemployed from June 2005 until March 2006. Applicant has several non DOD-related
part-time positions that he continues to work.4
In 2006, Applicant and his wife purchased a second home, which was financed
with a mortgage and a home equity loan. Applicant intended to live in the home as he
and his wife had marital difficulties. The house needed repairs before he could move
into the house. Before he completed the repairs, he broke his hip and missed time from
work, causing him to miss his mortgage payments.5
Applicant decided to sell the house at the same time as the economic downturn
started. He sought to sell the house as a short-sale. He also advised that he would need
to satisfy both loans at the time of the sale. His real estate broker found several
purchasers for the house, but could not finalize the sale because the real estate broker
could not find a lender to satisfy both loans. Finally, in 2012, his real estate broker found
a purchaser and a bank, which would satisfy both loans. The sale of his property
finalized in 2012.6
Lender A initially financed the primary mortgage of $224,000 and the home
equity loan of $56,000 on Applicant’s house. Lender A transferred the $56,000 home
equity loan through its right of assignment to Lender B, a successor to the creditor
identified in SOR ¶ 1.a, on March 29, 2012.  7
Applicant provided a number of documents related to the sale of his house. By
letter dated November 10, 2012, Loan Processing Company C notified Applicant that it
would be collecting and processing the loan payments for Lender B. This document
Item 7; AE A, Item II.8
AE A, Items IV and V.9
AE A, Items III and VI.10
AE A, Item I.11
AE A, Item VII.12
Item 7.13
4
identifies the same loan number as listed for the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a.  On March 29,8
2012, Applicant, his wife, the purchaser of his property, and the buyer’s agent signed an
Affidavit of Arm’s Length Transaction. On the same date, Loan Processing Company C
mailed Applicant a letter accepting his offer of $8,000 as full settlement of the $56,000
home equity loan identified in SOR ¶ 1.a.  On April 12, 2012, Lender D advised9
Applicant that it was amending its January 31, 2012 approval letter for the sale of his
property. In the letter, Lender D advised that it waived its right to record any deficiency
on the loan, set out some settlement criteria, and provided instructions on payment. It
directed that the closing on the property must occur by April 27, 2012.  Applicant10
submitted a copy of the April 27, 2012 closing statement, which shows the $8,000
payment (split between Applicant and the purchaser) to Loan Processing Company C.11
The SOR also identifies a debt owed to the City in which Applicant lives.
Applicant provided documentation, which reflects a payment to the county tax collector
on April 25, 2012. Applicant advises that this debt had to be paid before closing on the
sale of his house.12
The credit report of record reflects Applicant disputed SOR ¶ 1.a. It also reflects
that he timely pays his bills.  13
When he completed his e-QIP, Applicant answered “no” to the following question
in Section 26: Financial Record- Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts: 
Other than previous listed, have any of the following happened?
In the last seven years (a) you defaulted on any type of
loan? and (d) you had bills or debts turned over to a
collection agency?
Applicant denies that he intentionally falsified his answer to this question. In his
response to the SOR, Applicant pointed out that when filing out the e-QIP, he answered
“yes” to the question about debts more than 120 days delinquent and provided details
about the problems with the mortgage on his second home. He also provided
Item 4; Item 5.14
5
information about an arrest. Since he paid the debt owed to the City, he was unaware
that the debt was listed as unpaid.  14
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
th,e “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
6
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed financial problems after purchasing a second home when
he broke his hip and could not work. The Government’s evidence reflects that some of
the debts related to this home had not been resolved. These two disqualifying
conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
7
Applicant’s debts are related to a second house purchased in 2006 and arose
when he was unable to work after he broke his hip. He decided to the sell that house,
but his broker had great difficulty finding a lender who would agree to resolve both loans
on the property. These are factors beyond his  control. Applicant acted reasonably by
placing his house for sale. Eventually, Applicant did sell the property and resolved all
the debts associated with this property. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.
Applicant is not in need of financial counseling as he pays his bills. He made a
good faith offer to Lender B to resolve his home equity loan. The lender accepted his
offer, and he resolved the debt when he closed on the sale of his second home. He paid
the debt to the city. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility:
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and,
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
For AG ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission must be deliberate. The
Government established that Applicant omitted material facts from his September 2013
e-QIP, when he failed to acknowledge that he defaulted on his mortgage loan on his
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313315
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
In its brief, the Government acknowledged that Applicant had mitigated security concerns under Guideline16
E.
8
second house. In his response to the SOR, he denied that he intentionally falsified this
information on his e-QIP. When the allegation of falsification is controverted, the
Government has the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does
not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred.
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or
state of mind at the time the omission occurred.15
While he did not provide the correct answer to the question about a mortgage
default, Applicant provided sufficient information about the financial problems he was
having with his second house to place the Government on notice that he had financial
problems related to this property. Likewise, he was unaware of the collection debt from
the City for a previously paid bill. Applicant did not intentionally falsify his answers on
the e-QIP. SOR allegation 2.a is found in favor of Applicant.16
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
9
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s
financial problems arose when he was unable to pay the mortgages on the second
house he and his wife purchased He made a decision to sell the property at the same
time the economic downturn began. The change in the economic downturn created
significant problems for selling the second house. Applicant eventually sold the house
through a short sale and paid his debts related to the second house with the proceeds.
Applicant pays his bills and lives within his financial means. He is responsible with his
money and his debts. He did not intentionally falsify his answers on his e-QIP. Rather,
he provided the Government with all relevant information to assess his security
worthiness. Applicant cannot be pressured or coerced because of his past debts or
answers on his e-QIP.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances and
personal conduct under Guidelines F and E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
10
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
