 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 14-00455 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 25, 2013, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 20, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 27, 2014. He answered 
the SOR in writing on April 17, 2014, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 16, 2014, and I received 
the case assignment on June 19, 2014. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 26, 
2014, and I convened the hearing in person as scheduled on July 24, 2014. The 
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without objection. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through L, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 4, 2014. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until August 7, 2014, to submit additional matters. He 
later asked for additional time to submit his documents. Without objection, I granted him 
until August 21, 2014, to send his additional exhibits. On August 21, 2014, he submitted 
Exhibits M to T without objection from Department Counsel. The record closed on 
August 21, 2014. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his request 
for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and married to his second wife with whom he has a 
young child. He is divorced from his first wife. They had three children who are now 
teenagers. Applicant works for a defense contractor and earns over $60,000 annually. 
With a security clearance he could apply for other jobs that would pay him more money. 
He received a college degree in 2009. He served in the U.S. Navy from 1989 until 2000 
and held a security clearance without any violations during that time. (Tr. 22-27, 65; 
Exhibits 1, 3; Answer) 
 
 Applicant owes 12 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. The 12 debts total 
$72,051. These debts include a student loan, various personal loans, and other bank or 
credit cards. The hearing elicited information that two debts are duplicates of two other 
debts, so there are actually 10 delinquent debts. The debts started to accumulate in 
2008 and thereafter. A 13th allegation refers to Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
2003.  (Tr. 34-58, 85; Exhibits 2, B-T; Answer) 
 
  Applicant owes child support to his former wife. That alleged amount is $8,330 
(Subparagraph 1.a). Applicant was unemployed for three months and was unable to 
make the payments. He departed from his prior residence to move to his present 
location for a new job, but failed to complete his paperwork in the proper order so his 
prospective employer withdrew the job officer. This series of events occurred in 
approximately 2010. Applicant then had to find other employment to support his family. 
Now he has been offered new employment requiring this security clearance. The money 
for his current and back child support is being garnished from his paycheck in the 
amount of $800 monthly. He has paid $5,600 this year on this debt. Applicant expects 
his arrearages to be repaid by December 2015 while his regular child support 
obligations continue to be paid and are current. As of April 2014 the state department 
collecting the child support from Applicant calculates the debt is $10,598.34. This debt 
is being resolved. (Tr. 28-38; Exhibits 2, A, K, L; Answer) 
 
 Applicant owes a collector $681 for a debt owed to a bank (Subparagraph 1.b).  
This debt was paid and resolved in 2014. (Tr. 38-40, 85; Exhibits 2, H, K, L; Answer) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant owes a credit card company $1,414 (Subparagraphs 1.c). This debt is 
owed since 2008. Applicant entered an installment agreement with the collector to pay 
$519 each month starting in June 2014 for three months. Applicant submitted 
documents showing two payments were made for June and July 2014. The third 
payment would be made after the hearing in August 2014. It is resolved. (Tr. 43, 44, 85; 
Exhibits 2, C, K, L, S; Answer)  
 
 Applicant owes $126 on a medical account (Subparagraph 1.d). This debt is paid 
on July 9, 2014. (Tr. 44, 45, 85; Exhibit D, K, L; Answer) 
 
 Applicant owes $7,837 to a bank for a student loan (Subparagraph 1.e). 
Applicant wants to rehabilitate this debt along with the debt in the following paragraph. 
He entered an agreement to do that rehabilitation. The June 2014 agreement requires 
monthly payments of $105 for at least nine months. He made his first payment in 
February 2014 and monthly since then. This debt is being resolved. (Tr. 45-48, 85; 
Exhibits 2, E, K, L, P; Answer) 
 
 Applicant owes another student loan debt to a bank in the amount of $10,556 
(Subparagraph 1.f). He entered a loan rehabilitation agreement with the lender in 
February 2014 and is paying the debt on the installment payment basis combined with 
the previous debt. This debt is being resolved. (Tr. 45-48, 85; Exhibits 2, E, K, L, P; 
Answer) 
 
 Applicant owes $657 to a credit card issuer (Subparagraph 1.g). This debt is the 
same account as found in Subparagraph 1.j. This debt is resolved by payment of 
$406.49 on June 6, 2014. (Tr. 39, 40, 48, 85; Exhibits 2, B, K, L; Answer)  
 
 Applicant owes $1,172 to a credit card issuer for an unpaid debt (Subparagraph 
1.h.). This debt was settled for $1,114 with two payments of $557 being made in June 
and July 2014. Applicant submitted a letter from the collector, dated August 12, 2014, 
showing the balance is zero. This debt is resolved. (Tr.48-50, 85; Exhibits F, K, L, N; 
Answer) 
 
 Applicant owes $864 on a medical account that is paid (Subparagraph 1.i). 
Applicant submitted two documents from the hospital showing the debts were paid. (Tr. 
50-51, 85; Exhibits 2, G, K, L, T; Answer)  
 
 Applicant owes $582 on a credit card account (Subparagraph 1.j). This debt is 
the same as that in Subparagraph 1.g and is resolved by payment of $406.49 on June 
6, 2014. (Tr. 39, 40, 48; Exhibits 2, B, K, L; Answer)  
 
 Applicant owes $3,828 to a credit card issuer (Subparagraph 1.k). Applicant 
contends this debt is the same as that alleged in Subparagraph 1.b. He claims to have 
paid it in full in the amount of $3,828 to the collector. Applicant testified his payments 
were $200 for at least eight months. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 52-56, 85; Exhibits 2, H, 
K, L; Answer) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant owes student loans totaling $36,004 from his college education 
(Subparagraph 1.l). Applicant’s brother, a co-signer for these loans, borrowed from his 
Section 401(k) retirement account and paid the debt in full on a settled amount. This 
debt is resolved. Applicant repays his brother $200 each month to return the money to 
his brother’s retirement account. (Tr. 56-59, 85; Exhibits 2, K, L, R; Answer) 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in April 2003 (Subparagraph 1.m). He was 
discharged in bankruptcy in August 2003. The amount of the bankruptcy was about 
$10,000. Applicant filed bankruptcy to remove debts remaining from his first marriage. 
After receiving the discharge, Applicant incurred more debt that is now the subject of the 
SOR. These debts resulted from his move to another state, seeking better paying jobs, 
a period of unemployment as a result of the move, and other conditions. All the debts 
have been resolved or are being paid at the time of the hearing. Applicant inherited 
$5,000 from his grandmother and used that money to resolve many of these debts. (Tr. 
59-64; Exhibits 2, A-T; Answer) 
 
 Applicant owes a large tax debt that is not listed on his SOR. Applicant moved 
from another state to his present state of residence in 2010 when he thought he had a 
job commitment from an employer. However, his interim security clearance was denied 
and Applicant was unemployed for a while. Applicant owes the federal Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) about $8,000 from when he moved to from his condominium in his 
previous state of residence. Applicant received a home credit on his income taxes for 
the purchase of the condominium and did not live in it for the required minimum of three 
years. Applicant retained ownership of the condominium when he moved to his present 
location and rented it. Applicant will enter a repayment agreement with the IRS in the 
future. He made a payment and reduced his monthly withholding from his paycheck to 
one exemption to allow the IRS to take more money, which they will use each year to 
reduce this tax debt. This debt is being resolved by these withholding changes and 
refund collections by the IRS. (Tr. 64, 65, 85) 
 
 Applicant submitted one character letter from a co-worker at his present position. 
That person stated Applicant is trustworthy and his integrity and performance are above 
reproach. (Exhibit O) 
 
 Applicant submitted a one page budget. It documents his income, his payments 
to his current creditors, and monthly expenses. The budget shows Applicant has $369 
remaining after all expenses are paid, which he can use for other family expenses. 
(Exhibit Q)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
6 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $72,051 in delinquent debt from 2008 to the present time 
that was unpaid.  Applicant has 12 alleged delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  A 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy from 2003 was also alleged in the SOR. Applicant started 
resolving his debts in 2012. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the  person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant was unemployed for a three month period in approximately 2010. This 
situation adversely affected his ability to pay child support. It also made it difficult to 
support his family. Applicant moved to a new state for a better paying job. The job offer 
was withdrawn because he had no security clearance. Applicant finally found jobs and 
worked his way up to his present position. Now he seeks another job. Those conditions 
were largely beyond his control and caused his inability to pay his student loans and 
other debts in a timely manner. Now he has paid or is resolving on an installment basis 
all listed debts. AG ¶ 20 (b) applies. 
  
Applicant paid or is paying his debts in an orderly manner. All the delinquent 
debts have been addressed. Therefore, there are clear indications from the evidence he 
presented that the financial problems are under control and being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) 
applies.  
 
Applicant has focused his efforts to pay all debts in some manner. At the same 
time he is paying a garnishment for child support from his first marriage. Applicant paid 
all of his debts, including student loans with the help of his brother. He is repaying his 
brother for that loan. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to 
repay his delinquent debts. He has resolved in some way all of the debts listed in the 
SOR. He will arrange an installment payment plan with the IRS to pay the tax debt 
resulting from his move to another state and failing to live in his former home for at least 
three years to obtain the tax benefit. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant addressed all his 
 
8 
 
 
delinquent debts in a responsible manner. He used his inheritance of $5,000 to pay 
many of the debts. He negotiated a settlement and entered installment payment 
agreements. His brother resolved the student loan debt because, as a co-signer of the 
loan, its delinquent status was adversely affecting his credit score. Applicant now 
repays his brother for that loan. All debts are resolved or will be within the next year. 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.m:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
