 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00919 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding drug involvement. Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a 
Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On April 30, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Division A (CAF) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 ((SF 86), dated September 30, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR. In a sworn statement, dated May 
19, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing “unless a hearing is deemed 
necessary.”2 It remains unclear why the matter was assigned as a hearing, as there is 
no evidence of a hearing being requested by either party. The issue was not raised as 
an unresolved procedural matter by either party during the hearing, and no objections to 
the nature of the process were made.3 Department Counsel indicated the Government 
was prepared to proceed on August 20, 2014. The case was assigned to me on August 
21, 2014. A Notice of Hearing was issued on August 27, 2014, and I convened the 
hearing, as scheduled, on September 18, 2014.  
 
During the hearing, two Government exhibits (GE 1 and GE 2) and two Applicant 
exhibits (AE 1 and AE 2) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on September 29, 2014. I kept 
the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that 
opportunity. He submitted six documents which were marked as AE C through AE H 
and admitted into evidence as without objection. The record closed on September 25, 
2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR under drug involvement (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.). Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as a software engineer with his current employer since September 2013.4 He 
never served in the U.S. military,5 and never held a security clearance.6 A June 2007 
high school graduate, Applicant received his bachelor’s degree (cum laude) in May 
2011 and his master’s degree in July 2013.7 He has never been married.8 
                                                          
2
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated May 19, 2014. 
 
3
 Transcript (Tr.). at 11. 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
5
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 18. 
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 39. Applicant’s application for a security clearance with another government agency 
resulted in the processing for that clearance being suspended in March 2012. 
 
7
 Tr. at 36; GE 1, supra note 1, at 12; AE A (Official Academic Transcript, dated September 17, 2014). 
 
3 
                                      
 
Drug Involvement  
 
Applicant was a polysubstance experimenter and abuser whose substances of 
choice were several illegal drugs, including marijuana, Psilocybin mushrooms, cocaine, 
and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), as well as two prescription drugs, including liquid 
codeine and Adderall. His use of drugs never resulted in a positive drug test or incidents 
involving the police or judicial authorities, and he never sought or received treatment for 
his drug use.9 The sole sources for the information developed regarding Applicant’s 
drug involvement are his self-reported responses to inquiries in his SF 86, in his U.S. 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interviews, in his responses to the SOR, and 
during the hearing. 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.): Applicant was initially exposed to marijuana during the 
summer following his high school graduation in 2007 when he was 18 years old. Over 
the period continuing until October 2012, he generally attended parties and small 
gatherings with friends and teammates where marijuana was freely provided. Applicant 
smoked marijuana in cigarettes or pipes more than 75 times, but less than 100 
occasions during that five-year period, with most of that use occurring during the first 
three years.10 On five or six of those occasions during 2012, he contributed or 
reimbursed friends for the cost of the marijuana used, but never actually approached 
any drug dealers to purchase it.11 Applicant’s motivation for using marijuana was 
essentially to fit in because 90 percent of his college teammates used drugs and 
alcohol.12 He acknowledged it was wrong, and it was not the way he was raised, but he 
simply made poor decisions when he was influenced by his peers.13 During 2011 and 
2012, Applicant started to understand that he did not want to continue using marijuana, 
and he no longer felt any enticement to use marijuana again.14 He has abstained from 
using marijuana since October 2012.15 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c. and 1.d.):  On one occasion in October 2009, while on a camping trip 
with his roommates, Applicant was offered Psilocybin mushrooms. Since his roommates 
were going to use them, out of curiosity, and with no reason not to do so, he accepted 
their offer. Applicant paid his roommate for 1/16th of an ounce of the substance, and he 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 20.  
 
9
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated November 26, 2013), at 3. 
 
10
 Tr. at 25, 37. 
 
11
 GE 2, supra note 9, at 2; GE 2 (Investigator’s Note, dated February 10, 2014); Tr. at 25-27. 
 
12
 Tr. at 25. 
 
13
 Tr. at 26. 
 
14
 Tr. at 26; GE 1, supra note 1, at 34. 
 
15
 Tr. at 24. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
ingested it.16 He has not subsequently used Psilocybin mushrooms and does not intend 
to ever use them again.17  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): On one occasion during the period August to October 2010, while 
at a party with friends, one of Applicant’s roommates offered him a very small amount of 
cocaine. Applicant initially rejected the offer, but when he was told he did not have to 
ingest it and could simply dab it on his gums, he, out of curiosity changed his mind and 
accepted the substance.18 It was furnished to him without cost.19 He rubbed the 
substance on his gums, but because so little of the substance was used, he did not feel 
any effect from it.20 Applicant regretted trying the cocaine and vowed to never use it 
again.21  
 
 (SOR ¶¶ 1.f. and 1.g.): On three occasions during the period March 2012 to May 
2013, Applicant experimented with LSD, or what he referred to as “acid.” The initial 
incident occurred during his 2012 spring break while with teammates on a “bonding” trip 
following a tournament. One of his teammates furnished the substance to all of the 
other members, and everyone, but one person, tried it. Applicant reimbursed his 
teammate for two “hits” of the substance, both of which he swallowed.22 The second 
incident occurred later that summer while at a party with friends when a “hit” of the 
substance was furnished without cost. Applicant swallowed the substance, but there 
was no resulting effect.23 The last occasion occurred shortly before graduation while he 
was with roommates and friends celebrating a friend’s discharge from the Army. One of 
Applicant’s friends furnished the substance for free to those who wanted it, and once 
again, Applicant swallowed a “hit.”24 Applicant has not used LSD since that last 
occasion in May 2013 and declared that he has no interest in using LSD ever again. He 
explained his experimentation with LSD was something he did with friends from school 
purely to have fun.25  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.): On one occasion in about October 2010, as Applicant’s roommate 
was recovering from flu-like symptoms, Applicant and his roommate consumed the 
                                                          
16
 GE 2, supra note 9, at 2; GE 1, supra note 1, at 35; Tr. at 27-28. 
 
17
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 35. 
 
18
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 35; GE 2, supra note 9, at 2; Tr. at 28-29. 
 
19
 GE 2, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
20
 Tr. at 28. 
 
21
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 35. 
 
22
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 36; GE 2, supra note 9, at 2; Tr. at 29. 
 
23
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 36; GE 2, supra note 9, at 2; Tr. at 30. 
 
24
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 36; GE 2, supra note 9, at 2; Tr. at 30. 
 
25
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 36. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
unused portion of his roommate’s prescribed liquid codeine, essentially to experience 
“high-like” effects.26 Applicant did not pay for the portion that he consumed.27  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.i.): On three occasions between May 2009 and May 2013, Applicant 
swallowed one-half of an Adderall pill to enhance his focus and better enable him to 
study for tests and work on school projects.28 He was of the impression that Adderall 
was considered a “magic study drug,” but that was simply an illusion.29 Applicant did not 
pay for the pills that he used.30  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that this period of his behavior in his life was immature 
and his reckless behavior reflects poorly on his character.31 He has disassociated 
himself from the friends and former teammates who were involved in drug use.32 His 
girlfriend is not a drug user, and he rarely goes to bars or concerts.33 After he graduated 
and started looking for employment, Applicant realized he needed to grow up and 
mature, so he made a decision to quit using drugs. He does not intend to ever use 
illegal drugs again34 and would be willing to undergo a monthly drug test for the rest of 
his life, if necessary.35 On September 9, 2014, Applicant submitted a written statement, 
as follows: “I hereby state my intention to never abuse any drug in the future. If at any 
time I violate this statement, I agree to automatic revocation of any held security 
clearance.”36 
 
 Aside from his professional and social activities, Applicant is an active member of 
his church, and he has been voluntarily involved in community service with a children’s 
organization.37 
 
Character References  
 
Applicant’s college team coach, now a corporate manager, noted that Applicant 
displayed leadership and practiced honesty during their five years together, and that he 
                                                          
26
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 37; GE 2, supra note 9, at 2; Tr. at 31, 38. 
 
27
 GE 2, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
28
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 37; GE 2, supra note 9, at 2; Tr. at 31, 38. 
 
29
 Tr. at 38-39. 
 
30
 GE 2, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
31
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2. 
 
32
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2. 
 
33
 Tr. at 35-36. 
 
34
 GE 2, supra note 9, at 3. 
 
35
 Tr. at 35. 
 
36
 AE B (Statement, dated September 9, 2014). 
 
37
 Tr. at 39-40. 
 
6 
                                      
 
completely trusts Applicant’s judgment, decision-making, and reliability.38 Applicant’s 
girlfriend, a nurse’s aide studying to be a registered nurse, has been in a close 
relationship with Applicant since October 2013. She considers him to be trustworthy, 
reliable, honest, and gentle, and she is confident that he is committed to avoiding future 
drug use.39 One former colleague, who served as Applicant’s functional lead and 
eventually his direct supervisor, trusts Applicant implicitly and supports his application 
for a security clearance.40 Two current colleagues, one of who serves as Applicant’s 
work-team leader, have characterized Applicant as very professional in behavior and 
appearance, as well as honest, reliable, and dependable.41 A former fellow research 
student and current friend considers Applicant to be professional, very respectful of 
privacy, and trustworthy.42  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”43 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”44   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
38
 AE F (Character Reference, dated September 25, 2014). 
 
39
 AE H (Character Reference, dated September 22, 2014). 
 
40 AE E (Character Reference, dated September 22, 2014). 
 
41
 AE C (Character Reference, dated September 22, 2014); AE D (Character Reference, dated September 
22, 2014). 
 
42
 AE G (Character Reference, dated September 24, 2014). 
 
43
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
44
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”45 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.46  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”47 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”48 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
45
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
46
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
47
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
48
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
8 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 25(a), any drug abuse (see above definition), is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, 
under AG ¶ 25(c), illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, may 
raise security concerns. Applicant was a polysubstance experimenter and abuser 
whose substances of choice were several illegal drugs, including marijuana, Psilocybin 
mushrooms, cocaine, and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), as well as two prescription 
drugs, including liquid codeine and Adderall. He contributed to, or purchased outright, 
some of the substances used. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) have been established. 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying conditions 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Under AG ¶ 26(b), 
drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where there is a demonstrated intent 
not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
9 
                                      
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. Applicant’s experimentation and use of drugs took 
place in a university setting, surrounded by teammates and college friends. His one-
time experimentation with Psilocybin mushrooms, cocaine, and liquid codeine, as well 
as his three-time experimentation with LSD and Adderall all ceased before he 
graduated from college in May 2013. The Psilocybin mushroom incident occurred in 
October 2009. The liquid codeine incident and the cocaine incident both occurred in 
October 2010. The last experimentation with LSD and use of Adderall both ceased in 
May 2013. In addition, Applicant’s more frequent use of marijuana ceased in October 
2012. His motivation was generally to fit in with his peers and because of curiosity. His 
use of Adderall was to enhance his focus and to better enable him to study for tests and 
work on school projects. Applicant’s use of drugs never resulted in a positive drug test 
or incidents involving the police or judicial authorities, and he never sought or received 
treatment for his drug use. Despite his drug involvement, there is substantial reason to 
recognize Applicant’s honesty and integrity. As noted above, the sole sources for the 
information developed regarding Applicant’s drug involvement are his self-reported 
responses to inquiries in his SF 86, in his OPM interviews, in his responses to the SOR, 
and during the hearing. Without his honesty, the issue might never have been 
uncovered. 
Applicant realized he needed to grow up and mature, so he made a decision to 
quit using drugs. He has demonstrated an intention not to abuse any drugs in the future. 
For example, he has disassociated himself from his former drug-using and drug-
supplying associates and contacts; he has changed and avoided the college 
environment where the drugs were used; he has been completely drug-free and 
abstinent since May 2013, nearly 18 months ago; and he has signed a statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any future violation. In addition, he 
would be willing to undergo a monthly drug test for the rest of his life, if necessary. 
Applicant’s new outlook regarding substance abuse and his period of sustained 
abstinence from any of the drugs reflect Applicant’s substantial efforts to demonstrate 
an intention not to abuse any drugs in the future. Applicant’s drug involvement is 
unlikely to continue or recur, and no longer casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
10 
                                      
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my analysis below.      
 
There is substantial evidence supporting the security concerns. Applicant was a 
polysubstance experimenter and abuser of various drugs and substances. His most 
recent use of any such drug or substance occurred in May 2013.  
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. His 
experimentation or use of the various drugs and substances took place while Applicant 
was a student and his motivation was generally to fit in with his peers and because of 
curiosity. His use of Adderall was to enhance his focus and to better enable him to study 
for tests and work on school projects. He was merely 25 years old during the hearing. 
Applicant’s use of drugs never resulted in a positive drug test or incidents involving the 
police or judicial authorities, and he never sought or received treatment for his drug use. 
There is substantial reason to recognize Applicant’s honesty and integrity, for the sole 
sources for the information developed regarding his drug involvement are his self-
reports. Without his honesty, the issue might never have been uncovered. 
 
Applicant’s lengthy periods of drug abstinence are viewed favorably, and he 
should be encouraged to continue. Applicant has established a pattern of abstinence 
that enables me to conclude that his substance use and abuse problems have been put 
behind him and will not recur. 
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.49 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. This decision should serve as a warning that his 
failure to continue his abstinence from drugs will adversely affect his future eligibility for 
a security clearance.50 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all 
                                                          
49
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
50
 While this decision should serve as a warning to Applicant, the decision, including the warning, should not 
be interpreted as being contingent on future monitoring of Applicant’s drug abstinence. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) has no authority to attach conditions to an applicant’s security clearance. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 06-26686 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-04302 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2005); 
ISCR Case No. 03-17410 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0109 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has 
mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. (See AG && 2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated and overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
