 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-00894 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 26, 2013, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On April 25, 2014, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing in an undated document. Applicant 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On July 29, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
on August 5, 2014. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on August 18, 2014. 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that 
would have expired on September 17, 2014. I received the case assignment on October 
9, 2014. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the six allegations in the SOR. They allege financial 
delinquencies totaling $64,903. (Items 1, 2)  
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He is married and has a teenaged stepdaughter. He is 
sponsored for a security clearance by a defense contractor. He does not have a security 
clearance now, or with prior employers. Applicant was born in 1980 and graduated from 
high school in 1999. He does not have a college degree. (Items 1, 3, 6) 
 
 Applicant owes six debts, none of which he has paid or made any effort to pay. 
The delinquencies date from 2007 and go through to 2008. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant admits he owes a credit card company $2,255 (Subparagraph 1.a). He 
opened the card in 2000 and the debt has been unpaid since 2007. Applicant has not 
resolved this debt. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant admits he owes a lending company $40,765 on an account opened in 
2005 and delinquent since February 2008 (Subparagraph 1.b). The money is owed on a 
second mortgage on real estate Applicant purchased in 2003. This debt has not been 
resolved. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant admits he owes a credit card company $5,166 that has been 
delinquent since January 2008 (Subparagraph 1.c). This debt is unresolved. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant admits he owes a finance company $14,056 on a delinquent account 
since July 2008 (Subparagraph 1.d). This debt is unresolved. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant owes a debt collector $1,751 on an account delinquent since April 2008 
(Subparagraph 1.e). This debt is unresolved. (Items 1-6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant owes a debt collector $389 for an account that has been delinquent 
since December 2009 (Subparagraph 1.f). This debt is unresolved. (Items 1-6) 
  
 Applicant’s major financial difficulties began in 2003 when he became a real 
estate owner and investor. Problems arose during the next five years for him. In 2008 
Applicant’s two properties were foreclosed on by the mortgage lenders. Applicant rented 
units on the properties to tenants who were to pay him rent, with which he could pay the 
mortgage lender the $1,700 monthly payment. His tenants did not pay him, so he could 
not pay his mortgage. Applicant purchased his first property in May 2003, when he was 
23 years old, for $215,000. Then, in 2005, Applicant purchased another property for 
$250,000 as an investment. Applicant did not disclose his annual income from 
employment between 2003 and 2008 or demonstrate in any way he could afford to 
purchase these two properties for over $400,000 total cost, and service at least $3,400 
in monthly mortgage payments on the two properties at the same time. (Items 1-6) 
 
 The SOR listed debts that were related to those real estate investments in some 
way. The second debt in the SOR was the second mortgage on the first property he 
purchased. The last debt for $389 was for water tank rentals from the local utility he 
installed in his rental properties and that remained there after the foreclosures on the 
two properties. Three other delinquent debts (Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d) were on 
credit cards he used to pay his mortgages each month on his two properties. The final 
debt on the SOR (Subparagraph 1.e) was owed to a landlord on an apartment Applicant 
rented when he lived in the South from 2006 to 2008. The landlord charged this amount 
for Applicant’s failure to give 60 days’ notice instead of 30 days when he vacated the 
apartment. (Item 6)  
 
 Applicant has made no effort to repay any of these debts. He did not provide any 
documents to show his tenants did not pay their rents or that he made any efforts to 
collect from them. Applicant did not submit any documents to show he attempted to 
resolve any of these six debts in any way. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
When evaluating applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant=s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2007 to the present, Applicant accumulated six delinquent debts, totaling 
$64,903 that remain unpaid or unresolved. These debts relate to two real estate 
properties Applicant owned between 2003 and 2005 that were taken in foreclosure in 
2008. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
  
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the financial burden and foreclosures were beyond his 
control and he acted responsibly under the circumstances. In 2003 when he purchased 
his first series of rental units Applicant was 23 years old. He did not disclose in the 
information he submitted with his Answer to the SOR what his annual income was, how 
he could afford the two rental properties he purchased between 2003 and 2005, and 
what efforts since 2008 he made to repay the credit card companies and bank from 
which he borrowed money to make monthly mortgage payments and take out a second 
mortgage. There is no evidence from Applicant that he made any effort since 2008 to 
resolve these six debts. He failed to meet his burden of proof on that issue and AG ¶ 20 
(b) does not apply. 
 
On the same facts none of the other mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has 
failed to submit any evidence he has done anything to resolve these $64,903 worth of 
debts relating to his failed real estate ventures in the past decade.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past six years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
