1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ADP Case No. 14-00911 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for a public trust position is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant applied for eligibility to occupy a sensitive automated data processing 
(ADP) position on August 29, 2013. On April 28, 2014, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F. DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 13, 2014; answered it on May 23, 2014; and 
requested a decision on the record without a hearing. On August 14, 2014, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case and sent a complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. The FORM consisted of Department Counsel’s brief and six documents, 
2 
 
which have been admitted as Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6. Applicant timely 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was received in evidence without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the three delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. His 
admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He served in the U.S. 
Air Force from January 1983 to December 1986 and was honorably discharged. He 
held a security clearance while in the Air Force. He attended college from June 1987 to 
February 1990 and received a bachelor’s degree.  
 
 Applicant owned and operated his own business from January 1999 to August 
2011. He also held a second part-time job from January 2003 to August 2011. He drew 
a salary from his business and reported it annually on his federal and state income tax 
returns. He filed quarterly returns for his business, but the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) returned them, stating that it could not locate his business. He did not contact the 
IRS about the problem with his quarterly returns. 
 
In August 2011, Applicant closed his business due to declining income, and he 
quit his part-time job to accept a full-time position in the private sector. In February 
2013, he began working for his current employer. In July 2013, he was briefly 
unemployed for about a month, because his employer’s federal contract expired and 
was then renewed in August 2013. (GX 3, PSI at 1.)  
 
 Applicant married in April 1983. He and his wife separated in July 2000 and 
divorced in August 2011. He has a 30-year-old son. 
 
 In 2006, the IRS audited Applicant’s business and determined that he owed 
taxes for tax years 2000 to 2002 and 2005 to 2008. The IRS filed a tax lien in 2005 for 
$72,227 (SOR ¶ 1.b) and a second tax lien in 2008 for $4,085 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant 
contacted the IRS after closing his business and finding a full-time job. He entered into 
a payment agreement with the IRS in July 2012, in which he paid $100 per month and 
his ex-wife paid $50 per month. In July 2013, he entered into another payment 
agreement to pay $230 per month. He has produced evidence that he paid as agreed 
through September 2014. Because they are divorced, Applicant and his ex-wife each 
receive separate statements for one-half of the total taxes owed. (AX A at 2.) 
 
 Applicant used student loans to help pay for his college education. Repayment of 
the loans was deferred for several years after he graduated because of his low income. 
He began making payments after his business was established, but he fell behind when 
his business income declined. His delinquent student loans, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, were 
referred to a collection agency in June 2012. (GX 6.) In 2013, Applicant disputed the 
amount of the delinquent student loans on the ground that he had not been given credit 
for payments he had made. (GX 3, PSI at 4.) He decided not to pursue the dispute after 
3 
 
he was accepted into a loan rehabilitation program in February 2014. The rehabilitation 
program required payments of $350 per month until October 2014, and he made the 
payments as agreed. As of August 2014, he owed $121,950, of which $41,691 was 
interest, and $23,872 was for fees. (AX A, Attachment B.)  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. DOD contractor personnel are 
entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable 
access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government 
must present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate 
burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or 
continue eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit bureau report, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations.”) The 
following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is partially established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous 
and not fully resolved. However, the federal income tax debts were the result of his 
unfamiliarity with the federal tax laws applicable to his business. These circumstances 
are not likely to recur. The delinquent student loans are not likely to recur because it is 
unlikely that Applicant will pursue further education or need to borrow money for his 
education. 
5 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is partially established. Applicant’s errors in computing his tax liability 
were due to his own mistakes and failure to obtain sound tax advice, not circumstances 
beyond his control. His brief period of unemployment in July 2013 was after his debts 
were already delinquent. His separation and divorce do not appear to have contributed 
to his financial problems. To the contrary, his ex-wife has contributed to repayment of 
the tax debt. However, the downturn in his business was a major factor in his inability to 
timely repay his student loans or to pay the federal taxes due after his business was 
audited. He acted responsibly by working a second part-time job when his income from 
his business declined. He began making payments on his tax debt in July 2012, has 
complied with his payment agreement, and has successfully completed a rehabilitation 
program for the student loans. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. There is no evidence that Applicant has 
sought or received financial counseling, but there is clear evidence that his financial 
problems are being resolved. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant has established payment agreements for his 
tax debt and student loans and has established a track record of compliance with the 
payment agreements.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns based on financial considerations. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with national security to grant him eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Guideline F (Financial Considerations):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
