 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-00974 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 22, 2013. On 
April 29, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 7, 2014; answered it in an undated 
document; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On August 13, 
2014, Department Counsel sent Applicant copies of the documents she intended to 
submit at the hearing. (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I). Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed on August 14, 2014, and the case was assigned to me on August 19, 2014. 
 
2 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
August 20, 2014, scheduling the hearing for September 9, 2014. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1, 2, and 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. GX 3 was not admitted, for the reasons set out below.  
 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through F, which were admitted without objection. I kept the 
record open until September 26, 2014, to enable Applicant to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX G through N, which were admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX G through N are 
attached to the record as HX II. Applicant submitted AX O and P in rebuttal to 
Department Counsel’s comments in HX II. Department Counsel’s surrebuttal to AX O 
and P is attached to the record as HX III. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
September 25, 2014. The record closed on October 6, 2014. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 GX 3 is an unauthenticated summary of a personal subject interview included in 
the report of investigation prepared for DOD by the Office of Personnel Management. 
As such, it is subject to the authentication requirement in the Directive ¶ E3.1.20. 
Applicant declined to waive the authentication requirement. Department Counsel stated 
that she intended to question Applicant in order to authenticate GX 3. (Tr. 20-21.) 
Applicant reviewed the document and commented that it was inaccurate and omitted 
important details favorable to him. (Tr. 24, 26-27.)1 I ruled that GX 3 would not be 
admitted as substantive evidence, but that Department Counsel would be allowed to 
question Applicant about the document during cross-examination. (Tr. 25.) 
 
 An administrative judge is required by Directive ¶ E3.1.10 to “conduct all 
proceedings in a fair, timely, and orderly manner.” This duty is especially important 
when an applicant appears pro se and is unfamiliar with the rules of evidence and 
procedure applicable to administrative hearings. 
 
 Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, Department Counsel is “responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence” to establish controverted facts. This responsibility 
includes presenting evidence on foundational issues such as authentication.  
 
 There is no specific requirement in the Directive for advance notice of testimony 
from witnesses, and no prohibition against calling an applicant as an authenticating 
witness. However, it is fundamentally unfair to require an applicant to authenticate a 
summary of a personal subject interview against him or her without advance notice. Pro 
se applicants often do not understand the significance of statements attributed to them 
in the summary of the personal subject interview. Review of a personal subject interview 
for accuracy requires careful reading, often requires review of personal financial files, 
                                                          
1 When later cross-examined about GX 3, Applicant repeatedly testified that it was inaccurate. (Tr. 98-
I02.) 
 
3 
 
and is best done in a non-confrontational atmosphere instead of the tense and 
sometimes intimidating atmosphere of an adversarial hearing. However, I need not rely 
on the concept of fundamental fairness in this case, because Applicant was unable to 
authenticate GX 3. 
 
 Authentication within the meaning of Directive ¶ E3.1.20 means producing 
“evidence sufficient to support a finding that the matter in question is what its proponent 
claims.” Fed. R. Evid. 901(a). GX 3 was offered as an accurate summary of what 
Applicant said during an interview by a security investigator. However, Applicant 
disputed its accuracy, and no other evidence was presented to establish that it was 
what it purported to be, i.e., an accurate summary of the interview.  
 
 Under Fed. R. Evid. 613, a witness may be questioned about a prior inconsistent 
statement, even if the statement is not admissible. Harris v. New York, 401 U.S. 222 
(1971). Thus, I permitted Department Counsel to confront Applicant with GX 3 and 
question him about it. His testimony about GX 3 and his testimony about the events 
covered in GX 3 was admissible, but the substantive evidence of the events at issue is 
his testimony, not GX 3. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g, 
with explanations, and he submitted evidence that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 
and 1.f were resolved. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated 
in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old computer-based-training instructor employed by a 
defense contractor since May 2008. He served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps 
from August 1989 to September 2000 and was honorably discharged. He received a 
security clearance while in the Marine Corps. In April 2014, he was suspended from his 
current job without pay, pending a decision on his security clearance. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 Applicant married in July 1994. He and his wife have three children, ages 14, 13, 
and 11. His wife has two adult sons, ages 21 and 25, from a previous relationship, who 
live with Applicant and his wife because they are financially unable to leave home. (Tr. 
46-48.) 
 
Applicant attended a university from August 2000 to August 2001 and a technical 
college from August 2002 to May 2003, but he did not receive a degree. He was 
employed in the automotive industry from November 2001 to February 2005. He and his 
wife purchased a home in November 2003 for $112,000, with no down payment. (Tr. 65, 
121.) They financed the purchase with a variable-rate loan for 80% of the purchase 
price and a second loan for the remaining 20%.2 When they bought the home, they also 
                                                          
2 It is not clear from the record whether the interest rate on the 20% loan was variable or fixed. The 20% 
loan is not alleged in the SOR. 
 
4 
 
installed a fence around the home, at a cost of about $3,000, to be paid in monthly $150 
installments.3 They were current on the fence payments until they filed a bankruptcy 
petition. (Tr. 65-67.) 
 
Starting in 2005, Applicant’s work hours were cut due to a downturn in the 
automotive industry. (Tr. 79-80.) A nationwide downturn in the housing markets was 
reinforced by a reduction in personnel at a military installation near his home and 
workplace, as a result of the military base alignment and consolidation (BRAC) 
program. (Tr. 40.) At the same time, the interest rate on the variable mortgage on their 
home rose dramatically. Their total payments on both loans rose from about $700 per 
month to more than $1,000 per month. (Tr. 43.) Furthering their financial distress, 
Applicant’s wife’s work hours as a dental assistant were cut back as the result of the 
BRAC reductions, and the dental office eventually closed. (Tr. 81-83.).  
 
In February 2005, Applicant began a new job with a federal contractor, located 
several hundred miles from the family home. He left his family behind, and worked as 
an electronic technician for this federal contractor until he began his current 
employment. He and his family lived apart and maintained two households. (GX 1 at 12-
14; Tr. 34-37.) While they were geographically separated, Applicant relied on his wife to 
pay the bills for the family home. (Tr. 36-38.) They tried to sell the family home but were 
unsuccessful because of the downturn in the housing market. (Tr. 40.) They could not 
refinance because they were upside down on their loans. (Tr. 77.) Applicant minimized 
the cost of maintaining two households by living in a single rented room. (Tr. 96-97.) 
 
 Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in September 2006. The 
bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The mortgage loan debts on their home were 
included in the bankruptcy in an effort to avoid foreclosure. Applicant hoped to sell the 
home, pay off their debts with the profit on the home, and have enough money to make 
a down payment on a home at his new job location. (Tr. 88-90.) His payment plan was 
confirmed in October 2006. The plan initially provided for payments of $150 to the 
trustee. (Tr. 91.) In May 2007, the payments to the bankruptcy trustee were increased to 
biweekly $300 payments. The record does not reflect the reason for the increased 
payments. He testified that he asked his attorney if they could remove the mortgage 
loan debt from the bankruptcy, and he was advised that their only option was to dismiss 
the bankruptcy. (Tr. 93.) 
 
On August 13, 2007, the trustee filed a motion to show cause for failure to make 
the required payments for May through July 2007. After a hearing on September 13, 
2007, Applicant and his wife were ordered to resume payments. A second motion to 
dismiss for failure to make payments was filed on August 21, 2008. The petition for 
bankruptcy was dismissed on August 24, 2008. When it was dismissed, Applicant was 
in arrears for $846 and had paid a total of $11,538 to the trustee. (GX 4.) He testified 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
3 The fence appears to have been a safety-related necessity rather than a discretionary purchase, 
because the home had a swimming pool. (Tr. 89.) 
 
5 
 
that he made $650 payments to the bankruptcy trustee from January to June 2008, and 
he proffered six carbon copies of the checks from his checkbook. (Tr. 107.) He was 
unable to produce evidence that the checks were sent and negotiated. However, he 
produced canceled checks reflecting that he made payments of $288.48 and $845.44 to 
the mortgage lender in February 2008 and payments of $791.12 and $288.48 in March 
2008. (AX G; AX H.)  
 
 While living apart, Applicant and his wife decided to divorce. After filing the 
divorce petition and incurring legal expenses in an amount not reflected in the record, 
they reconciled and decided to move the family to Applicant’s work location. The family 
moved to the new job location in November 2006. In 2008, they decided to allow the 
mortgage on the family home to be foreclosed. While the home was unoccupied, it was 
vandalized. After the lender declared the home a “natural disaster,” the insurance 
company paid the lender for the damage, and the lender applied the insurance 
proceeds to the balance due on the mortgage loan and charged off the balance. (GX 1 
at 38-39; GX 2 at 8-9; Tr. 39-40.) The lender foreclosed on this property, which was sold 
for $154,000 in March 2010. (GX 2 at 6; AX H.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he dealt with his creditors individually after the bankruptcy 
was dismissed, and that all the debts included in the bankruptcy either had been 
resolved or were being resolved, to the best of his knowledge. (Tr. 110-12.) The 
evidence concerning the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b, collection account for unpaid utilities, $122. This debt was for 
unpaid utilities in the family home on which the mortgage loan was foreclosed. It was 
paid in May 2014. (Answer to SOR, Enclosure 3; AX L; AX M at 2.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c, collection account for unpaid cell phone bill, $1,018. Applicant 
contacted the creditor and determined that this debt was a cell phone account that 
Applicant opened for his two stepsons. It was included in the bankruptcy and is 
unresolved. (Tr. 57.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, collection account for unpaid medical bill, $206. This debt was 
paid in May 2014. (Answer to SOR, Enclosure 2.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e, mortgage loan payments past due for $21,311, with total balance 
on the loan of $96,097. The mortgage was foreclosed and the property sold for 
 
6 
 
$154,000, which is more than the balance on the debt.4 Applicant did not receive an IRS 
Form 1099-A or 1099-C, reflecting a foreclosure sale.5 (Tr. 123-25, 127.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f, collection account for medical bill, $67. This debt was paid in May 
2014. (Answer to SOR, Enclosure 1; AX I.) 
 
 SOR 1.g, collection account for unpaid water bill, $220. This debt was the 
final water bill on the family home on which the mortgage loan was foreclosed. Applicant 
testified that he called the telephone number listed on his credit report and found that it 
goes directly to voice mail. He left a message, but received no response. In his post-
hearing submission, he stated that he had paid the bill and received a receipt, but he 
attached the receipt for the medical bill in SOR ¶ 1.f rather than the receipt for this debt. 
(AX G; AX I.) 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f were paid when Applicant received his 
income tax refund. (Tr. 62.) Before he was suspended, his pay was being garnished for 
$500 biweekly for the fence that he installed around the family home before the loan 
was foreclosed and the property was sold. (Tr. 62.) He notified the creditor’s lawyer that 
the garnishment would be interrupted because he was suspended without pay. He 
owed about $1,000 on this debt when garnishment was suspended. (Tr. 65-66.) This 
debt was included in the bankruptcy, but it is not alleged in the SOR.  
 
 In July 2014, after Applicant was suspended without pay for three months, he 
found another job. The defense contractor for whom he worked until April 2014 is 
holding his job open if his security clearance is continued. (Tr. 46-47.) However, he now 
earns $15 per hour instead of the $30 per hour he earned as a contractor employee. He 
is working ten hours a day, six days a week. (Tr. 112.) His wife works four days a week 
as a part-time dental assistant. (Tr. 44, 112.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he has a family budget, but it consists only of a list of 
expenses in the back of his checkbook. He keeps his list of expenses “either written 
down on a piece of paper or in [his] head.” He and his family are living paycheck to 
paycheck. (Tr. 114-15.) 
 
 Applicant’s operations manager, who has known him for eight years and regards 
him as a close friend, describes him as a person of good moral character and, 
                                                          
4 I left the record open to enable Department Counsel to submit evidence of the local law regarding 
deficiency judgments. (Tr. 124-25.) She did not submit any additional evidence. However, the question 
whether Applicant may be liable for a deficiency appears to be moot, because the sale price of the 
property exceeded the amount of the debt. 
 
5 It is possible that the IRS Form 1099-A or 1099-C was sent to the family home, where Applicant no 
longer resided. It is also possible that a Form 1099-C was not issued due to the Mortgage Forgiveness 
Debt Relief Act of 2007, which provides tax relief for forgiven mortgage debt, between 2007 and 2012, 
that was used to buy, build, or substantially improve a principal residence or to refinance debt incurred for 
those purposes.  
 
7 
 
“incredibly responsible.” He is aware of Applicant’s financial problems and is confident 
that he will “do whatever it takes” to resolve his debts. He states, “I feel strongly about 
[Applicant], his work ethic, and about his future with [his employer].” (AX K.) 
 
 Applicant’s former operations manager considers him adaptable and capable. He 
states that Applicant and his team received “countless accolades for professionalism, 
extensive knowledge, and the ability to motivate trainees.” (AX D.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor, who has known him for eight years, describes him as a 
person who makes sound decisions and is well trusted. He states that Applicant “is a 
man of his word and a man that I trusted and will continue to trust.” (AX N.) 
 
 Applicant’s regional manager considers him a role model for other employees. 
He describes him as a “loyal, trusted employee who can be counted on to get the job 
done without supervision.” (AX C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
 
8 
 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
September 2006, which was dismissed in August 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a). It also alleges the 
following delinquent debts: a utility bill for $122 (SOR ¶ 1.b); a cell phone bill for $1,018 
(SOR ¶ 1.c); medical bill for $206 (SOR¶ 1.d); a mortgage loan past due for $21,311 
with a total balance of $96,097 (SOR ¶ 1.e); a medical bill for $67 (SOR ¶ 1.f); and a 
water bill for $220 (SOR ¶ 1.g).  
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
9 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing, 
corroborated by his credit bureau report and bankruptcy records, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not fully established. Applicant’s delinquent debts were numerous, 
and some of them are not yet resolved. However, one of the major contributing 
circumstances that caused his financial distress was his ill-advised decision to buy a 
home with no down payment and financed by a variable-rate loan. He has learned his 
lesson, and that circumstance is not likely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. The rise in interest rates on Applicant’s loan was not a 
circumstance beyond his control, because he voluntarily agreed to a variable-interest 
loan. However, he encountered numerous circumstances beyond his control: his 
reduced income due to a downturn in the automotive industry, his wife’s loss of income, 
the added expense of maintaining two households, the legal expenses involved in the 
abandoned divorce action, the vandalism of his home while it was unoccupied, the 
failures of his adult stepsons to pay their cell phone bills, and the reduced marketability 
of their family home due to the adverse economic impact of the BRAC program. 
 
 
10 
 
 Although Applicant made some financial missteps due to his lack of experience, 
he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He stayed in contact with the lender on 
his home loans, he filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy instead of Chapter 7, and he paid 
$11,538 to the bankruptcy trustee until he could no longer afford the biweekly $350 
payments. He lived frugally while separated from his family. He sought other 
employment when he was suspended from his job with a defense contractor, and he 
has worked long hours to generate as much income as possible. Using his limited 
financial resources, he started resolving his smaller debts first, using an income tax 
refund to resolve the debts in SOR ¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f. He inadvertently neglected to 
attach a receipt for payment of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g to his post-hearing submission, 
but his candor at and after the hearing, coupled with his documentation of payment of 
his other debts, convinces me that he resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. Applicant received legal advice from his bankruptcy 
attorney and completed the financial counseling required by the bankruptcy court. There 
are “clear indications” that his financial problems are being resolved. His largest debts 
were resolved by the foreclosure sale of his home. Both he and his wife are employed. 
He has resolved the two utility debts related to the home lost to foreclosure. The only 
unresolved debt alleged in the SOR is the cell phone debt incurred by his two adult 
stepsons. He was making regular payments on the fence debt, not alleged in the SOR, 
until he filed his bankruptcy petition. He was within two months of resolving the fence 
debt when he was suspended, and he notified this debtor of his suspension without pay. 
He is determined to resolve the fence debt as soon as his financial situation makes it 
possible. If he is able to return to his job with a defense contractor, he will double his 
current earnings, greatly enhancing his ability to quickly resolve his remaining debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established, for the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG 
¶ 20(c) and the following additional considerations. A security clearance adjudication is 
an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-
collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the 
SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines do not require that 
an individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they 
require that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 
2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has systematically addressed his delinquent 
debts, starting with the Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He paid more than $11,500 toward 
resolving his debts through the bankruptcy. When the bankruptcy payments were 
increased beyond his means, he tried to work directly with his creditors. He is living 
frugally and working hard. He has resolved several smaller debts, allowing him to focus 
on the delinquent cell phone bill and the remaining payments on the fence debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
 
11 
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably for 11 years in the U.S. Marine Corps and has held a 
security clearance since his Marine Corps service. He has worked for defense 
contractors for nine years. He has earned the trust and respect of his supervisors. He 
was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He has a job waiting for him if his 
security clearance is continued.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    For Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
