 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00704 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concern. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA 
acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 7, 2014, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on July 18, 2014. The FORM was mailed to Applicant who 
 
2 
 
 
received it on August 4, 2014. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She submitted exhibits (AE) A 
through D. All exhibits were admitted into the record without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on October 1, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she denied both allegations. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. She is married and has four children, including two 
stepchildren. She has worked for her current employer, a defense contractor, since 
June 2003. She has a bachelor’s degree. Because of an ongoing medical condition, she 
has been drawing short-term disability benefits since June 2013. Her husband has been 
unemployed since February 2013 and is drawing benefits from that status. She has no 
previous military experience, but she has held a security clearance since 1983 with no 
apparent incidents.1  
  
 The SOR lists two delinquent debts including a charged-off bank loan in the 
amount of approximately $33,447 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and federal income tax debt for tax years 
2006 and 2007 in the amount of approximately $5,615 (SOR ¶ 1.b). The bank debt is 
supported by a credit report from March 2014.2  
 
 Applicant purchased a home in July 2006. She financed the purchase with a first 
mortgage of about $208,000 and a second mortgage of about $37,000, both with the 
same bank. A successor bank acquired both mortgages in 2007. In November 2007, 
her first loan went into foreclosure status. She made her mortgage loan current by using 
funds from her 401(k). In 2010, she began negotiating a loan modification with her 
mortgage holder. She was able to secure the loan modification, and as a result she 
believed her two original mortgages were rolled into one single mortgage, which 
resulted in her new mortgage balance of approximately $245,000. Her current mortgage 
balance is $237,220 and she is current on her payments.3 
 
 In November 2012, Applicant became aware that her original second mortgage 
loan was listed as a “charged-off” account on her credit report. She could not 
understand this entry because this loan had been rolled over into her subsequent 
mortgage modification. She disputed the item on her credit report. She contacted her 
bank before the issuance of the SOR, but the bank maintained that the information it 
provided to the credit reporting services was accurate. She was never made aware of 
                                                          
1 Items 4-5. 
 
2 Items 1, 5-7. 
 
3 Item 4, 6-7; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
 
this debt and received no billing statements. This debt is the subject of the allegation 
stated in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant explained that she misplaced the loan modification 
documents, but provided two emails from December 2010 that discussed the 
modification issue.4  
 
 In February 2013, Applicant proposed a payment plan to pay her 2006 and 2007 
federal tax debt in the amount of $5,615. She then provided documentary evidence 
showing she has paid the debt for both tax years in May 2013. The federal tax debt is 
resolved (SOR ¶ 1.b).5 
 Applicant’s last two job appraisals rated her with a score of 3.48 out of a possible 
5.0. She is viewed as a valuable contributor by her employer. She is also the recipient 
of several team awards and individual commendation awards for outstanding 
performance.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
                                                          
4 Item 4, 6; AE B.  
 
5 Items 4, 6.  
 
6 AE C-D. 
 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant had delinquent tax debts and an issue with a second mortgage. I find 
both disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant resolved her federal tax debts and is current on her modified mortgage 
payments. AG ¶ 20(d) applies. The record contains sufficient evidence supporting 
Applicant’s claim that the second mortgage was rolled into the first mortgage when the 
loan was modified. Even without the mortgage loan modification documentation, I make 
reasonable inferences from the Applicant’s statements, the loan balance listed in the 
credit report, and her email correspondence with the bank to so conclude. AG ¶ 20(e) 
applies.  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There 
is also no requirement that an applicant pay every debt listed in the SOR, only that he 
remove concerns about his reliability and trustworthiness raised by those debts. See 
ISCR Case No. 14-00504 at 3 (App. Bd. August 4, 2014). Applicant has taken 
significant action to implement the plan to resolve her debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s work 
performance and outstanding contributions to her job. I also considered her current 
disability and her husband’s period of unemployment. The evidence supports that she is 
on track toward financial stability. She paid her federal tax debt and modified her 
mortgage. The record contains sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
