 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01127 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie Young, Esq. 
 
 
October 24, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had eight delinquent debts totaling $43,512, identified on the Statement 
of Reasons (SOR). Applicant resolved four of his smaller debts, but remains indebted in 
the approximate amount of $35,948, which he has made little effort to resolve. 
Additionally, Applicant admitted using marijuana infrequently between April 2000 and 
June 2008. His use included one occasion after being granted a security clearance. He 
failed to fully disclose the extent of his marijuana use on two Security Clearance 
Applications. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his Financial 
Considerations, Drug Involvement, and Personal Conduct. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) on 
October 20, 2013. On April 30, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
 
2 
 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on May 19, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA).  
 
On June 30, 2014, the Department of Defense issued an Amendment to the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing additional security concerns under 
the guidelines for Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct. Applicant Answered the 
Amended SOR allegations on June 18, 2014. The case was assigned to me on July 22, 
2014.  
 
A notice of hearing was issued to Applicant on July 30, 2014, scheduling a 
hearing for September 22, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, 
which were admitted into the record without objection. Applicant requested that the 
record be left open to allow him to submit additional evidence and his request was 
granted. On October 17, 2014, Applicant presented additional exhibits, marked AE H 
through AE Q. Department Counsel had no objections to AE H through AE Q, and they 
were admitted into the record. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on September 30, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 30 years old. He is married, but separated from his wife. He has no 
children. He served on Active Duty in the Marine Corps from 2003 to 2005. He received 
an Honorable Discharge through Administrative Separation due to a medical condition. 
He held a security clearance while in the Marine Corps. His first clearance was issued in 
October 2003.1 (GE 1; AE L; AE M; AE Q; Tr. 30-32, 53, 57, 78.) 
 
Applicant has worked for a government contractor since 2010 and seeks a 
security clearance in connection with that employment. He was employed by a different 
government contractor from 2009 to 2010, with breaks in employment from August 2010 
to October 2010; March 2010 to April 2010; November 2009 to January 2010; and 
January 2009 to September 2009. From January 2007 to January 2009, he was 
employed in several different positions in the private sector. He was unemployed from 
September 2006 to January 2007. From March 2006 to July 2006 he was employed in 
several different private sector jobs. He was also unemployed from August 2005 to 
March 2006. (GE 1; AE Q; Tr. 28-29.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance, in part, 
because he made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
                                                          
1 Applicant first submitted a security clearance application on August 9, 2002, but that application was 
never processed. 
 
3 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified eight delinquent debts totaling $43,512. Applicant’s debts appear in credit 
reports entered into evidence dated November 26, 2013; June 26, 2014; and 
September 21, 2014. Applicant admitted all of the debts as alleged in subparagraphs 
1.a through 1.d, and 1.f through 1.h. He denied subparagraph 1.e. (Answer; GE 5; GE 
6; GE 7.) 
 
Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to periods of unemployment and 
underemployment, outlined above. He testified that he learned his lesson and no longer 
relies on credit cards. He has a monthly net remainder of $3,085.40 and makes the 
maximum contribution to his 401K savings plan. He has approximately $18,000 in his 
bank accounts and more than $80,000 in his investment portfolio. (AE B; AE C; AE D; 
AE E; Tr. 53, 56, 77, 89.) 
 
The debt identified in SOR subparagraph 1.a is owed to a college for a 
delinquent tuition in the approximate amount of $10,284. Applicant admits this debt in 
his answer. It has been past due since 2008 or 2009. Applicant incurred this debt after 
he completed one semester at the college. He was billed for the second semester, 
although he asserts he did not register for classes. He claimed he disputed this debt, 
but provided no documentation of the dispute. His last communication with this creditor 
was approximately four years ago. He testified that he is willing to resolve this debt, but 
did not present any documentation to show that he has taken steps in that direction. 
This debt is unresolved. (AE A; Tr. 43-46, 62-63.) 
 
The debt in SOR subparagraph 1.b became delinquent in the amount of 
approximately $4,168, after Applicant’s motorcycle was repossessed in 2007 or 2008. It 
represents the amount still owed on the loan after the motorcycle was resold. Applicant 
presented a document that shows he settled this account for $4,167.76 on February 8, 
2012. It is resolved. (AE A; AE J; Tr. 46-47, 63-65.) 
 
The debt in SOR subparagraph 1.c is for a store credit card account that is 
delinquent in the amount of $374. This debt has been past due since 2007. Applicant 
testified that he paid this debt, but he failed to present any documentation to support his 
claim. This debt is not resolved. (GE 5; Tr. 47, 65-67.) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a bank for a delinquent credit card account in the 
approximate amount of $2,239 as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d. This debt has 
been past due since 2007. Applicant testified he had resolved this account. Applicant’s 
June 2014 credit report reflects this debt was “paid in full.” This debt is resolved. (GE 5; 
GE 6; GE 7; AE A; Tr. 48, 67.) 
 
Applicant was alleged to be indebted on a collection account for approximately 
$420, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.e. He presented documentation to show that 
this debt is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.h. It was resolved on 
October 1, 2014, for a payment of $332.75. (GE 5; AE H; AE I; Tr. 49-50, 69-70, 72-73.) 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant is indebted on a repossessed vehicle in the approximate amount of 
$19,395, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.f. This debt has been past due since 2008. 
It appears on his September 2014 credit report as an unpaid collection account. 
Applicant testified that he was not aware he had further obligations on the vehicle after it 
was repossessed. He has not been in contact with this creditor since 2010. This debt is 
unresolved. (GE 7; AE A; Tr. 50-51, 70-71.) 
 
The debt in SOR subparagraph 1.g is for a store credit card account that is 
delinquent in the amount of $5,895. This debt has been past due since 2007. He 
testified that he paid this debt, but he failed to present any documentation to support his 
claim. This debt is not resolved. (GE 5; Tr. 51-52, 71-72.) 
 
Applicant presented documentation that he resolved one additional delinquency 
on July 20, 2010. However, the name of the creditor does not appear to correspond with 
any of the allegations on the SOR. Applicant had the burden to identify and explain this 
submission, and he failed to explain its direct relevance to the specific subparagraphs 
alleged. It does show that he responsibly settled an additional account in 2010. (AE K.) 
 
The Government alleged in the Amended SOR that Applicant should be 
disqualified from holding a security clearance under the guideline for Drug Involvement, 
due to his use of marijuana from April 2000 to June of 2008, including marijuana use 
while he was holding a security clearance. The Amended SOR also alleged concerns 
under the guideline for Personal Conduct, because Applicant deliberately failed to fully 
disclose his marijuana use on his August 2002 and June 2003 security clearance 
applications. In his Answer to the Amended SOR, Applicant admitted to marijuana use 
on two occasions in January 2000; once in November 2004; and once in June 2008. He 
further admitted that he used marijuana while holding a security clearance in 2004. 
 
Applicant testified that he experimented with marijuana prior to his enlistment in 
the Marine Corps, but does not recall the specific number of times. On his security 
clearance applications dated August 8, 2002, and June 6, 2003, he identified that he 
used marijuana two times in January 2000. (GE 2; GE 3.) He testified that his Marine 
Corps recruiter told him to disclose using marijuana twice during his recruitment. During 
his December 2013 interview with a special agent regarding his security clearance 
application, he disclosed that he first began smoking marijuana at age 16 (in 2000). He 
stated he used it at parties on 10-12 occasions during high school and twice after he 
graduated from high school. (GE 4; Tr. 32-34, 84-88.)  
 
Applicant abstained from marijuana use after he entered the Marine Corps until 
2004. He disclosed that he used marijuana once in 2004, while on Active Duty with the 
Marine Corps. He acknowledged that he held a security clearance at that time. He used 
marijuana on that one occasion in an attempt to self-medicate a medical condition that 
caused him significant pain. He failed to self-report his marijuana use to his chain of 
command. He realized that marijuana use was illegal, in violation of Marine Corps 
regulations, and in violation of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. (Tr. 34-37, 80-83, 
88.) 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant testified that he used marijuana on one additional occasion in 2008. He 
explained that he was unemployed and experiencing financial hardship when a friend 
offered him marijuana. He took multiple puffs on the marijuana on a single occasion. 
(Tr. 37-40, 91.) 
 
On his October 20, 2013 security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that 
from April 2000 to June 2008, he “experimented approx[imately] 12-15 times” with 
marijuana. (GE 1.) He testified at hearing that he disclosed the dates to the best of his 
memory, but that he did not recall specific dates. (Tr. 40-42.) 
 
Applicant regrets his marijuana use. He testified it was foolish and has vowed not 
to use marijuana in the future. He claimed he attempted to be forthright with the 
Government by disclosing his marijuana usage, although his memory of the times and 
frequency was not exact. (Tr. 40-42.) 
 
Applicant is respected for his honesty, trustworthiness, and integrity by his 
manager, brother, former co-worker, and team member, as documented in the letters of 
support they submitted. (AE F; AE G; AE O; AE P.) He has received a certificate from 
his employer for his meritorious service in support of Operation Enduring Freedom while 
working as a Government contractor overseas. (AE N.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
6 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. The relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant incurred approximately $43,512 in delinquent 
debt. One debt (SOR subparagraphs 1.e and 1.h) was identified twice on the SOR, so 
his alleged debt actually totals approximately $43,092. The debts have been delinquent 
since approximately 2007 or 2008. While Applicant recently began to address the debts, 
in its entirety, the Government has established its prima facie case against Applicant. 
The evidence shows Applicant’s “inability or unwillingness to satisfy” his debts from 
 
7 
 
2007 to 2010 and that he continues to have delinquent accounts. He has an overall 
“history of not meeting financial obligations” during that time period. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 were 
considered, including:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board has held, “A security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”2 Security 
clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection proceedings. 
Rather, the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to 
make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”3  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts, which are listed on the SOR, began accumulating in 
2007. He has resolved four (SOR allegations 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.h) of his delinquent 
accounts totaling approximately $6,826. Four debts (SOR allegations 1.a, 1.c, 1.f, and 
1.g), totaling $35,948, are unresolved. Because he failed to address the majority of his 
indebtedness, he did not demonstrate that such problems are unlikely to continue or 
recur. His reliability and trustworthiness in managing delinquent debts remain a 
concern. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant provided some evidence that his financial problems arose as a result of 
unemployment and underemployment. Those were circumstances beyond his control. 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
3 AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
8 
 
However, he failed to provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances or that he attempted to resolve his unpaid debts while they were 
accumulating over the past six years. AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application.  
 
 Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling, and there are no 
clear indications that his delinquent debts are under control; thus, AG ¶ 20(c) has no 
application. He did not provide documentation to demonstrate that he has made a good-
faith effort to resolve four of the eight SOR-listed debts. Hence, AG ¶ 20(d) has no 
application. There is no documentation that Applicant had a reasonable basis to dispute 
any delinquent debt and successfully resolved it through the dispute process. AG ¶ 
20(e) has no application.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant used marijuana from 
approximately 2000 to 2008, including use in 2004 while holding a security clearance. 
The facts established through the Government’s evidence and through Applicant’s 
admissions, raise security concerns under all of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
 
9 
 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant used marijuana at parties on 10-12 occasions during high school and 
twice after he graduated from high school. He abstained from marijuana use from 2002 
to 2004, but decided to use it again in 2004 despite having a security clearance. 
Applicant’s decision to use marijuana in 2004, while possessing a security clearance, 
was in clear violation of Marine Corps regulations, security regulations, Federal law, and 
state law. He again abstained for approximately four years, but chose to use it again in 
2008. His decision to use marijuana infrequently over a period of eight years casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Given the long 
periods of abstinence between use and his poor judgment in deciding to use marijuana 
while holding a security clearance, I cannot hold that future use is unlikely to recur. In 
this instance, an appropriate period of abstinence has not been demonstrated. The 
evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 26(a). 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) has limited application. Applicant stated that he does not intend to 
use marijuana in the future. These are factors that weigh in Applicant’s favor. However, 
as noted above, Applicant has not yet demonstrated an appropriate period of 
abstinence. Further, the evidence does not contain an explicit “signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” Applicant has not 
provided sufficient evidence to meet his burden of proof to overcome the concerns 
raised by his drug involvement. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
 
10 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Applicant was dishonest about his marijuana use on his security clearance 
applications dated August 8, 2002, and June 6, 2003, when he identified that he used 
marijuana two times in January 2000. He deliberately minimized the extent of his 
marijuana use. He knew his actions were illegal, a violation of security policies, and in 
violation of his employer’s policies. Additionally, his marijuana use created a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, and is an activity that could affect 
his personal, professional, or community standing. Using marijuana and later falsifying 
his e-QIP demonstrate that he lacked good judgment to comply with rules and 
regulations that are counter to his desires. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 Applicant was also alleged to have failed to disclose using marijuana while 
holding a security clearance on his August 8, 2002, and June 6, 2003 security clearance 
applications. Applicant was not granted a security clearance until October 2003, so he 
could not have falsified question 28 on his August 8, 2002, or June 6, 2003 security 
clearance applications. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
11 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant corrected the falsifications concerning his marijuana use while 
possessing a security clearance on his e-QIP when he disclosed it in his October 20, 
2013 security clearance application and during his December 2013 security clearance 
interview. His disclosures in his 2013 application and to the agent were before he was 
confronted with facts to the contrary, but his disclosure was not prompt or timely. He 
procrastinated reporting his deliberate omission of material information while serving in 
the Marine Corps. The evidence does not support the full application of AG ¶ 17(a). 
 
 Applicant testified that his recruiter told him to disclose using marijuana twice. 
Applicant presented no corroborating testimony to support this claim. Further, even if his 
claim was true, he failed to introduce evidence to show that his recruiter was instructing 
him specifically on the security clearance process. It is unlikely that he was instructed by 
a recruiter in 2003, when he completed his second application. The evidence does not 
support the full application of AG ¶ 17(b). 
 
 Applicant’s eventual disclosure of his marijuana use does not mitigate the 
concerns relating to his poor judgment and resulting vulnerability to coercion related to 
his falsification. He made poor decisions to violate laws, security procedures, and 
Marine Corps policies. He failed to produce sufficient evidence that similar lapses in 
judgment are unlikely to recur, without the passage of more time or other evidence that 
demonstrates trustworthiness and good judgment. He has not obtained counseling or 
taken other steps to indicate future use is unlikely to occur. The evidence does not show 
AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are applicable.  
 
 Applicant has earned an excellent reputation at work. However, not enough time 
has passed to know whether Applicant could again be tempted and persuaded to violate 
laws or other rules for his own personal benefit, as he did when he knowingly used 
marijuana after being granted a security clearance. AG ¶ 17(e) is not supported by the 
record. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
12 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F, H, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is a hardworking employee of a Government contractor with financial 
difficulties stemming from his past unemployment. He has been unable or unwilling to 
resolve his financial delinquencies, despite having a significant monthly financial 
remainder from his paychecks. He has used marijuana between 12 to 14 times from 
approximately 2000 to 2008. He was not fully truthful with the Government on his 2002 
and 2003 security clearance applications. Applicant is highly respected by those who 
know him. He has not used marijuana since 2008. He has divulged information about 
his drug use, although not always in an expedient manner. He testified that he will not 
use illegal substances in the future. However, Applicant knowingly violated laws, 
security procedures, and Marine Corps policies when he chose to use marijuana in 
2004 while holding a security clearance. That decision shows Applicant has 
questionable judgment. Not enough time has passed since Applicant’s drug use in 
2008, given his infrequent but repeated use of marijuana, to permit a finding that future 
drug use is unlikely to occur. His financial delinquencies remain unresolved. He has not 
established that he has the personal judgment required to hold a security clearance at 
this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  
  
 
13 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
