Item 1.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------, -------- -------- )       ISCR Case No. 05-04969
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
From tax years 2000 through 2004, Applicant failed to timely file all his federal
income tax returns and four state income tax returns. He is now out of debt, but still has
not filed his 2001 federal tax return. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), on November 7, 2005. On August 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the
security concerns under Guidelines F and E.  The action was taken under Executive1
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
Item 2.2
The government submitted nine items in support of the allegations.3
Item 2 at 1, 2; Item 3 at 25; Item 9.4
Item 2; Item 7; Item 8; Item 9.5
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 3, 2008, and requested
that his case be decided by an Administrative Judge on the written record without a
hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on September2
30, 2008. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM)  was provided to3
Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on October 13, 2008, and returned it to DOHA. He provided no further response to the
FORM within the 30-day period he was given to do so, did not request additional time to
respond, and made no objection to consideration of any evidence submitted by
Department Counsel. I received the case assignment on December 12, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked as an engineer for 41 years. He held a security clearance from about May 1968,
until it was revoked on November 25, 2003, when he failed to respond to a Statement of
Reasons citing security concerns arising from his then-substantial delinquent debts. In
his response to the present SOR, he admitted all the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a
through 1.c, concerning financial considerations, and denied the same allegations
incorporated by reference in ¶ 2.a, concerning personal conduct.  Applicant’s4
admissions are incorporated in the following findings.
In 1998, Applicant opened a restaurant in partnership with his wife and a third
person. The business started losing money in 2000, and became worse after the
September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. They continued operating the restaurant at a loss
while unsuccessfully trying to sell it until September 2004, when they closed it. Applicant
incurred substantial debts in the process, to the point that he owed five creditors a total
of more than $107,000 by August 2003. He has since repaid all of these creditors, and
the formerly delinquent taxes to the state and federal governments that he had
insufficient funds to pay at the time. He was able to do so through the sale of a second
home, use of retirement savings and his engineering salary, and a home equity loan on
his principal residence. His February 2008 credit bureau report shows no delinquent
debt, one credit card with an $869 balance, one $6,546 auto loan with a $170 monthly
payment, and two home mortgages totaling $371,000 with monthly payments of $3,550.
He has no intention of entering the restaurant business again.  5
Item 5 at 23-26; Item 6 at 2.6
Item 5 at 20-22; Item 6 at 2.7
Item 5 at 17-19; Item 6 at 3.8
Item 5 at 13-16; Item 6 at 3.9
Item 5 at 9-11; Item 6 at 3.10
Item 5 at 5-8; Item 6 at 3.11
Item 5 at 1-3; Item 6 at 3.12
3
Applicant filed his 2000 federal income tax return on September 25, 2002, after
receiving an extension of his filing deadline until August 15, 2001. He filed his 2000
state income tax return, that was due on April 15, 2001, on February 10, 2003. He
finally resolved all federal and state taxes, penalties and interest due for 2000 in
October 2004.6
Applicant admitted, and IRS records reflect, that he has not yet filed his federal
tax return for tax year 2001. He filed his state income tax return for that year, due April
15, 2002, on April 28, 2006. He has not yet addressed his federal return for 2001, but
fully paid all state taxes, penalties and interest for that year in July 2007.7
Applicant filed his 2002 federal income tax return on April 28, 2005, and  his
2002 state income tax return on April 26, 2005. Both returns were due on April 15,
2003. He finally resolved all federal and state taxes, penalties and interest due for 2002
in June  2005 and June 2006, respectively.8
Applicant filed his 2003 federal income tax return on May 23, 2006, and  his 2003
state income tax return on April 24, 2006. Both returns were due on April 15, 2004. He
finally received refunds for his 2003 federal and state taxes in October 2007 and
October 2006, respectively, with no penalties or interest due for those late filings.9
Applicant filed his 2004 federal income tax return on December 17, 2007, after
receiving an extension of his filing deadline until August 15, 2005. He filed his 2004
state income tax return, and paid state taxes due, on time. He finally resolved all federal
taxes, penalties and interest due for 2004 in February 2008.10
Applicant’s 2005 federal and state income tax returns were both timely filed after
receiving extensions until October 15, 2006.  Similarly, his 2006 federal and state11
returns were both filed by the April 15, 2007 deadline.  Accordingly, the allegations in12
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c are correct, although Department Counsel’s assertion in the
FORM that Applicant’s federal income tax returns for 2005 and 2006 were also late is
incorrect and presumably based on his mistaken reading of the evidence rather than
any attempt to mislead.
Item 2 at 2.13
4
Applicant has held many positions of significant trust and responsibility on multi-
million dollar projects with his company over the years, with no disciplinary actions in
connection with either classified or unclassified work.  He offered no other evidence13
concerning his character, trustworthiness or responsibility, and I was unable to evaluate
his credibility, demeanor or character in person since he elected to have his case
decided without a hearing. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “Any determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
5
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required
or the fraudulent filing of the same,” is potentially disqualifying. The evidence is
sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition, requiring a closer examination and
balancing of resulting security concerns with any potentially mitigating matters, and
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate or mitigate those concerns.
The guideline includes several conditions that could mitigate security concerns
arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), disqualifying conditions may be
mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s failures to
timely file five years of federal and four years of state income tax returns as required are
relatively recent and, for his 2001 federal return, is ongoing. His stated reason was his
inability to pay required taxes, but at least two of those returns involved refunds.
Further, the obligation to properly file tax returns is independent of the ability to pay any
taxes owed. Applicant filed timely returns for 2005 and 2006, but has not proven that
failure to file is unlikely to recur should he again encounter financial adversity. His
conduct continues to raise concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good
judgment. The evidence does not support this potentially mitigating condition. 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant attributes his
failure to file tax returns to his money-losing restaurant business and resulting debts.
ISCR Case No. 06-20964 at 4-7 (App. Bd. Apr. 10, 2008). In this case, the administrative judge found the14
facts to be insufficient for an adverse determination under Guideline F and the Appeal Board held that
analysis of failure to file tax returns under Guideline E was also required.
6
Losing money in a business does not alleviate the obligation to file proper tax returns,
and may indeed lower one’s tax liability. Filing the returns several years late does not
support a conclusion that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”
is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). This mitigating condition is partly raised by
Applicant’s repayment arrangements and absence of present delinquent debt, but is not
supported as a factor for significant consideration in this case because he filed so many
returns so late and has still not filed his 2001 federal return. Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d)
applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Applicant resolved most of his delinquent
federal and state income tax debts, but failure to file timely returns raises concerns
separate from the related tax, penalty and interest debts. I conclude this potentially
mitigating condition has not been established with respect to AG ¶ 19(g) security
concerns.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 sets forth potentially disqualifying conditions, none of which are
independently supported by this record according to their plain meaning. Applicant’s
repeated failures to file required tax returns in a timely manner are both sufficient for an
adverse determination (AG ¶ 16(c)), and explicitly covered (AG ¶ 16(d)) under Guideline
F. To the extent that Appellant’s financial conduct involves questionable judgment, lack
of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, however, it
can also be considered to support security concerns under AG ¶ 15.  His pattern and14
recent history of failure to timely file his federal and state income tax returns
demonstrate questionable judgment and unwillingness to comply with rules requiring the
reporting and satisfaction of one’s tax obligations, thereby raising questions about his
reliability and ability to protect classified information. For the same reasons discussed
above under financial considerations, no personal conduct mitigating condition has yet
been established to fully alleviate such concerns. 
7
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual who
is responsible for his choices and conduct. He filed four years worth of federal and state
income tax returns from one to four years late, and still has not filed his 2001 federal
return. Applicant submitted only anecdotal evidence of rehabilitation or permanent
behavioral change. His recent and ongoing disregard of lawful obligations creates
continuing doubt about his trustworthiness and reliability. The record contains
insufficient evidence about his character or responsibility to mitigate these concerns, or
tending to make their continuation less likely. 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations and personal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
8
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
