1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-26515
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esquire
January 23, 2009
Decision
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on February 23,
2006. On July 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines J, H, and
E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on August 7, 2008, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
October 6, 2008. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 9, 2008, and I convened
the hearing on November 6, 2008, in San Diego, California. The Government offered
Exhibits 1 through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his
own behalf and three other witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. He submitted
Exhibits A through E, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr) on November 14, 2008. Based upon a review of the case
2
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
At the beginning of the hearing, allegation 3.d. of the SOR was amended due to
a typographical error. The first five words initially read, “I do know know why.” It should
read and has been amended to read, ”I do not know why.” The amendment was made
without objection. 
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR Applicant admitted SOR allegations1.a., through 1.d., and 2.a.
through 2.d., and he denied 3.a. through 3.d. The admitted allegations are incorporated
herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 51 years old. He served in the U.S. Air Force for four years, and he
received an Honorable Discharge in 1981. 
Applicant works for a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance
in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct) 
The Government alleges that Applicant has engaged in the following criminal
acts:
1.a. On December 5, 1985, Applicant was arrested and charged with Hit and
Run-Personal Injury, a felony. He was found guilty, and he was sentenced to three
years confinement, which was suspended. He also was sentenced to three years
probation, and he was fined a total of $502.   Applicant served 36 days in confinement. 
Applicant testified that he was involved in an accident, but he exchanged
information with the driver of the other car before he left the scene. Several days later,
he was arrested for leaving the scene of an accident where there were injuries. He was
in jail for 36 days, before he accepted a guilty plea. He contended that there was some
confusion as to whether the crime was a felony or a misdemeanor, but he claimed that
he was informed that it was actually a misdemeanor, although he was originally told it
was a felony.  
1.b. On September 7, 1997, Applicant was arrested and charged with being
Under the Influence of a Controlled Substance. He pled guilty to the charge and was
sentenced to pay a fine of $100.
3
Applicant testified that this incident occurred when the police happened to be at
his home, because he was filing a report, as he believed he had property that had been
burglarized from his home, and the police arrested him for being under the influence of
an illegal substance. He testified that he had consumed a bottle of soda that belonged
to his girlfriend, and unbeknownst to him, it contained methamphetamine. He claimed
that he pled guilty, even though he had not known that he had ingested an illegal
substance. 
1.c. On December 14, 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with being
Under the Influence of a Controlled Substance.  Applicant plead no contest to this
charge. He was sentenced to five years probation, fined $435, and sentenced to serve
20 days of public service work.  He also was required to attend and complete a drug
treatment program. On April 10, 2003, his plea was set aside and the case was
dismissed, after he completed the drug rehabilitation program. 
Applicant testified that this incident did occur as he was offered crystal
methedrine by an individual whom he knew, and because he was feeling under a lot of
pressure, he used the  methedrine (Tr at 132). As a result of this arrest he underwent
treatment at a Veterans Administration (VA) hospital. The records from his treatment at
the VA (Exhibit 6) and the statements attributed to him will be discussed below. 
1.d. On March 28, 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with Count (1) DUI
Alcohol/Drugs with a Bodily Injury and Count (2) Under the Influence of a Controlled
Substance. 
Applicant testified that on that occasion he was pulled over by a law enforcement
officer for having a brake light that was not working.  The officer said he was under the
influence. His car was towed, and he was given a blood test. Applicant claimed that
when he appeared at the arraignment the case was dismissed. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The SOR lists four allegations regarding illegal drug involvement under
Adjudicative Guideline H. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as
they were listed in the SOR:
2.a. Applicant used marijuana from approximately 1970 through 1975 on three or
four occasions. 
2.b. Applicant used cocaine on one occasion during the time period of 1975 to
1977.
2.c.  Applicant used methamphetamine. His testimony was that he only
knowingly used it on one occasion in 2002, when it was offered to him, as discussed in
1.c., above. 
4
The records from his treatment at the VA, prepared in 2003, directly contradict
this assertion that he only used methamphetamine one time. 
On page 112 of Exhibit 6 there is a diagnoses of Amphetamine Dependence.
There is a notation under Medical  “meth scars on arms & legs ‘from picking. ’” Under
Personal Narrative it states: 
Veteran states he’s coming to ADTP at this time because his wife does
not like him to use crystal meth. Veteran states he started using
Methamphetamine in 1982 to help keep him awake or for his various jobs.
He’s had one 2 yr. period of not using since then & that was in 1997,
stating he couldn’t afford it then. States he would typically stay away from
it for 3-4 mos at a time. Withing (sic) the last yr., he reports smoking 1/4
Gm. of Meth about once daily or day & ½.  Last smoked 12/14/02.
Under Comments on page 124 It states, “[Veteran] states he’s here because he’s
been using crystal Meth x 21 yrs., recently smoking it, states it’s ‘faster.’”
Applicant is quoted on page 131 as stating, “I’m a functioning addict. I can quit,
but I just can’t stay quit . . . My problems will begin [again] with Meth in about 6 months.”
Finally, on page 132 he states,” It’s easy to quit, hard to stay quit. The problem is
that I like it too much.”
There are other examples of very specific statements attributed to Applicant
about his Methamphetamine usage. During his testimony, he contended that the
technicians at the VA were simply making up false allegations or else making errors. He
claimed that they applied so much pressure on him that he just agreed with whatever
they told him, even if he knew it was not true.  
 Because of the specificity in the VA records and the numerous quotes attributed
to Applicant about his long and frequent methamphetamine usage, the lack of any
perceived reason for the VA to furnish incorrect and untruthful information, and other
examples of Applicant’s less than complete candor, as will be discussed below, I find
that the VA’s version of Applicant’s drug usage history, that he used methamphetamine
regularly over many years, is far more credible than Applicant’s testimony that he only
knowingly used Methamphetamine on one occasion.  
2.d.  On February 21, 2003, Applicant was diagnosed as being Amphetamine
dependent by a health provide with the Department for Veterans Affairs. This was
stated in Exhibit 6. 
 
5
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The SOR lists four allegations regarding Personal Conduct concerns under
Adjudicative Guideline E. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as
they were listed in the SOR:
3.a. Applicant executed a SCA on February 23, 2006 (Exhibit 1). Question #24 a.
of the SCA asked if, in the previous seven years, Applicant had illegally used any
controlled substance? Applicant answered "Yes" to this question, and he disclosed that
he used “methadrine” on one occasion on December 2002. 
Based on the VA records, Applicant was long time user of methamphetamine,
and he should have listed his many years of methamphetamine usage, as discussed
above in paragraph 2.c.  
3.b. Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories on February 1, 2007 (Exhibit
2) and March 27, 2007 (Exhibit 3).  He disclosed that he used methamphetamine on
one occasion in 2003 . Again, he should have listed all of his methamphetamine usage,
as discussed above.
3.c. Question #23 a. of the  February 23, 2006 SCA asked if Applicant had ever
been charged with or convicted of any felony offense? He answered “No” to this
question. He should have revealed his 1985 arrest and conviction for Hit and Run-
Personal Injury, a felony , as discussed in 1.a., above.  
Applicant testified that he did not believe that he had to disclose this arrest
because it occurred more than 10 years before his completion of the SCA (Tr at 122).
However, the question did not limit the answer to 10 years, but asked whether he had
ever been charged with a felony offense. Clearly he should have included this 1985
offense. He also claimed that he was not sure if it was resolved as a felony. However,
he was informed initially that he was being arrested and charged with a felony, so there
was no legitimate reason for not listing this offense in response to question #23 a. 
3.d. Question #23 d. of the  February 23, 2006 SCA asked if Applicant had ever
been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs? He
answered “Yes” to this question, but he failed to reveal his 1997 arrest and conviction
for being Under the Influence of a Controlled Substance and his 2004 arrest for DUI
Alcohol/Drugs with Bodily Injury, as discussed in 1.b. and 1.d., above.  
Applicant testified that he was informed by the judge that his 1997 drug
conviction was “no worse than a traffic ticket” so he did not believe that he had to
disclose this conviction (Tr at 130).  The question requested information as to being
charged or convicted of any offense related to drugs, and he should have included this
1997 drug conviction. He also should have informed the Government about his 2004
arrest DUI Alcohol/Drugs with Bodily Injury.
6
Mitigation
Three witnesses testified on his behalf. Two of them had previously worked with
Applicant, and one was the wife of one of the other witnesses. They also spoke in
extremely positive terms about Applicant.  
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
7
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
The Government has established by substantial evidence that Applicant engaged
in criminal conduct, as he was arrested for, and convicted of criminal offenses including:
Hit and Run-Personal Injury, a felony, and more than one count of being Under the
Influence of a Controlled Substance. Also, while it was not alleged, Applicant’s failure to
furnish truthful information to the Government on his SCA and interrogatories and his
continued use of methamphetamine also is criminal conduct. 
In reviewing the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline J, DC 31. (a), a
single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, applies in this case. Under Mitigation
Conditions (MC), I can not find that any MC applies to this Applicant, as there is no
evidence of successful rehabilitation, because there is a significant pattern of criminal
conduct, and Applicant has not been truthful about all of his criminal conduct or shown
sufficient remorse.  Applicant has not mitigated this allegation. Paragraph 1 is found
against Applicant. 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, especially the possession and use of
methamphetamine over many years, is of concern, especially in light of his desire to
have access to the nation's secrets. Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to his illegal
substance abuse clearly falls within Drug Involvement Disqualifying Condition (DC) 25.
(a) (any drug abuse), (c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution), and (e) evaluation of drug abuse or
dependence by licensed social worker, in this case a diagnoses of Amphetamine
Dependence.
Based on the Applicant’s long and extensive use of methamphetamine and his
failure to be truthful about his usage, I do not find that any MC applies to this guideline.  
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial
evidence that Applicant has used illegal drugs for many years under Guideline H.
Applicant, on the other hand, has failed to introduce any persuasive evidence in
rebuttal, explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome the Government's
case against him.  Accordingly, Paragraph 2 Guideline H of the SOR is concluded
against Applicant.
8
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant furnished
incorrect, untruthful information to the Government in both a SCA, that he executed on
February 23, 2006 (Exhibit 1), and in interrogatories that he responded to on February
1, 2007 (Exhibit 2) and March 27, 2007 (Exhibit 3).
The Government relies heavily on the honesty and integrity of individuals seeking
access to our nation’s secrets. When such an individual intentionally falsifies material
facts or fails to furnish relevant information to a Government investigator, it is extremely
difficult to conclude that he nevertheless possesses the judgment, and honesty
necessary for an individual given a clearance. In this case, I conclude that Applicant
knowingly and willingly failed to give complete, honest answers regarding his drug
usage and his criminal conduct to the Government.
In reviewing the DCs under Guideline E, I conclude that DC 16. (a) applies
because of Applicant’s deliberate omission, concealment, and falsification of relevant
facts from a personnel security questionnaire and interrogatories, which were used to
determine security clearance eligibility. I can not find that any MC applies in this
paragraph.  
Applicant’s conduct, considered as a whole, exhibits questionable judgement,
unreliability, and a lack of candor. I resolve Paragraph 3, Guideline E, against Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines J, H and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case,
and based on all of the reasons cited above, including Applicant’s criminal conduct,
drug usage, and lack of honesty, I find that the record evidence leaves me with
considerable questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a
security clearance under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns. 
9
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c:     Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d:     Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b:     Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c:     Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.d:     Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
