KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge found that Applicant had previously stated before a DOHA Judge that it was
in the best interests of the Department and himself that he not use marijuana .  However,
Applicant subsequently used marijuana. The Judge’s findings of security concern are supported
by substantial record evidence.  Although the Judge’s findings contain error, the Board concludes
it is harmless.  The Judge erred in concluding that Applicant’s prior testimony was a deliberate
falsification.  The Judge’s decision had language which is inconsistent with her ultimate
determination.  However, the Judge’s sustainable findings of fact support her conclusion under
Guideline E, in that they illustrate questionable judgment and, therefore, impugn Applicant’s
reliability and trustworthiness.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASENO: 07-02595.a1
DATE: 01/15/2009
DATE: January 15, 2009
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-02595
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
The Judge’s favorable decision under Guideline H is not at issue in this appeal. 1
For example, the first page of the Judge’s decision makes reference to Guideline F rather than E and H, which2
the Board concludes is simply a typographical error.  Additionally, Applicant asserts that in the past he has used
marijuana, rather than having abused it as the Judge found.  The Board concludes that the distinction is without security
significance under the facts of this case.  Applicant asserts that he does not know the evidentiary basis for identifying
his use of marijuana in 2002 as having occurred in February of that year.  However, Applicant admitted, in his answer
to the SOR, that he used marijuana on two separate occasions between January 1999 and February 2002.  
2
FOR APPLICANT
Charles S. Tigerman, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 22, 2008,  DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October 30, 2008, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance. Applicant  filed a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact are supported by substantial record evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance
decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.   Finding no harmful error, we affirm.  1
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: in October 1990, Applicant
appeared before a DOHA Administrative Judge in a security clearance hearing, addressing his prior
use of marijuana.  At the hearing, he was asked if he planned to use marijuana in the future.
Applicant replied that he did not intend to do so.  He further stated, “I believe it’s in my best interest
and the best interests of the Department of Defense that I do not, both because of my participation
and role as a leader in my company.”  Decision at 2.  However, Applicant subsequently used
marijuana on two occasions.  “He does not know why he used it on these occasions.”  Id.    
The Board concludes that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by
substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”) Although Applicant has demonstrated that the Judge’s
findings contain error, the Board concludes that such error is harmless.  See ISCR Case No. 06-
23112 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 31, 2007).   Applicant further contends that the Judge erred in her analysis2
of the Guideline E security concerns.  Specifically Applicant persuasively argues that the Judge erred
in concluding that Applicant’s 1990 testimony concerning future marijuana use was a deliberate
falsification.  Additionally, Applicant correctly notes that certain language in the Judge’s decision
The Judge’s decision contains the following statement:  “Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has3
introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the government’s case
under Guidelines H and E of the SOR.”  Decision at 5.  The Board also notes Applicant’s point that the Judge’s formal
findings neglect to make explicit reference to subparagraphs 1(b) and (c) of the SOR.    
See Directive ¶ E2.15.4
3
is inconsistent with her ultimate adverse determination.   However, the sustainable findings of fact3
in the Judge’s decision support her adverse conclusion under Guideline E, in that they illustrate
“questionable judgment” and, therefore, impugn Applicant’s reliability and trustworthiness.   The4
Board concludes that there is insufficient reason to remand to the case to the Judge for a new
decision.  Therefore, the Board concludes that identified errors in the decision are harmless.
Accordingly, the Board concludes that the Judge’s decision is sustainable in light of the standard set
forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). (“The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’”) 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
