                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-04793 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s favorable evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the alcohol 
consumption security concerns. Moreover, he deliberately omitted alcohol-related 
incidents from his security clearance application and made a false statement to a 
government investigator. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 16, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 In September 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
1  Form Item 4. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked. 
 
On October 7, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Items 2 and 3). A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated November 6, 2008, was 
provided to him by letter dated November 10, 2008. Applicant signed the receipt for the 
DOHA transmittal letter on November 18, 2008. He was afforded a period of 30 days to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He failed to 
submit any materials, comments, or objections in response to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on January 21, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in SOR ¶ 1. He failed to admit or deny the 
allegations in SOR ¶ 2. I considered the two personal conduct allegations denied. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old ship fitter working for a defense contractor.3 He 
married his wife in 1986. He disclosed no children in his e-QIP. He did not serve in the 
military. He disclosed no felony convictions and no use of illegal drugs in the last seven 
years. He has worked for the same employer, a government contractor, since 
September 1972 to the present. Applicant indicated he received access to classified 
information at the confidential level in May 1986 (Item 4, § 26). Apparently, his access 
has never been suspended or revoked. 
 
He was convicted four times for driving while impaired (DWI) (Items 5, 1 and 10). 
February 1984, he has convicted of DWI and sentenced to 12 months jail (suspended), 
and placed on probation. In September 1989, he has convicted of DWI and sentenced 
to 18 months jail, most of the sentence was suspended, and he was placed on 
probation. In September 1991, he has convicted of DWI and sentenced to two years jail 
(suspended), and placed on two years probation. In June 2004, he has convicted of 
DWI and sentenced to 18 months jail, most of the sentence was suspended. 
 
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006.  
 
3  Item 4 (2006 e-QIP) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
3 
 
 
As part of his sentence, Applicant was required to attend substance abuse 
counseling from September 2004 to March 2005 (Item 8). He maintained abstinence 
through out his treatment period, successfully completed his counseling/treatment, and 
his prognosis was considered good. Applicant was diagnosed with alcohol dependence. 
The counselor recommended Applicant attend Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) as part of his 
treatment/counseling plan. 
 
In his answer to § 23(d) of his 2006 security clearance application (asking 
whether he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offenses related to alcohol 
or drugs), Applicant answered “Yes,” and disclosed he was convicted of DWI in June 
2004. He failed to disclose his 1984, 1989, and 1991 DWI charges and convictions. In 
response to § 25 (asking whether in the last 7 years his use of alcoholic beverages 
resulted in any alcohol related treatment or counseling), he answered “Yes,” and 
disclosed he received treatment from June to September 2004 (discrepant with Item 8). 
 
In January 2007, Applicant provided a sworn statement to a government 
background investigator (Item 9). During the interview, Applicant discussed the 
circumstances surrounding his 2004 DWI. Applicant told the agent that his 2004 arrest 
and DWI charge was the only time that he had ever been arrested and/or charged with 
any alcohol related offenses.  
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his alcohol related problems and 
included the review of his state’s criminal records history (Item 5), his answers to four 
sets of DOHA interrogatories (Items 6, 7, 9, and 10), and his counselor’s letter 
concerning his 2005 alcohol-related treatment (Item 8).  
 
In his May 15, 2007, response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that he 
was currently consuming alcoholic beverages weekly, and that he intended to continue 
doing so in the future (Item 6). The last day he consumed alcoholic beverages was two 
day before he answered the interrogatories. He also stated he was not participating in 
AA. 
 
In his March 31, 2008 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated “I [no] 
longer abuse alcohol in that way anymore” (Item 10). However, Applicant provided no 
information as to his present consumption of alcoholic beverages or abstinence, 
whether he continued any alcohol counseling and/or treatment, and whether he has 
taken any measures to avoid similar alcohol related problems in the future.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”4 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
4  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
5  “The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G the government’s concern is that excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
The government established its case under Guideline G by showing that in 1984, 
1989, 1991, and 2004 Applicant drove while impaired. He was convicted of DWI on four 
occasions and sentenced to jail (albeit suspended). Applicant excessive alcohol 
consumption resulted in his exercising questionable judgment. Additionally, he was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent in 2005. Guideline G disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 
22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence . . ., and AG ¶ 22(e): evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program, apply.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has been involved in any alcohol-related 
misconduct since June 2004. However, available evidence shows Applicant continued 
consuming alcohol and he intends to continue to do so in the future. There is no 
evidence Applicant has continued his alcohol counseling/treatment, that he has 
acknowledged his alcohol dependence, or that he has made any lifestyle changes to 
avoid future alcohol related problems. 
 
  There are four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 
6 
 
 
 (c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
  Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find none of the 
Guideline G mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence is not 
sufficient to fully raise the applicability of any of the mitigating conditions, or to show it is 
unlikely his questionable behavior will not recur. I specifically considered that 
Applicant’s last DWI conviction was in 2004, and there is no evidence of additional 
alcohol-related misconduct. Notwithstanding, because he has three other DWI 
convictions, I cannot find that his behavior was infrequent or that it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s recidivism shows he 
has not learned from his past mistakes, and casts doubt on his good judgment. AG ¶ 
23(a) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. AG ¶ 15.  
 
Applicant failed to disclose relevant information in his answers to § 23 (d) of his 
security clearance application. He also falsified material facts in his statement to a 
government investigator. Considering the record as a whole, I am convinced Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose the information. Numerous factors weighed in my analysis 
to reach that conclusion, including: Applicant’s maturity, his employment history, and his 
answers to the four DOHA interrogatories.  
 
Because of his extensive work experience as a government contractor employee 
and holding a security clearance, Applicant knew or should have known the importance 
of accurately completing his security clearance application and telling the truth. 
Nevertheless, he failed to provide information that was material to making an informed 
security decision and made false statements. AG ¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire,” and AG ¶ 16(b) “deliberately providing false or misleading information 
 
7 
 
 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or to other official government representative.” apply. 
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find none of the mitigating 
conditions apply to this case. I specifically considered AG ¶ 17(c), and find it does not 
apply since his behavior is recent and shows Applicant’s lack of reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
Applicant’s 36 year record of employment for a government contractor weighs in 
his favor. He has had access to classified information for 22 years. There is no evidence 
of any security violation, or that he is not a good, reliable and competent worker. These 
factors show some responsibility and mitigation.  
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. He has 
a history of alcohol abuse and was diagnosed alcohol dependent. Applicant’s 
falsification is directly related to his desire to hide his alcohol related problems. As such, 
the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress exists and it is likely it would 
continue to exist. Because of his years working for a government contractor and his 
many years holding a security clearance, Applicant knew or should have known the 
importance of the trust placed on him by the Government. Notwithstanding, he failed to 
be candid and honest on his security clearance application and during his interview. His 
behavior shows he lacks judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
 
8 
 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption and personal conduct.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a & 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
