1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )         ISCR Case No. 07-09098
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SCA) on March 4, 2008.
On April 4, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial considerations
(Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and made
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after September 1,
2006. 
Applicant submitted her answer to the SOR on June 2, 2008 by facsimile. DOHA
issued a notice of hearing on October 3, 2008, and the hearing was held on October 27,
2008. At the hearing, six exhibits (GE 1 through 6) were admitted in evidence without
objection to support the Government’s case. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits
(AE A through AE V). In the time allowed for Applicant to furnish additional
documentation, she submitted AE W through AE FF, which were received in evidence
 However, in GE 3 Applicant indicated she married her second husband in 2000.1
2
without objection. These exhibits contain position statements, federal tax documents,
revised credit information showing that several listed creditors were no longer reporting,
and character evidence about Applicant. DOHA received a copy of the transcript (Tr.) of
the proceedings on November 6, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts totaling $42,482.00 under the financial
considerations guideline. Applicant essentially admitted all the allegations. Her denial of
a student loan debt in SOR 1.b. is based on a consolidation offer the Government made
to her recently where all four past due loans were placed in one repayment plan.
Applicant’s denial of SOR 1.n. is based on her claim she paid the debt. SOR 1.t. and
1.u. refer to the same debt, and are found in Applicant’s favor based on the
documentation provided to show the debt was paid (AE CC). 
Applicant has been employed as an industrial coordinator with her employer
since December 2002. She seeks a security clearance. 
Applicant’s first marriage in July 1983 ended in divorce in February 1999.
Applicant encountered federal tax problems beginning in 1996. 
Applicant’s second marriage began in December 2001 (GE 1).  However, her1
husband’s layoff from his airline employer after September 11, 2001 created emotional
problems her husband could not resolve, and the marriage could not survive. Applicant
separated from her husband and has been living by herself in August 2004 (Tr. 84). She
points to the problems of her second husband, e.g., depression, and his failure to look
for work (Tr. 101), as two of the reasons she still has financial problems. Her second
husband filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005 that she did not join because she did not
want to jeopardize her security clearance (Tr. 44-46). Applicant indicated she was not in
a position to pay these debts until the last six months (2007) because her husband had
a mental breakdown after the bankruptcy, and they lost their home (Tr. 45).
In October 2007 Applicant enrolled in a debt consolidation organization with a
$500.00-down payment on October and November 2007 (GE 3; Tr. 97). However,
because of the rise in energy prices and maintaining her mortgage (Tr. 99), she has not
begun the monthly payments of $300.00. She is scheduled to begin the payments on
October 31, 2008 (Id.). Under the plan she is to pay $300.00 a month until the target
figure of $2980.00 is reached, then certain debts in the plan will be eliminated or
forgiven (Tr. 96). No additional information was provided. Applicant also signed up with
a credit service firm to challenge debts for validity and amount (Tr. 90; GE 3). That
service, which cost her about $80.00 a month, completed the list of disputed creditors
and debt amounts in August 2008 (Tr. 98). 
3
Applicant began a part-time job in June 2008 that concluded in the middle of
November 2008. Her payment stubs appear in AE AA. She is scheduled to begin a new
part-time job on November 21, 2008, and will be working out of her house (AE W). 
When Applicant was interviewed by the Government in November 2006, her
monthly remainder was about $31.30, but her monthly remainder currently is about
$400.00 due to salary increases (Tr. 103). Applicant testified that based on the advice of
her church counselor she is using a monthly budget to maintain better accountability
over her expenses (Tr. 104). She submitted AE X as her budget. The one page exhibit
dated November 3, 2008, is a list of her monthly expenses, but does not provide
information about other elements of her budget. 
The delinquent debts will be discussed in the order they appear in the SOR. The
debts became delinquent at different times between July 1999 and 2007. Applicant
testified she made sporadic payments on the debts in 2008 but few payments in 2007
because she had to meet a state requirement of working through the divorce (Tr. 83-
84). No additional information was provided. In addition, she stressed that she had to
make several sacrifices in starting her life anew in 2007 (Tr. 83-84; AE W).
SOR 1.a., 1.b., 1.l., and 1.m. These four debts are delinquent student loans
totaling $19,714.00. The loans were opened in March 2004. The last activity on the
accounts was June 2005. Applicant testified she paid about $5,000.00 on the loans over
the years, but has made no payments since 2006 (Tr. 81). She entered into the revised
student loan payback plan (containing all four student loans) in May 2008, and made
her first monthly payment of $200.00 in October 2008 as required (Tr. 82; AE C, AE Y).
This paragraph is resolved against Applicant. 
SOR 1.c. The last activity on this personal loan account ($124.00) was in May
1999. Applicant admitted this account and explained it would be in her payment plan
which apparently was formulated (Tr. 48). Applicant requested a research of this debt
by one of the credit agencies. She was informed on August 29, 2008 that the debt is no
longer being reported by the creditor (AE BB). This allegation is resolved against
Applicant.
SOR 1.d., 1.e. These two allegations refer to two checks that were returned to
Applicant due to insufficient funds to cover the checks to purchase food at a national
grocer. The value of the checks is $124.00. The checks were written in July 1999. AE
BB reflects that the creditor is no longer reporting the debts. Applicant agreed she still is
responsible for the checks, and stated they would be a part of her payback plan (Tr. 48-
49). These two allegations are resolved against Applicant. 
SOR 1.f. The last activity for this collection account of $88.00 was December
2000 (GE 6). Applicant acknowledged she owes the overdue debt. This account is
resolved in Applicant’s favor. AE BB reflects the creditor is no longer reporting the
account. I find against Applicant under this account. 
4
SOR 1.g. The services for this medical account of $288.00 were rendered on
March 2002 (GE 4, 6), and placed for collection in July 2002. AE CC contains a one-
page document from a local hospital (See, SOR 2.t.) and the remaining documentation
from a systems/account inquiry records system relating to medical services rendered at
another, undisclosed location. Though several pages show a zero balance for medical
services performed, the documentation reflects that the medical services were
performed from January 1997 to April 2001. There is no documentation reflecting that
she received medical services in March 2002, the date identified in the allegation and
credit reports (GE 5, GE 6). I find Applicant has not established this account has been
paid. 
SOR 1.h. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) federal tax lien ($6,602.00) was
filed against Applicant in August 2003 and applies to tax years 1996 and 1997. When
Applicant was with her husband in 1996, she was making regular payments to the IRS
for unpaid taxes. When she separated, she could no longer make payments, and was
put in a suspended status for the last five years (Tr. 94-95). Any refund Applicant is
entitled is being withheld by the IRS to pay down the lien (Id.). According to AE P1, the
outstanding balance as of March 2008 was $5913.00. This allegation is resolved in
Applicant’s favor. Applicant resolved her delinquent state tax obligation (unlisted) in
2007 (GE 3).
SOR 1.i. According to Applicant (Tr. 87), this account ($11,488.00) should be
reduced to $1,999.00 to correctly reflect the deficiency balance after the auto was sold
at an auction. Applicant believed this debt was discharged in her husband’s Chapter 7
bankruptcy. A review of the AE FF, a partial copy of an undated motion entitled
AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 7 SCHEDULES, lists five creditors. Neither the SOR 1.h.
nor the SOR 1.q. creditors are listed in the incomplete motion documents. See also, AE
W and AE BB. I find against Applicant under this allegation. 
SOR 1.j. The delinquent account is $336.00, according to GE 6. The last activity
on the debt was in May 2002. In her answers to interrogatories (GE 3), Applicant stated
she would settle the debt by January 2008. Applicant claimed the debt belonged to her
husband. She has not paid this account.
SOR 1.k. The account ($288.00) is a collection debt for a utility. The last activity
on the account was January 2005. In GE 2, Applicant stated the company would accept
payments on this account until paid in full. No additional information was provided. This
allegation is resolved against Applicant. 
SOR 1.n. Applicant claims she paid this account ($66.00)and destroyed the
receipt. She tried to retrieve the receipt, but has been unsuccessful to this as of the date
of the hearing (Tr. 53). The allegation is resolved against Applicant. 
SOR 1.o. This is a credit card account for $220.00. Applicant indicated in GE 2
and her testimony (Tr. 54) that she reached a settlement with the creditor, and the next
5
action was to pay the figure (Tr. 54). No additional information was provided as to
whether the settlement was paid. Applicant is still responsible for this account. 
SOR 1.p. Applicant admitted this account ($501.00) but disputed the amount with
the assistance of a credit assistance law firm. She learned the debt amount is accurate,
and is no longer disputing the amount (Tr. 90-91). Applicant is still liable for this
account. 
SOR 1.q. This account ($1,999.00) is owned by the creditor who had a lien on
the auto described in SOR 1.i. Though Applicant considered the two allegations referred
to the same debt (Tr. 87), she also acknowledged they might represent different debts.
AE N2 dated March 2008, reflects the debt has increased. Applicant is still responsible
for this account. 
SOR 1.r. This delinquent account amounts to $330.00. In GE 3, Applicant
advised the account was being disputed. Applicant is no longer disputing the account,
and is responsible for the past due debt.
SOR 1.s. According to GE 3, Applicant considered this account ($544.00) to be a
double entry that was being disputed. She presented no additional evidence. This
account is resolved against Applicant. 
SOR 1.t., 1.u. Both allegations refer to the same delinquent debt for medical
services. The medical account was paid on September 16, 2008 (AE CC). These two
accounts are resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
The total number of debts is reduced by one to 20, as the SOR 1.u. medical debt
($50.00) was entered twice in the list of delinquent debts appearing in the SOR. The
total amount of past due debt is $35,426.00.
Character Evidence
Several character statements were admitted in evidence. AE H is from the
project coordinator who has known Applicant professionally for several years. In 2006
and 2007, Applicant was a security officer in the project coordinator’s office. Applicant’s
dedication to a secure environment provided repose for all employees working in the
office.
The information technician (IT) has worked with Applicant for five years, and
believes she is dependable and reliable. The IT opines that Applicant is very security
conscious (AE I). 
The personnel security specialist has known Applicant as a coworker and a friend
for a year. Applicant advised the security specialist she was trying to pay her overdue
debts in good faith. 
6
The senior project manager wrote a character statement (GE 2) and testified
about Applicant. He indicated that Applicant has demonstrated honesty and
trustworthiness in the 2 ½ years he has known her (Tr. 38). He is aware she has
financial problems but he does not know what she has done (Tr. 39).
The associate facility security officer provided a written character statement (GE
2), and also testified about Applicant. The officer highlighted Applicant’s security
responsibilities include (1) ensuring that all attendees at the 12 government
symposiums have the proper badges, and (2) that all classified information is monitored
at all times, (3) and that all security rules in the transfer of secured information are
conducted appropriately. Since being reassigned to unclassified responsibilities,
Applicant has excelled at tracking classified information that is transferred to the
government or other contractors (Tr. 31).
Applicant received several certificates of recognition or training in AE EE,
including an acknowledgment in 2004 of her security support by the lab division of her
employer. Applicant received her notary seal in March 2007. In August 2008, Applicant
received a certificate for two days of training on certain software. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
7
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
18. The Concern. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”
Applicant encountered tax problems in 1996 when she was married to her first
husband. She testified she was involved in a payment agreement with the IRS for
unpaid taxes. The credit reports reflect corresponding tax problems with the state tax
agency. The credit reports also show that the debts listed in the SOR became
delinquent between 1999 and 2007. The age and amount of overdue debt brings
Applicant’s financial problems within the scope of FC disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a.
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) FC DC 19.c. (a history not meeting financial
obligations).
There are four mitigating conditions (MC) that have potential application to this
case. FC mitigating condition (MC) 20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment) is not
applicable. The IRS lien, which was filed in August 2003, covers tax problems that
surfaced in 1996 and/or more recently. The insufficient funds checks occurred in 1999,
and may be no longer enforceable. On the other hand, there are at least three overdue
debts that fell delinquent in 2006, less than three years ago. There are 20 debts that are
still delinquent. Though Applicant spent $500.00 in October 2007 to enroll in the debt
services program, and was informed she would be paying $300.00 a month under the
8
plan, she has not paid her first monthly installment. She paid approximately $80.00 a
month to have the credit services firm challenge debts for accuracy. Yet, the only
significant payments she has made on her debts were the involuntary payments to IRS,
and a $200.00 payment on the student loan after neglecting to pay the debt for about
three years. Applicant’s decision not to pay the smaller debts, even after her official
challenge of certain debts ended in August 2007, precludes the application of FC MC
20.a. 
Applicant gains some benefit from FC MC 20.b. (the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control and individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances), as her former husband and her current husband
(she is separated from) bear some blame for her financial problems. Her first husband
contributed to her tax problems with the IRS, leading to the lien being filed in August
2003 for taxes owed in 1996. Applicant ran into marital discord following September
2001, when her current husband lost his job and developed mental problems. 
Applicant exercised good judgment by separating from her current husband in
August 2004, after concluding she could no longer live him with his mental condition.
And, she receives mitigation for that period. However, FC MC 20.b. also calls for the
individual to act responsibly under the circumstances by continuing to handle their
affairs in a responsible manner. Four years have passed and Applicant owes more than
$35,000.00 to 20 creditors. If she did not know before October 2007 that she owed
several creditors, during that month, she was informed by the Government that she
owed the listed creditors. She provided lengthy explanations of the debts, and, in
several responses, indicated she would pay several of the creditors in early 2008. The
record reflects only one of the smaller debts was paid. Even though Applicant faced an
unanticipated situation with her husband, she only receives limited mitigation under FC
MC 20.b. by not paying more of the smaller creditors when she had the opportunity,
particularly in the last six months. Her claim she did not pay the smaller debts because
of the increasing cost of energy in the last year is not mitigating. Considering her part-
time employment since June 2008, her increased energy costs should not have
prevented her from paying these smaller debts. 
FC MC 20.c. (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control)
applies in part based on Applicant’s good judgment in enrolling in a debt service and
credit review service. However, the large number of overdue debts makes it impossible
for me to conclude Applicant’s problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Paying a debt service a credit review service more than $800.00 does not
provide the same mitigation as actually paying the creditors. Nonetheless, FC MC 20.d.
(the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts) receives some consideration in Applicant’s favor, as she incurred a large
debt with the debt and credit review service. However, she has made only one payment
on her consolidated student loan since 2006, and that payment was in October 2008.
Other than the one $50.00 medical debt and her payments to IRS, Applicant presented
9
no documented proof of payment of any of the other debts. The mitigation provided by
FC MC 20.d. is limited due to the lack of a sustained record of payments other than to
the IRS. 
FC MC 20.e. (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the
issue) applies to bona fide disputes. I am unable to discern whether or not Applicant
had a good faith dispute with any of the creditors. Applicant admitted the debts. None of
the debts were removed from her credit report because they were false or erroneous.
These two facts subvert the credibility of Applicant’s dispute claims. The removal of
debts listed in SOR 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f. from Applicant’s credit report is due to the
fact that the time period in which the creditors could get a judgment in court against
Applicant has expired. In addition, Applicant admitted the debts. Based on the totality of
all the record evidence, including her favorable job performance and security
consciousness, Applicant does not prevail under the FC guideline. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC) 
The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s
life, and a careful consideration of nine variables that comprise whole person model:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation and recurrence. ¶ 2, p.18 of
the Directive.
I have considered the disqualifying and mitigating factors in light of the all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has had two marriages that
burdened her with tax and debt problems. Some of the debts became delinquent in
1999. Some of the debt fell delinquent in 2004, and some reached the delinquent status
in 2006. She informed the Government in October 2007 she paid a debt service to
consolidate her debt. She also advised the Government of the credit review service to
evaluate her debts for accuracy. Yet, she did little to pay even some of the 10 smaller
debts covered in the SOR. While her action regarding the IRS debt weighs in her favor
because she has developed a record of paying down the deficiency, she has only paid
$200.00 on the education debt since 2006.   
Applicant has a successful job performance evaluation for the 2007 appraisal
period, and is considered to be a very responsible security official by her former
supervisor and her employee’s facility security officer. The respect the two individuals
10
have for Applicant is commendable, but they also were largely uninformed about
Applicant’s financial problems. Moreover, an individual who seeks a security clearance
has to show the same vigilance in their personal affairs as they do in conducting their
security responsibilities. Failing to achieve a successful control on her financial
indebtedness during Applicant’s uninterrupted employment since December 2002,
raises lingering questions about her security suitability which she has not overcome.
Accordingly, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial
difficulties. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l . Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u. For Applicant
11
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
