                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-17921
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
January 23, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On May 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines J, E, G and F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 25, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 14, 2008. Applicant did not file a
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2008. Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 48 year old employee of a defense contractor.
In or about November 1981, applicant was arrested and charged with (1)
Breaking and Entering with Intent to Steal and (2) Theft. He was convicted of the Theft
charge and fined.  
In or about December 1981, applicant was arrested and charged with (1)
Breaking and Entering and (2) Theft, both felonies.
In or about February 1982, applicant was arrested and charged with Malicious
Destruction of Property. He was convicted of the charge and sentenced to one year in
jail.
In or about February 1982, applicant was charged with (1) Breaking and Entering
and (2) Theft.
In 1984, applicant was arrested and charged with Theft three separate times.
There is no credible evidence that any of the arrests resulted in a conviction.
In 1985, applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Disorderly Conduct and
Prowling and (2) Loitering. He was convicted and sentenced to two days in jail.
In 1986, applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Driving Under the Influence
(DUI), (2) Driving While License Suspended or Revoked, and (3) Reckless Driving. The
DUI charge was dropped, and applicant was convicted of the other two charges. He
was sentenced to one day in jail.
In 1987, applicant was arrested and charged with Contempt of Court in
connection with a prior reckless driving case against him.
In 1988, applicant was arrested for, charged with, and convicted of Burglary and
Possession of Burglary tools, both felonies, and sentenced to three months in jail.
In 1990, applicant was convicted of selling or consuming alcoholic beverages on
city property and was sentenced to one day in jail.
In 1991, applicant was convicted of Driving with No Valid Drivers License and
was sentenced to two days in jail.
In 1992, applicant was twice convicted of Driving While License Suspended or
Revoked. He was sentenced to two days in jail on the first conviction and ten days in jail
on the second.
Applicant is indebted to the IRS in the approximate amount of $17,773.00 for
back taxes.
3
Applicant is indebted to NCO Financial in the approximate amount of $1,442.00
on an account that was referred for collection.
Applicant is indebted to AAC in the approximate amount of $3,338.00 on an
account that was referred for collection.
Applicant is indebted to ACE on an account that is more than 180 days
delinquent in the approximate amount of $300.00.
Applicant attached to his SOR response a copy of a money order in the amount
of $100.00 made payable to the IRS. He provided no explanation.
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
4
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern for criminal conduct is set forth in Paragraph 30 of the AG,
and is as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Paragraph 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying: Under Paragraph 31.a., “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses” may be disqualifying. Applicant’s multiple convictions raise this disqualifying
condition.
Paragraph 32 of the AG sets forth conditions that could mitigate security
concerns. I have considered each of them and conclude none apply.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
All of the Guideline E factual allegations, except for applicant’s three driving-
related criminal charges in 1991 and 1992,  were alleged under Guideline J. There is no
legitimate reason why these three criminal offenses were not included with all of the
other criminal conduct alleged under Guideline J. Because this is not a legally proper
use of Guideline E, it is found for applicant.
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set forth in Paragraph 21 of the
AG, and is as follows:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.
The  evidence the Government offered in support of its case under Guideline G is
that (1) in 1986, applicant was arrested and charged with DUI, and the charge was
dismissed, and (2) in 1990, he was convicted of selling or consuming alcoholic
beverages on city property. A 20+ year old DUI charge without a conviction and a low
level alcohol-related conviction over 17 years ago that might or might not have involved
alcohol consumption, do not establish a prima facie case under Guideline G. This
guideline is therefore found for applicant.
5
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to Financial Considerations is set forth in
Paragraph 18 of the new AG, and is as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one*s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual*s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The AG note several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
Paragraph 19.a., an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 19.c., “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may
raise security concerns. The evidence shows applicant has a history of not paying his
debts.  Accordingly, these disqualifying conditions are applicable.
I considered all of the potentially mitigating factors under Guideline F and
conclude none apply.
Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man with a
long history of serious criminal conduct and financial delinquencies. Although the
passage of time since his last criminal activity occurred is a factor in his favor, he
offered no positive evidence of reform from people who know him well. Without such
evidence, I cannot conclude that his criminal conduct will not recur. With respect to his
financial delinquencies, applicant provided no explanation for them, and offered little to
no credible evidence of any meaningful action to address them. Based on the foregoing,
I conclude applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guidelines F
and J.
6
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Paragraph 3, Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Paragraph 4, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
