 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
 
 
 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13434 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) J, Criminal Conduct; AG G, Alcohol Involvement; AG F, 
Financial Considerations; and AG E, Personal Conduct. Her eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on November 14, 2006.  On May 12, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under AG J, Criminal Conduct; AG G, Alcohol 
Involvement; and AG F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
 
2 
 
 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 22, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing, provided additional 
explanations and attachments, and requested that her case be determined on the 
record in lieu of a hearing. On June 23, 2008, the Government issued Applicant an 
amended SOR, detailing additional security concerns under AG E, Personal Conduct. 
Applicant received the amended SOR on June 27, 2008. She answered the amended 
SOR in writing on July 1, 2008. On November 17, 2008, the Government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained documents identified as Items 
1 through 15.  By letter dated November 17, 2008, DOHA forwarded copy of the FORM 
to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections 
within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on November 21, 2008.  Her 
response was due on December 21, 2008. She did not file additional information within 
the required time period. On January 21, 2009, the case was assigned to me for a 
decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains six allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG J, Criminal 
Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.); two allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG 
G, Alcohol Involvement (SOR ¶ 2.a. and 2.b.); and one allegation of disqualifying 
conduct under AG F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶ 3.a.). The amended SOR 
contains five allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG E, Personal Conduct 
(Amended SOR ¶¶ 4.a(i), 4.a(ii), 4.a(iii), 4.b(i), and 4.c.). In her Answer to the SOR, 
dated May 22, 2008, Applicant admitted all nine allegations. In her Answer to the 
Amended SOR, she denied the five AG E aIlegations. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 5; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old, divorced, and employed as an inspector by a federal 
contractor. She is a high school graduate, and she attended college for about one 
academic year. Before becoming a government contractor, she served as a military 
reservist for approximately seven years. She has not previously held a security 
clearance.  (Item 8; Item 10.) 
 
 In about October 1991, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under 
the Influence. There is no evidence in the record of the disposition of this charge. 
Approximately three months later, in January 1992, she was arrested and charged 
again with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol. In May 1992, she was found guilty of 
the January 1992 offense. She was fined $1,150, sentenced to 20 days confinement, 
and sentenced to 12 months probation. (Item 9; Item 11.) 
 
 In May 1996, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving While License 
Suspended or Revoked.  In June 1996, she was found guilty of the offense and fined 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
$500. In July 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol and Driving While License Suspended. In December 2000, she was 
found guilty on both counts.  She was fined $500 and required to pay court fees.  The 
court sentenced her to school and community service.1  She was placed on probation 
for 11 months and 28 days.  (Item 9; Item 11.) 
 
 In February 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence of Prescribed Medication.  She was found guilty, fined, and sentenced to one 
year of probation.  On October 31, 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
Driving on a Suspended License, Driving While Intoxicated, and DWI Subsequent 
Offense.  In her May 22, 2008 answer to the SOR, Applicant denied knowing that her 
license was suspended when she was arrested on October 31, 2007.  However, in an 
affidavit she signed under penalty of perjury on March 7, 2008, Applicant stated that 
when she was arrested on October 31, 2007, “[she]I knew that [her] license was 
suspended and knew that driving during this time was an arrestable offense.” (Item 9 at 
24; Item 12.)  
 
 Applicant continues to drink alcohol.  She estimates that she drinks 4 or 5 cans of 
beer on weekends. She intends to drink alcohol on occasion in the future.  (Item 10 at 6-
7.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant admitted she had received 
medical treatment or counseling due to her use of alcohol. In 2002 or 2003, when she 
was suffering from depression, she concluded she was drinking too much alcohol. She 
sought medical assistance and was referred to counseling.  A medical doctor prescribed 
antidepressant medication for her, and she met with a counselor every two weeks. 
Applicant thought she was being treated for depression and not alcohol abuse. She is 
no longer under medical care for depression or alcohol abuse. Subsequently, in late 
2007, she took a prescribed medication for anxiety attacks.  (Item 7 at 5; Item 10 at 8.) 
 
 Applicant’s automobile was repossessed in either 2003 or 2004. She owes the 
creditor approximately $17,095 for the remainder owed after the automobile was sold by 
the creditor. Her credit report of December 2006 shows that the creditor reported the 
unpaid balance of $17,095 as a loss in March 2004. Applicant admitted the debt. She 
has no plan in place to pay or settle this delinquency. Applicant reports a net monthly 
income of $1,676 and fixed monthly expenses of $986. Her net monthly remainder is 
projected to be $283. (Item 4 at 5; Item 10 at 34; Item 15 at 7.) 
 
 In response to interrogatories from DOHA, Applicant provided a monthly budget 
which showed her plan to pay a total of $406 to nine creditors. Applicant’s credit reports 
of October 19, 2007 and December 13, 2006 revealed she was responsible for seven 
additional accounts in collection status and one civil judgment. These delinquencies 
 
1 The record does not specify what kind of “school” Applicant was directed to attend, and it does not 
indicate whether she attended as directed. 
 
4 
 
 
totaled approximately $4,000 and were not alleged on the SOR.  (Item 10 at 9; Item 14; 
Item 15.) 
 
 Applicant completed and certified an e-QIP on November 14, 2006.  Question  
23d on the e-QIP reads as follows: “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of 
any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?”  In response to Question 23d, Applicant 
answered “yes” and listed a 2004 arrest for Driving Under the Influence of Prescribed 
Medication. She failed to list or disclose that she had been arrested in October 1991 
and charged with Driving Under the Influence. She also failed to list or disclose that in 
January 1992 and in July 2000, she had been arrested and charged with Driving Under 
the Influence of Alcohol.  
 
 Question 25 on the e-QIP reads: “Your Use of Alcohol: In the last 7 years, has 
your use of alcoholic beverages (such as liquor, beer, wine) resulted in any alcohol-
related treatment or counseling (such as for alcohol abuse or alcoholism)?”  Applicant 
answered “no” to Question 25.  She did not disclose that in 2002 or 2003, she sought 
and received medical treatment or counseling because of depression and increased use 
of alcohol. 
 
 The SOR allegation at ¶1.f reads as follows: “On or about October 31, 2007, you 
were arrested by [deleted] and charged with Driving on a Suspended License, Driving 
While Intoxicated, and DWI Subsequent Offense.”  In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the allegation at ¶ 1.f. She then provided the following additional explanation: 
“Definitely poor judgment on my part. However, I did not know my license was 
suspended, in the previous offense nothing was said, I realized at that time that it was 
expired but not suspended.  I have not been charged with this yet . . . . My court date is 
29 May 08.”  Applicant failed to disclose that, according to her affidavit of March 7, 
2008, she knew when she was arrested on October 31, 2007 that her driver’s license 
was suspended and, further, that she knew it was an arrestable offense to operate a 
motor vehicle on a suspended license. (Item 4  at 4; Item 9 at 24.) 
 
 Applicant submitted three letters of character reference.  Her current supervisor 
praised her demeanor and personality and stated that he found her to be “dedicated, 
reliable and trustworthy.”  A co-worker noted her “good judgment and mature outlook.”  
The individual who trained Applicant for her current responsibilities stated he 
“consistently found [Applicant] to be a conscientious, dutiful and dependable associate.” 
(Item 4, 5-7.)  
 
         Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Criminal Conduct guideline “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a 
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  
AG ¶30. 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
 
  Applicant admits a criminal history that spans 16 years. In 1991, 1992, 2000, and 
2007, she was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol.  In 2004, she was 
arrested for a drug-related driving offense.  In 1996, 2000, and 2007, she was arrested 
for three suspended license offenses, two of which occurred when she was also 
charged with Driving Under the Influence.  This behavior raises concerns under AG ¶ 
31(a) and AG ¶ 31(c).2 
 
  Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant’s case.  If 
“so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 32(a) might apply.  If 
“there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of 
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive involvement,” then AG ¶ 32(d) 
might apply. 
 
  The record demonstrates that Applicant’s criminal behavior, which began in 1991 
and has continued to at least 2007, is, therefore, recent. A supervisor, co-worker, and 
trainer provided letters of character reference indicating they thought she was 
trustworthy and reliable. However, Applicant has not yet established a record of sobriety 
to assure that her long-standing criminal behavior related to alcohol use is unlikely to 
recur. Her criminal behavior related to her alcohol use continues to cast doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  I conclude that neither AG ¶ 32(a) nor 
AG ¶ 32 (d) applies. 
  
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
 I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions.  I 
have especially considered AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). 3 
 
 
2 AG ¶ 31(a) reads as follows: “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.” AG ¶ 31(c) reads: 
”allegation or admission or criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
3 AG ¶  22(a) reads: “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, 
fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether 
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”  AG ¶ 22(c) reads: “habitual or 
binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”   
 
7 
 
 
Between 1991 and at least 2007, Applicant was arrested once for a drug-related 
driving offense and four times for alcohol-related driving offenses. Her most recent 
alcohol-related driving offense occurred fifteen months ago, in October 2007. She is a 
habitual consumer of alcohol, and, despite multiple arrests for driving under the 
influence of alcohol, she continues to drink alcohol. She sought treatment for 
depression, following an increase in her alcohol consumption. She is no longer in 
treatment for depression. Nothing in the record suggests she has been diagnosed as an 
abuser of alcohol or as alcohol dependent. These facts raise security concerns under 
AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). 
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23 (d) if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.”   
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related conduct spans at least 16 years, from 1991 to 2007. 
Her most recent arrest for driving under the influence of alcohol occurred in October 
2007 and is therefore recent. In about 2002, she sought treatment for depression, which 
she believed had caused her to increase her consumption of alcohol. She was treated 
with an antidepressant, but continued to drink alcohol after her treatment for depression 
ended. Despite several arrests for driving under the influence between 1991 and 2007, 
she has not sought to have her alcohol consumption evaluated by a medical 
professional. She continues to drink alcohol. Accordingly, I conclude that none of the 
Guideline G mitigating conditions apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
8 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated a substantial delinquent debt of over $17,000, 
which resulted from the repossession of an automobile.  Since 2004, she has allowed 
the debt to remain unpaid, and she has failed to make arrangements to satisfy the debt. 
This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
Guideline F also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, such as loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might be 
applicable include evidence the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control (AG ¶ 20(c) or the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. (AG ¶ 20 (d))  
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquency that dates to at least 2004. Her 
delinquency is recent, on-going, and occurred under circumstances that are likely to 
recur. She appears to have income sufficient to pay or settle her delinquent debt over 
time, but she has failed to do so. The record does not reflect that circumstances beyond 
her control gave rise to her delinquency. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 
20(d) do not apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
9 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 When Applicant completed and signed her e-QIP in November 2006, she 
responded “yes” to Question 23, which asked if she had ever been charged with or 
convicted of any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. She then listed a 2004 arrest for 
Driving Under the Influence of Prescribed Medication. She failed to list a 1991 arrest 
and charge of Driving Under the Influence, a 1992 arrest and charge of Driving Under 
the Influence of Alcohol, and a 2000 arrest and charge of Driving Under the Influence of 
Alcohol.  In her answer to the amended SOR, she denied that her failure to disclose this 
information was deliberate falsification of material facts. 
 
 Question 25 on the e-QIP asked if, in the last seven years, Applicant’s use of 
alcoholic beverages had resulted in any alcohol-related treatment or counseling (such 
as for alcohol abuse or alcoholism). The amended SOR alleged that Applicant’s answer 
of “no” was a deliberate falsification of a material fact.  
 
 In her answer to the amended SOR, Applicant stated that she did not know her 
license was suspended when she drove her car on October 31, 2007. In her affidavit of 
March 7, 2008, Applicant stated she knew on October 31, 2007 that she was driving on 
a suspended license. The amended SOR alleged Applicant deliberately falsified 
material facts in her answer to the SOR when she denied knowing her license was 
suspended.  
  
The allegations in the amended SOR raise a security concern under AG ¶ 16(a), 
which reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used 
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” 
 
  Several Guideline mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(a) if “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” If “the refusal or failure to cooperate, 
omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or 
inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security process” and “[u]pon being made aware of 
the requirement to cooperate or provide information, then individual cooperated fully 
and completely,” then AG ¶ 17(b) might apply.  If “the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not case doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 17(c) might apply. 
 
  AG ¶ 17(d) might apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and 
obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
10 
 
 
                                           
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(e) might apply if 
“the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”4   
 
Applicant denied that her failure to report her 1991, 1992, and 2000 arrests for 
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol constituted deliberate falsification. However, 
nothing in the record suggests that she took prompt good faith action to correct the 
omissions, concealments or falsifications before she was confronted with the facts. (AG 
¶ 17(a).) Nothing in the record suggests that her failure to report the three arrests was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice specifically 
about the security clearance process from authorized individuals or legal counsel. (AG ¶ 
17(b).) Applicant had a sixteen-year record of alcohol-related driving arrests and, as a 
mature adult, she knew those arrests were not minor, so remote in time, so infrequent, 
or occurred under such unique circumstances that they would not seriously impact her 
eligibility for a security clearance. (AG 17(c).) Applicant failed to provide documentation 
that she had acknowledged the behavior that led to the arrests or had taken other 
positive steps to alleviate the circumstances that caused her unreliable conduct and, as 
a result such behavior was unlikely to recur (AG ¶ 17(d).) Nothing in the record 
suggests that Applicant took positive steps to reduce or eliminate the vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress that her behavior caused. (AG ¶ 17(e). I conclude, 
therefore, that it was in her self interest to under-report her arrests for Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol.  I further conclude that her omissions were deliberate. 
 
Applicant also denied on her e-QIP that her use of alcohol had resulted in 
alcohol-related treatment or counseling. However, in response to DOHA interrogatories, 
she acknowledged she had received treatment for depression and increased alcohol 
use. She was prescribed antidepressants and saw a counselor. She asserted that she 
thought she was being treated for depression and not alcohol abuse. Absent any other 
information on the nature of Applicant’s treatment, her assertion is plausible. 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated she did not know her driver’s license 
was suspended when she was arrested in October 2007.  However, she signed an 
affidavit under penalty of perjury in May 2008 stating that when she was arrested in 
October 2007, she knew her license was suspended and that driving with a suspended 
license was an arrestable offense. After considering all applicable Guideline E mitigating 
conditions, I conclude that none applies and that Applicant’s answer was a deliberate 
falsification.    
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
 
4 Neither AG 17(f) nor AG 17(g) applies to the facts of this case. 
 
11 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult who has 
been recognized by her supervisors, trainers, and co-workers as sensible, responsible, 
and trustworthy. However, she failed to accurately report her criminal conduct and her 
alcohol-related behavior on her e-QIP, thereby creating a situation that could seriously 
mislead the government about her honesty, reliability, trustworthiness. Her falsifications 
were not minor: they went to the heart of her qualifications for a security clearance. 
Applicant’s failure to be truthful was deliberate. She made no effort to correct her 
falsifications before the government confronted her with her lack of candor. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her 
criminal conduct, alcohol involvement, financial delinquencies, and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.f.: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a. through 4.c.: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 4.d.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 4.e.:   Against Applicant  
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
