1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-16381
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: 
Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant:
James W. Green, Esquire
Lance R. Claery, Esquire
Edmunds & Claery, LLP
January 30, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on August 2,
2005 (Government Exhibit 1). On April 15, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
security concerns under Guidelines C, B, F and E stating why DOHA could not make
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant, and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance
should be denied or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
2
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by President Bush on December 29, 2005,
and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
 
The Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 8, 2008, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge.  Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on June 4, 2008.  This case was assigned to me on June 6, 2008.  DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on July 10, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August
14, 2008. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 9, which were
received without objection. The Applicant testified on his own and submitted Applicant’s
Exhibits A through T, also without objection.  The record was left open at the Applicant’s
request for the submission of additional documentation.  The Applicant submitted
Applicant’s Exhibits U through AA on August 21, 2008, and August 27, 2008.  These
exhibits were also received without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing on August 25, 2008.  The record closed on August 29, 2008.  Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Procedural Ruling
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to the Lebanese Republic (Lebanon). (Transcript at 18-20.) The
request and the allied documents were not admitted into evidence, but are included in
the record.  The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of general
knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute.  The facts administratively noticed
are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 51 and married.  He is employed by a Defense contractor and
seeks a security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense industry.
In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the allegations in the Statement of
Reasons.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference)
The Government alleges in Paragraph 1 that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has acted in such a way that shows a preference for a foreign
country over the United States.
The Applicant had and used a Lebanese passport to travel to Lebanon after he
became an American citizen.  (Applicant’s Exhibit X.)  This passport has been
3
surrendered to his company’s security office.  (Applicant’s Exhibit I.)  The Applicant also
has a valid United States passport.  (Applicant’s Exhibit U.)  
The passports show that the Applicant used both of them to enter and leave
Lebanon.  He and his family travel to Lebanon every two or three years to visit family
members.  During his last trip, in 2007 and 2008, he used his Lebanese passport to
enter Lebanon and his American passport to leave.  The Applicant testified that he
retained the Lebanese passport to ease his entry into Lebanon, because he would not
have to obtain a Lebanese visa.  He further stated that he would only use his United
States passport in the future.  (Transcript at 31-32, 68-70.)
Paragraph 2 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence)
The Government alleges in Paragraph 2 that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has foreign contacts and interests that could lead to the exercise
of poor judgment, unreliability or untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
The Applicant was born in Lebanon in 1957.  In addition to his parents, he has
one brother.  The Applicant came to the United States in 1979 to continue his
education.  He received his Bachelor’s Degree in 1987.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  He
has had a successful business career in the United States.  Currently his net worth is
about $100,000.00.  (Transcript at 70-73.) 
He became an American citizen on May 23, 1986.  (Applicant’s Exhibit V.)  He
said the following regarding his conduct if forced to choose between Lebanon and the
United States: “I would put the interests of the United States first because, like I said,
the United States gave me everything I have right now.  That’s true I was born in
Lebanon and - - but I live here, I get my education over here, I have my future here.  I
love this country and it’s my plan - - I would never, ever do anything to harm this
country.”  (Transcript at 36-37.)  He stated firmly that he would not respond to any
request for information and would notify his company’s security department if
approached.  (Transcript at 31.)
The Applicant married his Lebanese born wife on October 14, 2002.  She is a
resident alien here in the United States.  The Applicant testified that his wife applied for
American citizenship in 2008.  Her mother also lives in Lebanon.  (Transcript at 26-27.)
As stated earlier, the Applicant’s parents and brother continue to live in Lebanon,
specifically in the Bekaa Valley.  Applicant and his wife have fairly frequent contact with
their families in Lebanon, speaking to them about weekly.  The Applicant send between
$1,000.00 and $1,400.00 a month to both families in Lebanon.  Finally, the Applicant
stated several times that he loves his parents a great deal, and that they are more
important to him than Lebanon.  (Transcript at 73-39.)
In an interview in 2007, the investigator wrote that the Applicant indicated or
stated, “There is no conflict between Lebanon and the United States. [The Applicant’s]
loyalty lies with the U.S.  His degree of loyalty to Lebanon is 20-30 percent.”
All of the following statements are supported by the documents submitted by the Department Counsel in1
support of his request for administrative notice.  (Administrative Notice Documents I through X.)
4
(Government Exhibit 2 at 2.)  The Applicant denied using a percentage during the
interview.  He did indicate that he had loyalty to his relatives, but not to Lebanon itself.
He further stated, “I have everything I need in life here.  Why would I want to jeopardize
that and have loyalty to a different country.  I mean, I have loyalty to my family, but not
to the country itself.”  (Transcript at 81.)
The Applicant has contacts with Lebanon.  Accordingly, it is appropriate to
discuss the relationship between Lebanon and the United States at this time.   I take1
administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts about Lebanon. Lebanon is a
parliamentary republic that became independent in November 1943. The U.S. policy is
to maintain its traditionally close ties with Lebanon and to help preserve its
independence, sovereignty, national unity, and territorial integrity. Since its
independence, Lebanon’s national policy has been determined by a small group of
regional and sectarian leaders. Political institutions often play a secondary role to
religion and personality-based politics. Lebanon has been in a state of war with Israel
since 1973. Civil war broke out in April 1975 and did not end until 1991. Since 1992,
Lebanon has experienced social and political instability, economic uncertainty, lack of
infrastructure, violent clashes with Israeli forces, and political assassinations.
I also take administrative notice that Lebanon’s foreign policy and internal
policies are heavily influenced by Syria, which maintains intelligence agents in Lebanon
and is a state sponsor of terrorism. The unstable political situation in Lebanon enables
foreign terrorist organizations to operate within its borders. Hezbollah is the most
prominent terrorist group in Lebanon, and it has been designated by the U.S.
Department of State as a “Foreign Terrorist Organization.” The Lebanese government
recognizes Hezbollah as a legitimate resistance group and political party. Hezbollah
maintains offices in Beirut and elsewhere in Lebanon, is closely allied with Iran,
supports a variety of violent anti-Western groups, and has been involved in numerous
anti-U.S. terrorist attacks. Hezbollah seeks to obtain U.S. technology, has been involved
in several efforts to obtain restricted, dual-use technology, and is considered by the U.S.
to be the most technically capable terrorist group in the world.  A center for Hezbollah
and Syrian activity is the Bekaa Valley.  
Finally, I take administrative notice that Lebanon has a poor human rights record
and has been ineffective in controlling terrorism and political violence. Lebanese
security forces have engaged in arbitrary arrest, murder, torture, and other abuses.
There is an atmosphere of governmental corruption and lack of transparency. Militias
and non-Lebanese forces operating outside the area of Lebanese central government
authority have used informers and monitored telephones to obtain information about
their perceived adversaries. Ongoing political violence and terrorism directed at
Americans and U.S. interests make Lebanon dangerous for U.S. citizens. 
5
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he in financially overextended and therefore at risk of engaging in
illegal acts to obtain funds.
The Applicant testified that a year long period of unemployment between 2002
and 2003 left him unable to pay his debts.  He has since resolved two of the three debts
alleged in the SOR, as well as paying off other debts.  (Applicant’s Exhibits K, L and M.)
The Applicant was indebted to American Express in the approximate amount of
$827.00 (SOR 2.a.).  This debt was paid in June 2008.  (Transcript at 37; Applicant’s
Exhibit J.)
The Applicant was in a dispute with LVNV Funding as to a debt in the
approximate amount of $6,839.00 for Bank of America (SOR 2.b.).  The Applicant has
consistently stated that this debt was the result of a “friend” using the Applicant’s credit
card without his knowledge and buying equipment for the friend’s business.  The
Applicant has resolved the debt and paid $2,572.00 in settlement.  (Transcript at 37-40,
52- 64; Applicant’s Exhibit Z.) 
The Applicant cannot admit or deny that he owes a medical debt of
approximately $395.00 (SOR 2.c.).  He has been unable to find any information on this
debt because none of the available credit reports provide any contact information as to
the creditor or a collection agency.  (Transcript at 43-44, 50-52; Government Exhibits 6,
7, 8 and 9; Applicant’s Exhibits  R, S and T.)
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The Government alleges in this paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has made false statements to the Department of Defense during
the clearance screening process.
In 2005, the Applicant filled out a Security Clearance Application in which he
stated that he was over 180 days delinquent on the debt set forth in allegation 2.b.,
above.  That was true.  He also remarked that his loss of employment and wife’s health
problems created a financial hardship and he was unable to maintain payments on this
debt.  That was also true.  (Government Exhibit 1 at question 38.)
The Applicant filled out an Interrogatory in January 2008.  In this document, he
stated that the debt in 2.b. was the result of fraud and that he was having it investigated.
(Government Exhibit 3 at 3, 9.)  
The Government’s credit reports show that, beginning in March 2002, the
Applicant notified the credit agencies that he was a credit fraud victim.  (Government
Exhibit 6 at 1 and Government Exhibit 7 at 1.)  
6
The Applicant testified at length about this debt, how it was incurred, why he
began paying it, and why he stopped.  He was cross-examined extensively on this point.
His version of events is credible and believable.  (Transcript at 40-43, 52-68.)  In
essence, a friend defrauded the Applicant and, after it was discovered, told the
Applicant that he would pay the debt. This person failed to do it.  The Applicant, in a
misguided attempt to preserve his credit, made payments on the account rather than
report it as a fraud.  The Applicant eventually attempted to inform the creditor of the
fraud, but the creditor informed him that, having made some payments on the account,
the Applicant was now legally responsible for it.  
While his decisions may not have been those of a trained attorney, they are not
on their face unreasonable.  In addition, his answer on the Security Clearance
Application was true, if somewhat incomplete.  Under the particular facts of this case, I
do not find that his answers were false, or that they were intended to mislead the
Government in any way.   This paragraph is found for the Applicant as the Government
has failed to show that any falsehood was made.
Mitigation
The Applicant is a highly respected person in his field.  He presented
recommendations from co-workers and supervisors that are very laudatory.  The letters
describe the Applicant as “trustworthy, dependable and compassionate,” “honest, loyal,”
and “straight forward.”  All of these people recommend the Applicant for a position of
trust.  (Transcript at 46-49; Applicant’s Exhibits A through H.)
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.  In addition, the Administrative Judge may also rely on his own
common sense, as well as his knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the
world, in making a reasoned decision.
7
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Section 7 of Executive Order
10865, “Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
It is the Government's responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant's conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government's case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial
evidence that the Applicant had a valid Lebanese passport that he used for travel
(Guideline C), that he has family members in Lebanon (Guideline B), and that he had
financial difficulties (Guideline F).  The Government did not meet its burden in showing
that the Applicant made false statements in the clearance screening process (Guideline
8
E.)  The Applicant, on the other hand, has not successfully mitigated the Government's
case, except in part.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference)
Turning first to Guideline C, the Applicant has mitigated the Government’s
concerns about his possession and use of his Lebanese passport after becoming an
American citizen.  The concern is stated thus under this Guideline, When an individual
acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United
States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are
harmful to the interests of the United States.
The Applicant had a valid Lebanese passport after becoming an American
citizen.  Accordingly, Disqualifying Condition 10(a)(1) applies to the facts of this case:
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include: (a)
exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S.
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  This includes but is not
limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
The Applicant has surrendered his passport to his company’s facility security
officer.  Accordingly, as required by Mitigating Condition 11(e) his Lebanese passport
has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise
invalidated.  
I have considered the Applicant’s using his Lebanese passport to travel to
Lebanon after becoming an American citizen.  As stated above, he would use both
passports to travel, and has indicated a credible intent to only use his American
passport in the future.  Paragraph 1 is found for the Applicant.  
Paragraph 2 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence) 
The concern under Guideline B is styled as follows:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is
associated with a risk of terrorism.
The Applicant and his wife live in the United States.  They have friends and
investments here.  His net worth is about $100,000.00.
9
Both of them, however, have connections to family in Lebanon.  As described
above, his parents, her mother, as well as siblings still live in Lebanon.  By his own
words, the Applicant stated that he has strong feelings for his family in Lebanon.  This is
shown by his repeated trips to Lebanon, five since 2000.  The last trip, as described
above, took place in December 2007-January 2008.  It is also shown by his sending
substantial sums of money, approximately $12,000.00 a year, to Lebanon. 
All of these connections must also be viewed in the context of the situation in
Lebanon, and in particular Hezbollah’s history of attempting to obtain classified and
other information from Americans and American companies.  To his credit, the Applicant
repeatedly stated that he is a loyal American citizen, that he understands his
responsibilities as a security clearance holder, and that he would not be a party to any
attempt by anyone in Lebanon to obtain information from him.  However, given the
depth and extent of his connections with Lebanon, he has failed to meet his burden of
showing an unequivocal connection to the United States. 
Based on the evidence the Government has presented, the following
Disqualifying Conditions apply to this case: 7.(a) Contact with a foreign family member .
. . who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; (b)
connections to a foreign person . . . that create a potential conflict of interest between
the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person . . . by providing that information; and (d)
sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion.  I have also considered the information concerning the situation in Lebanon,
provided by Department Counsel in their administrative notice documents. 
The Applicant has not provided compelling evidence to show that the following
Mitigating Conditions also apply to this particular case, given his particular background:
7(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.; (b) There is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of
the U.S. interest; and (c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.  Paragraph 2 is found against the Applicant.
10
Paragraph 3 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set out in
AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise
security concerns.  The Applicant failed to pay several of his debts for a period of years.
The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a
closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties.  Under AG ¶ 20(b), the disqualifying
conditions may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted in the financial problem
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment . . .), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.  The Applicant was laid off
between 2002 and 2003.  The Applicant has paid off all of his debts but one, and on that
one he is unable to find sufficient information to allow him to make a payment.  The
evidence raises this potentially mitigating condition. 
Evidence that the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts is also mitigating under ¶ 20(d).  The Applicant successfully
showed that he has successfully paid off two of the three debts alleged in the SOR, in
addition to resolving other debts.  I conclude this potentially mitigating condition applies.
Finally, ¶ 20(e) states that it may be mitigating where the individual has a
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  As set forth at length above, the
Applicant had a legitimate dispute with concerning the debt in 2.b.  In order to resolve
this issue, he accepted a settlement and paid this debt.  This mitigating condition clearly
applies to the facts of this case.  For all the foregoing reasons, Paragraph 3 is found for
the Applicant.
Paragraph 4 (Personal Conduct)
The Government failed to show that the Applicant made any false statements.
This Paragraph is found for the Applicant.
11
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
This is a close case.  The Applicant is an able, intelligent and respected member
of the Defense industry.  He is obviously a loyal American citizen.  I considered the
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and
circumstances surrounding this case, in particular his connections to Lebanon.  Two of
the factors have the most impact on this case.  First, I cannot find that there is the
“presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes,” as set
forth under AG ¶ 2(a)(6).  The Applicant simply has not proved that he has sufficient
connections in this country, as opposed to those in Lebanon, which shows a preference
for the United States instead of Lebanon.  In addition, given the terrorist situation in
Lebanon, it is not possible for me to find that there is little or no “potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress” as set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)(8) given his particular
circumstances. 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 2 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.  As
stated above, Paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 are found for the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For the Applicant
12
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e.: Against the Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline F: FOR THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c.: For the Applicant
Paragraph 4, Guideline E: FOR THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 4.a.: For the Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
