 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )             ISCR Case No. 07-15062 
 )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the
guideline for financial considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance
is denied.
On November 28, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP, SF-86 format) to request a security clearance
required as part of her employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). After reviewing
the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. 
On August 27, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR),
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. 2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included nine documents (Items 1 - 9) proffered in3
support of the government’s case.
 Applicant disputes this total, claiming that her delinquent debt amounts to approximately $73,000 (see notes4
on copy of FORM in Applicant’s Reply to FORM).
2
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG).
Applicant received the SOR (Item 1) on September 8, 2008. She signed her
Answer on September 15, 2008, in which she admitted to SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g., 1.i.,
and 1.k. through 1.u. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.j. In her Answer, Applicant also
noted that 1.c., 1.e., 1.j. 1.p., and possibly 1.u. were duplicate allegations. She did not
indicate whether she wished to have a hearing or have her case decided on the record.
As neither Applicant nor the government requested a hearing,  the case was assigned2
to me on January 21, 2009, for an administrative decision based on the record.
On December 29, 2008, DOHA Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant
materials (FORM)  in support of the government’s preliminary decision. Applicant was3
given 30 days from the date she received the FORM to file a response. The government
did not object to Applicant’s response, which was timely received on January 9, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I
make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is a 46-year-old mother of three. She married in 1982, and divorced in
1993. Her three sons are 14, 21 and 24 years old. Her two oldest sons are from a prior
marriage and she pays child support arrearages (Item 4). She attended one semester of
college in 1999. Applicant was employed as a receptionist from 1997 to summer 2007,
and completed her Security Clearance Application as part of that employment (Items 5;
6). As of July 2008, she worked for another defense contractor (Item 6). The file does
not include information on whether or not she was employed from summer 2007 to
summer 2008.
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes 21 debts, which total more than $100,0004
(Items 7, 8 and 9). In her Answer, Applicant admits to 19 debts. She denies allegation
1.j., stating that it is a duplicate of 1.e. However, in her Reply to the FORM, she
indicates that it is allegation 1.r. that is actually the duplication of 1.e., noting that “This
is item (e) on previous pg. Amount is after truck was sold.” (Reply, Item 1) She also
contends that allegations 1.c. and 1.p. are duplicates of other alleged debts, but does
In its FORM, the government 5
3
not state which debt each duplicates. She claims that 1.u. might be a duplicate, without
further explanation (Item 4).  5
Applicant denies the $44,000 child support delinquency alleged in the SOR,
stating that the account is current, and that she pays it monthly through payroll
deduction. In her Answer, she notes that the amount owed is $38,000, but in her Reply
to the FORM, she lists the current debt as $36,000 (Reply, Item 1). She also states in
her Answer that her income tax refunds are applied to her child support debt.
Applicant claims that all the debts, except the child support, are in a debt
consolidation program (Item 4). In her response to DOHA Interrogatories in June 2008,
Applicant noted that she had “joined a debt-relief program to correct my outstanding
debt” and that she would be “completely out of debt within 5 years.” (Item 6). She
provided the name of a law firm as the point of contact, but did not forward
documentation showing her enrollment. Three months later, with her Answer of
September 15, 2008, she again stated that she was “trying to consolidate and pay off”
her debts, and that she had obtained the services of a debt-relief organization. She
provided the following documentation: an agreement signed on September 15, 2008;
instructions on making payments; and a list of debts to be included in the plan. The list
of debts in the agreement duplicates the debt list in the SOR, and the agreement was
signed on the day Applicant wrote her Answer to the SOR. The file contains no
documentation of payments made or any further contact with the agency between
September 2008 and Applicant’s Reply to the FORM in January 2009.
Applicant did not provide a Personal Financial Statement, as requested,
However, based on her earning statement of July 2008 (Item 6), her gross monthly pay
is approximately $2,707, or approximately $32,485 annually. Her net monthly pay is
$1,668, or approximately $20,000 annually. Her earning statement also shows a
garnishment of $280.85 per pay period, or approximately $562 per month. She states
that this garnishment is applied to her child support debt (Item 6).
Applicant noted in her Interrogatory response that she “recently went through a
marital breakup and due to the financial situation I fell behind on things.” (Item 6). In her
Answer to the SOR she referred to the same situation, noting that, 
“A couple of years ago I was going through a bad
relationship break up after 12 years... The one thing that did
happen to me is my live in boyfriend whom I have a son with
(age 13) walked out on us about 3 years ago and I could not
keep up with my payments. I do not receive any child
support from him and I could not pay all of these bills, part of
them are his, just in my name.” (Item 4).
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors6
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
Guideline F (financial considerations) at AG ¶ 18.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an Applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a8
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the
requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.9
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
5
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
Based on the evidence contained in the FORM, disqualifying conditions AG ¶19
(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting
financial obligations) apply. The credit bureau reports show that most of Applicant‘s
debts became delinquent around 2005 and 2006, and they still appear on her 2008
reports (Items 7, 8 and 9), showing she has a history of being unable or unwilling to
meet her financial obligations.
The following conditions that can potentially mitigate security concerns are
relevant: AG ¶ 20: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due
debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute.
Applicant’s failure to pay her numerous delinquencies did not occur in the distant
past, because they are still delinquent. Although Applicant appears to have signed an
agreement with a debt counseling organization, she provided proof only that she is
making payments on one of the SOR debts, child support, through garnishment of her
pay. Given her failure to provide evidence of that she has actually started to make
payments on the remaining debts, her reliability remains in question. AG ¶ 20a cannot
be applied.
6
AG ¶ 20(b) is relevant because Applicant experienced a difficult break-up of her
relationship with her son’s father, which left her unable to handle the family debts on her
own, a condition that was beyond her control. From her statement that it occurred about
3 years ago, the break-up appears to have taken place in approximately 2005. The
credit bureau reports show that most of her delinquencies happened in the 2005-2006
time frame (Items 7, 8 and 9). Therefore, it does appear that the loss of her partner’s
support affected her ability to pay her debts. However, to be applicable, this mitigating
condition requires that the person act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant’s
failure to contact a debt-relief agency until she received the Statement of Reasons three
years later, and her failure to provide evidence of actual payments on her debts, do not
demonstrate responsible action. AG ¶ 20 (b) does not apply. 
AG ¶ 20c is relevant because Applicant claims she has a payment plan in effect
to resolve her debts. However, AG ¶ 20c cannot be applied because it also requires
evidence that the problem is under control. Applicant has provided no such evidence.
AG ¶ 20d is also relevant because Applicant contacted a debt-relief agency to
begin resolving her delinquencies. However, the record is insufficient to support a claim
that she made a good-faith effort to pay her debts. For instance, she stated in June
2008 that she had started a debt-relief program, but provided only the name of a law
firm, with no further evidence that she followed through with that firm and began a
program (Item 6). She apparently sought out a different debt-relief agency in September
2008. However, the record contains no proof that she has done more than sign an
agreement. There is no evidence that Applicant actually began making payments on
any debts in the plan. The fact that she signed the agreement on the day she submitted
her Answer, and that the debt list is simply a copy of the debts as listed in the SOR,
indicate that Applicant engaged in a last-minute attempt to show some evidence of
payment efforts. Finally, between her Answer in September 2008, and her Reply in
January 2009, she had an opportunity to make payments to show that a plan was
underway, but she took no action on any debt during those four months. Without
evidence to support her claim of paying her debts through a payment program, and with
only a promise of doing better in the future (Item 4), mitigation is not available under AG
¶ 20d.
AG ¶ 20(e) is also relevant. Applicant disputes several allegations, contending
they are duplicates of debts alleged elsewhere in the Statement of Reasons. The
evidence supports Applicant’s claim in part. The credit bureau reports show that 1.c.
and 1.p. are duplicates, as well as 1.k. and 1.u. (Items 8 and 9). However, the evidence
does not support Applicant’s contention that 1.e. and 1.j. are duplicates. AG ¶ 20(e)
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and
all the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a): 
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
7
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant is 46 years old and presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. She
accrued significant debt over the past several years. In response to the government’s
concerns she offered proof that she pays one debt: her child support arrearage, which is
paid by garnishment. She also offered proof that she signed an agreement with a debt-
relief organization, but no record evidence of payments. Absent evidence that the
payment plan is underway, and that Applicant has, in fact, begun making payments, the
government’s security concerns remain. A fair and common-sense assessment of the
available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows
she has not satisfied the doubts about her ability or willingness to protect the
government’s interests. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in
these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.10
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a: - 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i - 1.o. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p. For Applicant (duplicate of 1.c.)
Subparagraph 1.q. - 1.t. Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.u. For Applicant (duplicate of 1.k.)
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
RITA C. O’BRIEN
Administrative Judge
8
