                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-17387
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On August 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 19, 2008 and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on October 21, 2008, and was scheduled for
hearing on December 16, 2008.  A hearing was held as scheduled, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, or deny, Applicant’s application for a security clearance.  At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of 18 exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself)
and three exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on December 24, 2008.  Based
2
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant is alleged to have been arrested for 11 separate
offenses between October 1995 and May 2007.  Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged
to have accumulated 17 delinquent debts exceeding $25,000.00.  And under Guideline
E, Applicant is alleged to have falsified his security clearance application (e-QIP) of April
2007 by understating his alcohol/drug-related arrests.
                                                                                                                                
      For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted his criminal charges and
accumulated debts, but denied falsifying his security clearance application.  He claimed
to have avoided recurring episodes of anger, domestic violence and alcoholism with the
aid of pastoral and professional assistance.  He claimed his covered offenses in the
SOR were attributable to mistakes due to a lack of maturity and responsibility.  He
claimed to have taken positive steps with a debt consolidation company to eliminate his
listed debts.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old cable technician for a defense contractor who seeks to
retain his security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Applicant is a high-school graduate.  He has been married three times, and  he
divorced each of his spouses.  He has two children with his current fiancé, and they
reside with him and receive his financial support (R.T., at 35).  
Applicant enlisted in the Marine Corps in August 1993.  He did not adjust well to
military life and was discharged for other than honorable reasons in August 1993 (see
ex. 1; R.T., at 36).  He was introduced to alcohol at the age of 16.  For most of his adult
life, beer has been his drink of choice.  Although, he did sometimes turn to hard liquor
during his years of spousal turmoil with his last wife. 
Applicant’s arrest history
Between October 1995 and May 2007 Applicant was arrested on 11 separate
occasions for assorted alcohol and drug-related offenses, domestic violence incidents,
soliciting for prostitution, and traffic-related offenses.  He admits each of these listed
offenses and attributes most of his arrests over the past two years to alcohol abuse,
anger problems, and a rough childhood  (R.T., at 41-43, 59).  Four of his covered
arrests were alcohol-related (see exs.  13 through 17). 
3
Domestic issues with his last wife adversely affected his job performance with his
last employer.  Arguments with his wife caused him to miss a lot of work with this
employer and directly contributed to his termination from another employer in June 2006
(see ex. 3).
Applicant’s most recent arrest occurred in May 2007 and was for possession of
marijuana, driving on a suspended license for a prior DuI conviction, no headlamps, and
no seatbelt (see exs. 3, 14 and 15; R.T., at 38-40).  He was found guilty of marijuana
possession and driving on a suspended license in July 2007, and was sentenced to 45
days in jail (suspended) on the following conditions: pay a fine of $1,935.00, complete a
multiple offender state counseling program, abstain from drinking while his license
suspension remained in effect, and abstain from drinking for three years and attend 20
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings per month (see ex. 15; R.T., at 39-40).  
Applicant has since completed most of his court-ordered conditions and still
attends AA meetings every two weeks (R.T., at 40). His court-ordered program did not
include  random testing for drugs and alcohol. The only time he has ever been tested for
drugs is at work, and in that test, he tested negative for any illegal substances (R.T., at
53-54).  His court-imposed abstinence has more than a year to run.
Before his May 2007 arrest, Applicant was arrested in December 2006 and
charged with being an unlicensed driver (no alcohol or drugs cited).  Prior to being cited
for this traffic-related offense, he was arrested  in October 2006 for DuI.  Preceding his
October 2006 DuI arrest, Applicant consumed five beers and was pulled over by police
while driving home from a nightclub gathering.  When administered a Breathalyzer,
Applicant reported a .14 per cent blood-alcoholic content (BAC) (see exs. 3 and 14).   
Applicant has made progress in controlling his emotions and avoiding alcohol
through spiritual healing and personal acceptance of responsibility (R.T., at 44-46).  He
was introduced to alcohol at the age of 16 (beer).  For most of his adult life, beer has
remained his drink of choice.  Although, he did turn to hard liquor during his years of
domestic quarreling and turmoil (R.T., at 43).  
Since December 2006,  Applicant has carefully avoided alcohol and illegal drugs
of any kind (see ex. C; R.T., at 49-50).  He has regularly attended AA meetings and
intends to continue to attend these meetings (R.T., at 40, 46).  He works with AA’s 12-
step program and has completed the step that asks for help (R.T., at 47-49).  He is
helped in the maintenance of his sobriety by his own confessions and those of his fellow
AA members (R.T., at 47).  He has an AA sponsor, who is his pastor (R.T., at 49).
Applicant has no AA chips to commemorate his sobriety at present, but assures he is
eligible to receive his one-year chip, and has no intention to return to alcohol (R.T., at
45, 49-50).  Without corroborative support for his assurances, they cannot be afforded
the full weight that Applicant seeks.  In the meantime, he remains under court order to
abstain from alcohol, and provides no progress reports or updates from his counselors
or probation officers.
4
Applicant’s finances
Applicant accumulated 17 delinquent debts (exceeding $25,000.00) between
2000 and 2008 (see exs. 4 through 7 and 18).  Creditor 1.m represents the largest listed
debt.  Opened in 2001, the account was charged off for non-payment in 2003 (see ex.
7).  Applicant assures he has contacted a debt consolidation service and bankruptcy
consultant in 2008 to address his debts (R.T., at 79-80, 84-85). Applicant provides no
documentation, though, of any communications or start-up fee payments with a debt
consolidation service or bankruptcy consultant.  Without some documentation, his
claims cannot be fully assessed or validated (see ex. C).  He provides no
documentation either as to how he intends to resolve his debts.  
While Applicant continues to consider petitioning for Chapter 13 bankruptcy
relief, to date he has taken no action.  He is concerned it could hurt his credit, and will
initiate bankruptcy only as a last resort (see ex. 2; R.T., at 82-85).  He has not taken any
tangible steps either to obtain financial counseling or address his creditors individually.
(R.T., at 83-84).  His listed debts remain outstanding without any tangible attention
devoted to resolving them.  He has no savings or net monthly remainder to allot to his
individual creditors and no visible means of paying his listed creditors (R.T., at 86-87).
Applicant is committed first to taking care of his family with his available resources
(R.T., at 87).
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in April 2007, Applicant omitted his alcohol-related
arrests of October 2006 and February 1999 when responding to question 23d.  He
attributes his omission of his 1999 arrest to memory lapse (see ex. C; R.T., at 110-11 ).
Because the charges arising out of his 2006 DuI arrest had not yet resulted in any
conviction, he asked his facility security officer (FSO) at the time for advice on how to
address this arrest in his e-QIP (R.T., at 105-07).  She passed away before she could
get back to Applicant with an answer (R.T., at 107).  Without professional advice to
guide him, Applicant interpreted the question on his own and omitted his October 2006
arrest for the lack of a conviction at the time he executed his e-QIP in April 2007 (R.T.,
at 107-08).
In a follow-up interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) in August 2007, the investigator reviewed Applicant’s arrests with
him.  Before she could ask him any questions about his October 2006 DuI arrest, he
told her of the arrest and the pending charges against him (R.T., at 101, 109-11).  The
investigator proceeded to ask him about his 1999 DuI arrest, which he indicated he had
forgotten about when completing his e-QIP (see ex. 3;  R.T., at 95-96, 110-11). 
Applicant has consistently insisted that he could not recall being arrested for DuI
in February 1999 (R.T., at 75-76).  His 1999 DuI arrest is fairly dated (see ex. 17) and
conceivably could have been forgotten when he completed his e-QIP in April 2007 due
to the number of arrests involved.  His omission of his October 2006 DuI is more difficult
5
to reconcile with the clear instructions in question 23d about providing details about
arrests and charges, not just convictions (see ex. 1).  But Applicant assures he sought
advice from his FSO about the 2006 arrest, and volunteered details of the arrest in his
follow-up OPM interview before the agent could confront him with it. The summary of
interview does not contradict Applicant in any way on his claims, and his affirmative
response to question 23d and overall credibility sufficiently shows he was not trying to
hide his arrests to avoid embarrassment and the potential loss of his clearance.
Applicant’s explanations enable him to avert inferences of knowing and wilful
falsification. 
Applicant is supported in his clearance application by his FSO and his mother
(see exs. A and B).  Both find him worthy of obtaining a clearance.  
 
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.  Adjudication Guidelines (AG) ¶ 30.
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  AG ¶ 18.
6
 Personal Conduct
The Concern: “Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.”  AG ¶ 15.
Drug Involvement
The Concern: “Improper or illegal involvement with drugs raises
questions regarding an individual’s willingness or ability to protect
classified information.  Drug abuse or dependence may impair social or
occupational functioning, increasing the risk of an unauthorized disclosure
of classified information.”  AG ¶ 24
Alcohol Consumption
The Concern. “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment, or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”
AG ¶ 21.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or continue an
applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is
clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated
in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security
clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence.  As
with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
7
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is an employed defense contractor with a considerable history of arrests
and convictions, most involving domestic violence issues and drug/alcohol-related
offenses.  Security concerns are also raised over a number of debt delinquencies (17 in
all) that exceed $25,000.00 and omissions of two of his alcohol-related offenses in the e-
QIP he completed in April 2007. Raised drug and alcohol concerns are associated with
his arrest history.
Criminal conduct offenses
Applicant’s history of multiple arrests and convictions involving domestic violence
charges and drug/alcohol-related offenses warrant consideration of two disqualifying
conditions of AG ¶ 30.  DC ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,”
and DC ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged,” have application.  Applicant’s arrests and convictions
comprise 11 separate incidents over a 10-year period between October 1995 and May
2007. Among his arrest/convictions are four alcohol-related offenses, three domestic
violence offenses, one soliciting/prostitution offense, and one drug possession offense.
With the aid of the lessons he acquired in his most recent anger management
counseling, he has developed better control mechanisms for dealing with potential
domestic violence and alcohol issues.  Divorced with two children to support (while living
with his fiancé), Applicant faces new parental challenges and has accepted parental
responsibilities.  However, he has been able to develop any seasoned track record yet
for making safe predictions about the future. 
Because of the severity and recurrent nature of Applicant’s arrest history over the
past 10 years, it is too early to afford him any reliance on  MC ¶ 32(a), “so much time has
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  His own testimonials about his maturation
process and the support he has drawn from his FSO, AA meetings, and his mother are
helpful, but not enough at this time to enable him to take advantage of any of the
mitigating conditions covered by AG ¶ 32.  Based on a consideration of the applicable
guidelines, Applicant’s efforts to date are insufficient to enable him to mitigate the
criminal conduct specifically associated with his multiple arrests and convictions.  
To his credit, Applicant has shown considerable responsibility and care for the
welfare of his fiance and her children he supports.  His compliance with his probation
conditions and continued AA participation reflects positively on his commitment to accept
more responsibility and honor the laws and rules of civil society. 
8
Whole person assessment of Applicant’s arrest history and mitigating efforts
include an evaluation of the following considerations: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the adequacy and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation of the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.  Applicant’s covered actions must be balanced against all of the material
circumstances surrounding the criminal conduct at issue and steps he has taken to
prevent recurrence.
 Taking  into account all of the facts and circumstances developed in the record,
Applicant’s covered arrests and convictions still leave residual security concerns after
crediting him with the corrective steps he has taken in his work and personal life.
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k of the SOR.
Applicant’s financial issues
Security concerns are also raised under the financial considerations guideline of
the AGs where the individual applicant is so financially overextended as to indicate poor
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, which
can raise questions about the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information, and place the person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.  Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts (17 in all) and his past
inability to pay these debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions
(DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and ¶19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant has no documented efforts to resolve his
delinquent debts that exceed $25,000.00.  His claims of contacting a debt consolidation
firm and bankruptcy consultant are not documented and cannot be corroborated in this
record.  
Neither extenuation nor mitigation credit are available to Applicant.  His failure to
provide any documented proofs of extenuating circumstances associated with his debts
or good faith repayment efforts and/or counseling initiatives preclude him from relying on
any of the available mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20. 
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
improper influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases (as here).
9
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
debt accumulations and his lack of any documented steps taken to resolve them, the
support he has received from his FSO, AA meetings and his mother, and his own
personal account of the changes in his lifestyle to ensure more personal responsibility in
his personal affairs, Applicant provides too little probative evidence of progress with his
debts to mitigate security concerns related to his proven debt delinquencies.
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 2.a through 2.q of the SOR.
Applicant’s alcohol history
Applicant’s four alcohol-related arrests covered in the SOR raise major concerns
over his risk of recurrent alcohol abuse.  On the strength of the evidence presented, two
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs for alcohol consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be
applied: DC ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace or other
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent,” and DC ¶ 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol
to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”
To Applicant’s credit, he acknowledges his excessive alcohol consumption and
the adverse effects that his abuse of alcohol played in his family and in his use of public
roads and highways over a 10-year stretch spanning 1995 and 2006.  His abstinence
assurances are entitled to some weight, but are open to some uncertainties about the
quality of his sobriety and AA participation without corroboration from his sponsor and/or
fellow AA members and chips commemorating his sustained abstinence.  Further, he
has never sought an evaluation from a credentialed physician or licensed substance
abuse counselor and provides no corroborative support of the lessons he claims from his
anger management and counseling courses. 
Applicant’s failure to provide any corroborative support of his AA and abstinence
commitments are important considerations in determining what weight to assign to
Applicant’s rehabilitation claims.  See ISCR Case 02-03186 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006);
ISCR Case 01-20579, at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 14, 2004).  With over a year to run on
Applicant’ s court-imposed three-year abstinence requirement,  uncertainties abound
over Applicant’s ability to maintain his sobriety.
Still troubling and of ongoing security concern is Applicant’s history of recurrent
alcohol-related arrests, the absence of any professional diagnoses and prognoses, and
his lack of a more extended period of sustained abstinence.  While Applicant provides
assurances of his sincere commitment this time to maintain his current track of sobriety
with the help of AA, his sustained abstinence efforts are still relatively new (about two
years). Moreover, Applicant’s probation conditions include three years of sustained
abstinence.  This sustained abstinence condition will not expire for another year and a
10
half. This is not to suggest his renewed commitments to sobriety do not reflect positive
changes in behavior supportive of sobriety.  
Faced with similar recurrent alcohol-related arrests over a considerable period of
time, our Appeal Board has expressed reluctance to make safe predictive judgments
about an applicant’s ability to avoid abusive incidents in the future without strong
probative evidence of sustained recovery, aided by positive professional reinforcements.
See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 (App.
Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).  Applicant’s circumstances do not enable him to differentiate these
guides forged by the Appeal Board in addressing alcohol-related arrests.
Taking into account both Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse, his strong work
record, the applicable guidelines and a whole person assessment of his most recent
sobriety efforts, conclusions warrant that his overall efforts, while encouraging, do not
reflect sufficient  evidence of sustained commitment to AA and its tenets of sobriety to
convince he is no longer at risk to recurrence.  In the past, he has enjoyed considerable
periods of sobriety only to return to episodic drinking that involved alcohol-related
incidents away from work.  Because of this recurrent abuse problem, his earlier incidents
cannot be considered isolated and unrelated to a pattern of abuse, despite their
comparative age when considered separately.
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant fails to make a convincing showing
that he has both the maturity and resource support at his disposal to avert any recurrent
problems with judgment lapses related to alcohol.  Without a more sustained record of
sobriety to rely on, Applicant’s mitigation efforts are simply not enough at this time to
warrant safe predictions that he is no longer at risk to judgment impairment associated
with such conduct.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by the alcohol guideline of the SOR. 
Implications of Applicant’s drug-related arrest
Applicant’s documented involvement with illegal substances are minimal.  His only
proven association with drugs is the marijuana possession imputed him by his May 2007
drug possession arrest/conviction. This arrest alone is not enough to establish any
pattern of drug abuse.
Still, Applicant's recent documented drug possession is sufficient to invoke two  of
the disqualifying conditions of AG ¶ 24, i.e., DC ¶ 25(a), “ any drug abuse,” and DC ¶
25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase,
sale or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia.”  Neither of these conditions
require any minimal pattern of abuse.
Applicant has not used or possessed marijuana or any other illegal substance
since his first and only drug-related arrest in May 2007. To be sure, misconduct
predictions (to include return to illegal drug use), generally, may not be based on
supposition or suspicion.  See ISCR Case No. 01-26893 (App. Bd. October 2002); ISCR
11
Case No. 97-0356 (App. Bd.April1998).  The Appeal Board has consistently held that an
unfavorable credibility determination concerning an applicant is not a substitute for
record evidence that the applicant used illegal drugs since his last recorded use, or
based on his past use he is likely to resume drug usage in the future.  See ISCR Case
No. 02-08032 (Appeal Bd. May 2004). 
Based on the absence of any developed record of recurrent drug abuse by
Applicant, there are no prudent reasons to infer that he has used marijuana or any other
drug on other occasions, (prior or subsequent to his May 2007 arrest/conviction).
Accordingly, Applicant may claim the mitigation benefits of one of the mitigating
conditions of the Guidelines for drugs: MC ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago,
was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.”  
Applicant’s limited involvement with illegal drugs and his assurances that his
marijuana possession is a thing of the past are convincing.  Considering all of the
developed evidence of record, Applicant mitigates security concerns associated with his
isolated possession of marijuana.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to sub-
paragraph 4.a that is covered by Guideline H.
Falsification issues
Potentially serious and difficult to reconcile with the trust and reliability
requirements for holding a security clearance are the timing and circumstances of
Applicant’s multiple omissions of his alcohol-related arrests in the security clearance
application he completed in April 2007, and in his withholding of his arrest/charges
arising out of his October 2006 and February 1999 incidents.  So much trust is imposed
on persons cleared to see classified information that deviation tolerances for candor
lapses are gauged very narrowly. 
Applicant’s October 2006 alcohol-related arrest was followed by filed charges of
DuI.  On these charges, Applicant was scheduled to appear in court to respond just days
after he completed his April 2007 e-QIP.  Concerned about how to answer the pertinent
question covering his alcohol-related arrests, he went to his FSO at the time for
guidance.  Before she could get back to him with helpful instructions, she suddenly
passed away.  Pressed to complete and return his completed e-QIP, Applicant omitted
his 2006 DuI arrest, along with his February 1999 DuI arrest (this one for reasons of
memory lapse).
By omitting his October 2006 and February 1999 DuI arrests, Applicant initially
raises the question of whether he failed to satisfy minimum standards of candor covered
by AG ¶ 15.  DC ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
12
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities,” has some initial application to Applicant’s situation.
 
By itself, Applicant’s confusion explanation for his 2006 arrest omission is difficult
to accept.  His prompt, good faith correction of the omission in his ensuing OPM
interview helps to fortify his explanation for his initial omission, and mitigate any candor
concerns about his answers. 
In the past, the Appeal Board has denied applicants availability of the predecessor
mitigating condition of MC ¶ 17(a) “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to
correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the
facts,” where the applicant has waited many months to timely correct a known omission.
Compare ISCR Case No. 97-0289 (App. Bd. January 1998) with DISCR Case No. 93-
1390 (App. Bd. January 1995).  
Applicant’s correction of his 2006 e-QIP omission was made both promptly and
voluntarily in Applicant’s case, and enable him to convincingly mitigate security concerns
over this omission.   Weighing all of the circumstances surrounding his e-QIP omission of
his October 2006 arrest/charge, and his proven prompt, good faith correction, Applicant’s
claims satisfy the necessary probative showing to avert drawn conclusions that he
knowingly and deliberately withheld material background information about ths prior
arrest/charge.
Applicant’s memory lapse claims covering his earlier 1999 DuI arrest are plausible
enough to enable him to avert inferences  of knowing and wilful omission of this charge,
and convincingly demonstrate that the falsification allegation covering his 2006 arrest is
not proven.  This allegation is concluded to be unsubstantiated. 
Considering all of the evidence produced in this record and the available
guidelines in the Directive (inclusive of the E2.(a) factors), unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to subparagraph 3.a of Guideline E.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2 (a) factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE J: (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.k: AGAINST APPLICANT
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
13
Sub-paras. 2.a through 2.q: AGAINST APPLICANT
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):          FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 3.a: FOR APPLICANT
GUIDELINE H: (DRUGS):          FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 4.a: FOR APPLICANT
GUIDELINE G: (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):           AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 5.a: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
14
  
