                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-18176 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Fadi F. Toma, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 2, 2006, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86) in the electronic e-QIP version. On June 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 18, 2008. He answered the 
SOR in writing on June 24, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. DOHA received the request on July 8, 2008. I received the case assignment on 
August 27, 2008.  Thereafter, Applicant retained counsel who filed a Notice of 
Appearance and an Amended Answer on September 22, 2008.  DOHA issued a Notice 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
of Hearing on October 20, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
November 5, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through Y, without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 18, 2008 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. (Tr. at 12, 14.) The request and the attached documents 
were admitted into evidence as Exhibit 4. The facts administratively noticed are set out 
in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated June 24, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional information to 
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 50 years old.  He is unmarried.  Applicant works for a defense 
contractor.  He was born in Iraq.  He is of the ethnic Kurdish heritage in Northern Iraq. 
He graduated from an Iraqi college in 1981 with an electrical engineering degree.  He 
served his mandatory military duty in the Iraqi Army from 1981 to 1983.  He had 
difficulty getting a job after his military service because he is a Kurd and was not a 
member of the ruling Ba’athist Party.  In 1991, he fled Iraq along with his family and 
other persons from his hometown to escape possible attack by the previous Iraqi 
regime, and he went to a refugee camp in Turkey with his parents and sisters.  They 
returned to Iraq when protected by United Nations coalition forces.  He preferred not to 
return to Iraq.  Applicant went to Turkey and applied for asylum in 1992, and sought to 
come to the United States.  He was admitted as a refugee to the United States in 1992.  
In May 1999 he became a U.S. citizen.  Applicant owns his home.  He purchased it in 
2001 for about $98,000 and paid off the mortgage in 2005.  He also paid $86,000 in 
cash for seven lots next to his home. (Tr. 28-30, 43-49, 72; Exhibits 1-3, S-X) 
 
 From March 2003 to 2004, Applicant worked for a defense contractor as a 
translator in Iraq with the United Nations coalition forces during the liberation of Iraq 
from the Saddam Hussein Ba’athist Party regime.  He had an interim security clearance, 
on which he had no violations.  He worked very hard and took a break to rest from 2004 
until February 2006, when he signed a contract with another Government contractor to 
work as a cultural advisor to the coalition forces in Iraq.  He has had an interim security 
clearance since starting work with the second defense contractor, and there have been 
no violations of that security clearance.  (Tr. 31-34, 51-54; Exhibits 1-3)   
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has five sisters and two brothers, all of whom were born in Iraq. 
Applicant’s mother and four sisters live in Iraq and are citizens of that country.   One 
brother died in the refugee camp in 1991.  Another sister lives in Norway, as does an 
uncle whom Applicant has not had contact with since 1996. Of the four sisters living in 
Iraq, the third oldest of them is engaged to an Iraqi-born man and they will be moving to 
Germany after their marriage.  His mother is 65 years old, and lives on the pension her 
husband, who died in 1996, earned as a policeman in Iraq.  Applicant does not provide 
any financial support to her.  His four sisters are school teachers in Iraq.  The oldest 
sister is married to an electrician, the second oldest to an accountant, and the youngest 
is married to a real estate agent.  Applicant last spoke with his mother and sisters four 
months prior to the hearing.  He speaks with them by telephone two or three times each 
year.  Applicant characterizes his relationship with his mother as a “long distance” 
situation. Also, Applicant’s two brothers live in European countries, the Netherlands and 
Norway.  Applicant testified his sisters and mother appreciate the United States efforts 
to bring democracy to Iraq, and does not regard himself as open to any coercion or 
pressure because of his familial relationships. (Tr. 37-41, 47, 50, 58-68; Exhibits 1-3) 
 
 Since leaving Iraq, Applicant has not had much physical contact with his family.  
He visited them for a month at a time in 1999 and 2005, staying at his mother’s house.  
While there in those years, he visited a childhood friend.  He has not had contact with 
that person since 2005.  He used his U.S. passport each time to enter Iraq and any 
other country on route to that destination.  Since becoming a U.S. citizen in 1999, 
Applicant has not voted in any Iraqi election, and prior to that the elections in Iraq were 
controlled by the Hussein regime.  Applicant does not own any property in Iraq or any 
other foreign country.  He has not had any contact with the Iraqi Embassy in the United 
States.  He has no plans to visit Iraq on personal business as he did in 1999 and 2005.  
Applicant does not claim dual citizenship with Iraq, contending he renounced his Iraqi 
citizenship when he became a U.S. citizen.  He is willing to renounce any vestige of 
Iraqi citizenship if it were found to exist currently. (Tr. 69, 70) 
 
 Applicant submitted 12 very favorable character letters from persons with whom 
he worked in Iraqi, including military members with whom he served and U.S. 
Department of State infrastructure reconstruction team leaders. They all reported 
excellent work by Applicant, the long hours he worked, his dedication to his duty and to 
the efforts being made in Iraq by the coalition forces, and recommended he receive a 
security clearance.  Applicant also submitted several certificates awarded him by the 
coalition military forces for his duty performance.  His performance evaluations for 2008, 
submitted as exhibits, are marked as “exceeds expectations” in his duty performance.  
Applicant also submitted his financial records to show his real estate purchases, his 
savings and investments, all directed toward showing his financial investment in the 
United States. (Exhibits A-Y)     
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: Iraq is a Middle Eastern country 
with 27 million people.  In 2003, The United States led a United Nations coalition to 
remove Saddam Hussein, a long-serving dictator and Ba’athist Party leader, from power 
in Iraq. A parliamentary democracy was created pursuant to a new 2005 constitution. 
 
4 
 
 
After free elections in 2006, Iraq’s new government took office. The Parliament was 
elected for a four year term. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq has had 
much violence, perpetrated by Al Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. Numerous 
attacks and kidnappings have targeted the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, and other 
civilians, as well as Iraqis.  Although the new governmental has taken aggressive action 
against terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq remains high, as do human rights 
abuses. Terrorist groups conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state 
intelligence services.  For the past 18 months, the large increase in U.S. combat troops 
in Iraq has substantially reduced violence. These troops were aided by Iraqi soldiers of 
the new Iraqi Government, and Sunni local forces that formerly supported the Al Qaeda 
insurrection.  In Northern Iraq, the Kurdish local government and forces maintain a more 
peaceful environment for the residents than elsewhere in Iraq.  The Iraqi Government 
has regained sovereignty over its territory, has primary responsibility for security, and 
the coalition, primarily American military forces now, operate according to a recently 
concluded status of forces agreement between the United States and Iraq. (Exhibit 4) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The Applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interest, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1 and 
 
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s mothers and four sisters are citizens and residents of Iraq. While Iraq 
struggles with the creation of a democracy, it is randomly victimized by terrorist attacks. 
This situation creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶ ¶ 
7(a) and (b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation.  Two conditions that could mitigate the disqualifications are provided under 
AG ¶ 8:  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the U.S., he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interests. In 1991, Applicant escaped from Iraq to avoid the Hussein 
regime.  He sought asylum and came then to the United States in 1992.  He became a 
naturalized citizen in 1999.  He worked in the United States since his arrival, does not 
own any property in Iraq, but owns a home and has his money in the United States. He 
returned to Iraq in 2003 to work with the United Nations coalition forces in removing the 
dictatorial regime then in power.  He departed in 2004 after concluding his work with the 
first defense contractor for whom he worked.  He visited his family in 1999 and 2005.  
He returned to work in Iraq with another defense contractor as a cultural advisor in 
2006.  He continued to do that job until his interim security clearance was removed in 
2008 when the SOR was issued.  He speaks to his mother and four sisters two or three 
times a year by telephone.  He has not seen his mother or sisters since 2005.  One 
other sister and his two brothers live in Europe.  His ties to the United States are much 
stronger than his ties to his siblings and elderly mother living in Iraq. His strongly 
expressed gratitude to the United States for giving him shelter and a peaceful life is very 
persuasive to show his strong ties to the United States overcoming any residual 
attraction to his former country.  In his former country he was a member of a 
discriminated minority who had limited job opportunities.  He wanted to come to the 
United States in 1992 and escape the situation in Iraq.  
 
7 
 
 
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) has limited application to Applicant’s relationships with his siblings, 
with whom he has infrequent communication. Although there is a remote possibility that 
terrorists could attempt to coerce or threaten Applicant through his mother or siblings, it 
is highly unlikely. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Four circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis.  First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and 
human rights abuses in Iraq. But they are declining as the new Government matures 
and gains experience.  More importantly for security purposes, terrorists are hostile to 
the United States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists, and even friendly 
governments, could attempt to use his sisters and mother, who live in Iraq, to obtain 
such information. Second, he had connections to Iraq before he left there in 1991. He 
was born in Iraq and spent his formative years there. Third, his mother and four sisters 
remain citizens and residents of Iraq. Fourth, he maintains some contact with his mother 
and sisters. 
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. Applicant is a mature person. He came to the United States as a refugee in 
 
8 
 
 
1992 and became a naturalized citizen in 1999.  He has worked in the United States 
since his arrival.  He previously owned property in the United States, and currently has 
a bank account. Out of his sense of gratitude and dedication to the United States, he 
sought employment with a Government contractor in 2003 as an Arabic-speaking 
linguist. He takes his loyalty to the United States very seriously, and has worked 
diligently for a defense contractor for more than two years in an important capacity for 
our troops. I give great weight to the letters of recommendation, written by the soldiers 
with whom he served. They assess him as loyal and trustworthy, and praise his 
significant contributions to the cause of freedom in Iraq. After leaving Iraq in 1991, he 
did not return for 8 years. No statements from his character witnesses recommended 
denial of his security clearance. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action 
that could cause potential harm to the United States or failed to abide by his employer’s 
rules and regulations.  
 
Applicant held an interim security clearance during his tenure in Iraq without any 
indication that he breached security policies or procedures. While that fact is not 
normally to be considered a factor in granting a clearance, the Appeal Board noted in 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s 
prior history of complying with security procedures and regulations 
significant probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or 
extenuating the security concerns raised by the applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 
5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
May 30, 2006). However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution 
to the nation security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. 
July 14, 2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to 
an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognizes, resist, 
and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from foreign influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
