 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16833 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by her drug and alcohol use, 
criminal conduct, and personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
On August 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct; Guideline H, Drug Involvement; Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 11, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 9, 2008. 
 
2 
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 19, 2008, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on January 7, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf 
and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were received without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 26, 2009.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
Applicant works overseas. The notice of hearing went to her address in the 
United States. Her husband called her on January 5, 2009, and told her that her hearing 
was scheduled for January 7, 2009. She contacted our office telephonically on January 
5, 2009, to request a continuance, but Department Counsel and I had already departed 
for the state where the hearing was to be located and the request was not received. 
Applicant flew to the site of the hearing on January 6, 2009. I advised Applicant at her 
hearing on January 7, 2009, of her right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days 
notice before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived her right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2001 or 2002. She served in the U.S. Army from 1997 
through 2000, and was honorably discharged. She held a security clearance in the 
Army and during her current employment. She attended college classes but has not 
obtained a degree. She is currently married and was twice previously married. She has 
two children ages ten and eight from an earlier marriage and a five-year-old child with 
her current husband. Applicant is the wage earner in her family. Her husband minds the 
children.1  
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana on several occasions in about 1996 to 1997, while 
she was in high school. She did not use any illegal drugs while she was in the Army. In 
about 2001, she started using illegal drugs. Between about February 2001 and June 
2006, she used methamphetamine about five to ten times and cocaine about 50 times. 
Applicant drank alcohol to make her feel relaxed in social settings, but she did not like 
the feeling of being intoxicated. She used methamphetamine and cocaine so that she 
could consume alcohol but not feel as intoxicated.2  
 
 Applicant was arrested in January 2006, and charged with driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI) and driving with a .08% or higher blood alcohol level. Her 
blood alcohol was tested at .16% and a short time later at .14%. Applicant pled no 
contest to the second charge in July 2006, and she was sentenced in August 2006. She 
was out of the country and not present at either court session and was represented by 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 34-36, 39-40, 46-47, 53; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 37, 40-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
counsel. She was sentenced to 30 days confinement, suspended on the condition that 
she attend ten Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings per month for three months, fined 
$1,900, and placed on probation for three years. Terms of her probation included that 
she complete an alcohol counseling program and not drink any alcohol for two years. 
Applicant was sentenced in August 2006, but the court records indicate that she started 
some of the terms of the probation before the sentencing and the probation started on 
March 6, 2006.3   
 
 Applicant’s fine was ordered to be paid at the rate of $50 per month starting on 
January 1, 2007. There was miscommunication between Applicant and her attorney as 
to when the fine was to start being paid and she did not make the initial payments. A 
bench warrant was issued in February 2007. Applicant was notified of the bench 
warrant and she paid $2,227 to pay all her fine and costs. The bench warrant was 
recalled in April 2007. Applicant completed the terms of her probation that required 
attendance at AA meetings and an alcohol counseling program. She will remain on 
probation until April 2009.4  
 
 Applicant has been treated for anxiety and depression since 2001. The anxiety 
caused her to feel uncomfortable in social settings. She was treated by her primary care 
physician from 2001 through 2006. She started seeing a psychologist through her 
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) in October 2006, for drug and alcohol counseling, 
marital counseling, and for her depression. She saw him for weekly one-hour sessions 
for three months. He recommended she see a psychiatrist. She has been under the 
treatment of a psychiatrist since January 2007. He prescribed medication for her 
depression and anxiety. She started with weekly one-hour sessions, then every two 
weeks, and then once per month. She reported that she no longer had feelings of 
depression or anxiety.5 
 
Applicant has not used any illegal drugs since June 2006. She continued to drink 
alcohol while on an overseas assignment. She returned from the overseas assignment 
in October 2006, and began drug and alcohol treatment. She drank a couple more times 
and then became totally abstinent. She has not had any alcohol since January 2007.6  
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
April 5, 2007. She listed her DUI arrest and fully listed her illegal drug use. She was 
questioned by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on 
August 17, 2007, and fully discussed her drug and alcohol use. She was open, honest, 
and candid about her drug and alcohol use at her hearing. She admitted that she 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 26-27, 31-34, 37-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 3-6. 
 
4 Id. 
 
5 Tr. at 38-39; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 27-29, 45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
4 
 
exhibited extremely poor judgment when she used illegal drugs and when she drove 
after drinking. She credibly testified that she will never use illegal drugs again.7 
 
Applicant no longer associates with the people with whom she used drugs. Her 
husband does not use drugs and rarely drinks alcohol. She did not sign a statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation before the hearing. I 
directed her attention to Drug Involvement Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 26(b)(4). She was 
unaware of this provision. She stated that she is willing to sign a statement of intent not 
to abuse any illegal drugs in the future with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation. Her family, close friends and company are aware of her drug and alcohol 
history.8 
 
 Applicant’s company sends her on frequent deployments overseas. She has 
served in various locations, including a three-month and a six-month tour in Iraq. She 
received positive performance evaluations. One supervisor recognized her superior 
performance in Iraq. Another supervisor reported that she has done an excellent job 
and is a valued asset to their team.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 55; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 45-46, 54-55; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. at 29-30; AE A-E. 
 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant was arrested and convicted of driving with a .08% or higher blood 
alcohol level. A bench warrant was issued in February 2007, for failing to pay her fine. 
She remains on probation until April 2009. The evidence is sufficient to raise all of the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s only criminal arrest occurred in January 2006. The probation violation 
was due to a miscommunication between Applicant and her attorney and was quickly 
rectified by her payment of the entire fine. While this is her only arrest, I am also 
considering her illegal use of drugs as criminal conduct. She received drug and alcohol 
counseling and has not used illegal drugs in more than two and a half years and has not 
had alcohol in more than two years. She has been under the treatment of a psychiatrist 
since January 2007. Her employment record is commendable. I find there is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation and Applicant’s criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 
32(a) and (d) are applicable.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
(a) any drug abuse;   
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s drug possession and use are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c) 
as disqualifying conditions. All of her drug use since she started working for her current 
employer in 2001 or 2002, has been while holding a security clearance. AG ¶ 25(g) is 
applicable.  
 
Three Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
 Applicant stopped using illegal drugs in June 2006. She attended outpatient drug 
and alcohol counseling in October 2006 to January 2007. Her doctor is successfully 
treating her depression and anxiety. She disassociated herself from her drug-using 
friends and avoided the environment where drugs were used. She is willing to sign a 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. She clearly, 
unequivocally, and credibly committed to remaining drug free. I find an appropriate 
period of abstinence and that illegal drug use is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and (b) 
are applicable. 
 
Applicant attended drug and alcohol counseling through her employee 
assistance program. AG ¶ 26(d) requires a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
 
8 
 
medical professional. There is no such prognosis in this case. AG ¶ 26(d) is not 
applicable. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant was arrested in January 2006, and charged with DUI and driving with a 
.08% or higher blood alcohol level. She used illegal stimulants so that she could drink 
alcohol without feeling intoxicated. Her alcohol-related incidents and pattern of alcohol 
consumption are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 22(a) and (c).  
 
Two Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a) and (b) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
Applicant has not had a drink of alcohol in more than two years. I find that AG ¶¶ 
2(a) and (b) are applicable under the same rationale discussed above under the 
Criminal Conduct and Drug Involvement sections.  
 
 
 
9 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant’s personal conduct was also alleged under the Criminal Conduct, Drug 
Involvement, and Alcohol Consumption Drug guidelines, as addressed above. She 
drove after drinking and used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. She was 
well aware that drug use was wrong, illegal, and against DoD policy. She exercised 
extremely poor judgment. This constitutes credible adverse information in other 
adjudicative issue areas that may not be sufficient for an adverse determination under 
any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It is also personal conduct that could 
create a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are 
applicable. 
Conditions that could mitigate Personal Conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
10 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 The discussion under the guidelines for Criminal Conduct, Drug Involvement, and 
Alcohol Consumption is equally appropriate for this guideline. Applicant has obtained 
drug and alcohol counseling and has been drug-free for more than two and a half years 
and alcohol for more than two years. I find that the behavior is unlikely to recur. 
Additionally, Applicant has been open and honest about the conduct which has reduced 
any potential vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 17(c), (d), 
and (e) are applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 30 years old. She used 
marijuana on a few occasions in high school. She remained drug free in the Army, but 
started using illegal drugs after her discharge. She suffered from depression and 
anxiety. She drank alcohol to make her feel relaxed in social settings. She did not like 
the feeling of being intoxicated and she used methamphetamine and cocaine so that 
she could consume alcohol without feeling as intoxicated. Most of her drug use was 
while holding a security clearance. She had a DUI arrest in January 2006, after which 
her blood alcohol level was tested at .16%. Her extremely poor judgment cannot be 
overstated.  
 
 
11 
 
Applicant decided a change was necessary in her life. She completely stopped 
taking illegal drugs in June 2006. She attended outpatient drug and alcohol counseling 
from October 2006 through January 2007. She has completely abstained from alcohol 
since January 2007. She has been under the treatment of a psychiatrist since January 
2007. He prescribed medication and she reported that she no longer had feelings of 
depression or anxiety.  
 
Some people take longer to grow up than others. Applicant clearly did not exhibit 
maturity when she used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. Since that time 
she has done everything possible to mitigate her actions. She fully admitted her drug 
use on her SF 86 and to the background investigator. Her family, friends, and company 
know of her drug use. She candidly discussed her drug and alcohol use at her hearing 
and credibly testified that she has no intention to use illegal drugs in the future. 
Applicant is the sole wage earner in her family and is well aware that loss of her security 
clearance would adversely affect her employment. I also considered her favorable 
character evidence, employment record, and her deployments to a war zone.  
 
Applicant is on probation for a few more months. I am convinced that she has 
matured and that her current record of abiding by the law is a result of her new maturity 
and not simply because she is on probation. She has further convinced me that illegal 
drug use is a thing of her past. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her drug and 
alcohol use, criminal conduct, and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:  For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a-3.c:  For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:   For Applicant 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
