 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-18881 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), based on a single delinquent debt of about $146,000. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on June 14, 2007. On 
September 15, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 24, 2008; answered it on October 13, 
2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
 
2 
 
 
request on October 16, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
31, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on the same day. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on November 24, 2008, scheduling the hearing for December 18, 2008. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through H, which were admitted without objection. 
I held the record open to permit both parties to submit evidence and argument on an 
issue of reciprocal recognition of clearances, and they submitted Hearing Exhibits (HX) I 
and II. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 23, 2008. The record closed on 
January 9, 2009. 
 
Reciprocal Recognition of Clearance 
 
 Applicant testified he had received a clearance from another federal agency (Tr. 
84-86). Based on his testimony, I directed the parties to provide evidence and legal 
authorities pertaining to Applicant’s entitlement to reciprocal recognition of his clearance 
from another federal agency. 
 
The National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM), DOD 
5220.22-M, February 28, 2006, paragraph 2-204, provides:  
 
Any previously granted PCL [personnel clearance] that is based upon a 
current investigation of a scope that meets or exceeds that necessary for 
the clearance required shall provide the basis for issuance of a new 
clearance without further investigation or adjudication unless significant 
derogatory information that was not previously adjudicated becomes 
known to the granting agency.   
 
 The documents submitted by Applicant and his facility security officer reflect that 
he received a clearance based on a “minimum background investigation,” much 
narrower in scope than required for a security clearance, and his existing clearance 
does not allow access to classified information. Accordingly, I have concluded he is not 
entitled to reciprocal recognition of his clearance from another federal agency. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debt alleged in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old information systems engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since June 2007. He has a favorable trustworthiness determination from 
another federal agency based on a “minimum background investigation.” That 
determination was not a security clearance. He has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant and his spouse are natives of Bangladesh. He came to the U.S. on a 
tourist visa. He obtained a student visa and attended college in the U.S. from January 
 
3 
 
 
1988 to July 1991, when he graduated with a bachelor’s degree in information systems. 
He and his spouse were married in August 1993. They have two children, ages 11 and 
7. He became a U.S. citizen in July 1996, and his spouse became a U.S. citizen in 
March 2002.  
 
 The debt arose when Applicant signed as a guarantor on a small business loan 
of $205,000 to purchase a day care center in the spring of 2002, to be operated by 
Applicant and his spouse (Tr. 49-50). The day care center was fully licensed to operate 
at the time it was purchased (Tr. 45). Applicant and his spouse purchased the 
corporation that had been operating the day care center, and the loan was made to the 
corporation, with Applicant as guarantor (Tr. 45-47). Applicant handled the 
administration of the business during his off-duty hours and his spouse managed the 
daily operations (Tr. 51). The business took more time to manage than they expected 
and the regulations were more complex and onerous than expected. In 2004, the county 
withdrew his operating license for regulatory noncompliance (Tr. 52-54, 81-82). 
Applicant and his spouse unsuccessfully attempted to sell the business (Tr. 53). 
 
Applicant and his spouse made payments on the loan for about two years. After 
the day care center defaulted on the loan, the lender demanded payment from Applicant 
as guarantor of the loan (Tr. 64). In addition, the lender took the $30,000 certificate of 
deposit Applicant had pledged as collateral for the loan (Tr. 56-57). In June 2005, 
Applicant offered to settle the debt for $8,000, but his offer was rejected on the ground 
that he had sufficient equity in his personal residence to satisfy the debt in full (AX E). In 
February 2006, the lender obtained a judgment against him for $168,519 (GX 2). In May 
or June 2006, he offered $18,000 to settle the debt, and later offered $20,000, but these 
offers also were rejected. Although rejecting his offers, the lender suggested that a 
settlement for half the equity in his home might be acceptable. The principal balance in 
June 2007 was $148,625 (AX D). His lawyer has suggested bankruptcy as an option, 
but he rejected that option as a “matter of dignity.” (Tr. 83.) The debt has not been 
resolved.  
 
During an interview with a security investigator in July 2007, Applicant reported 
net monthly household income of $8,485; expenses of $2,815; debt payments of $2,905 
(1st mortgage), $623 (2nd mortgage), and $621 (car payment), leaving a net remainder 
of $1,521 (GX 3 at 4). The car loan has since been paid off. He is current on all his 
financial obligations except the unpaid judgment (AX A, B, and C). 
 
Applicant testified he estimated the market value of his residence at between 
$650,000 and $700,000 (Tr. 67). The balance on his first mortgage is about $298,000 
(Tr. 69; GX 5 at 3). He also obtained a second mortgage for about $81,000 in October 
2001 (Tr. 70). He used the second mortgage to make improvements to his home and 
pay off a car loan. The home improvements were made over several years. He 
borrowed about $36,000 to purchase a new car in the fall of 2005. He also owns two 
older cars. Even though he has about $240,000 in equity in his home, he testified he 
has not borrowed against his equity because he would not be able to afford the 
payments if he increased the amount of his loan (Tr. 70-71). 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
The SOR alleges an unsatisfied judgment against Applicant in the amount of 
$168,000. The evidence shows that the balance due is $146,625. The concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an Ainability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ Applicant’s financial history raises both of these 
disqualifying conditions, shifting the burden to him to refute, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and a final conjunctive prong. If any of 
the three disjunctive prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully 
established unless the conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
 
The first prong of AG ¶ 20(a) (“so long ago”) is not established because the debt 
is not resolved. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is established because there is only 
one debt, incurred almost seven years ago. The third prong (“under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur”) is established because the debt was incurred when Applicant 
and his spouse decided to buy a business without realizing the complexity of the 
regulatory requirements for operating a day care center and without realizing how much 
of their available time would be required to properly operate it. Applicant has learned 
from his experience and is not likely to venture into such uncharted waters again.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The final prong (“does not cast doubt” on current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment) is not established. Applicant’s decision to buy the business and 
guarantee the loan was due to his lack of experience. He has learned from that 
experience and has not demonstrated bad judgment in any other financial matters. 
However, he has not taken reasonable measures to resolve the debt, thereby raising 
doubt about his reliability and trustworthiness. His settlement offers of $8,000 and 
$10,000 bordered on the frivolous. In the fall of 2005, he borrowed $36,000 to buy a 
new car, even though he already owned two cars and his day care business was in 
distress. He bought the new car shortly after his settlement offer of $8,000 was rejected. 
He has rejected his lawyer’s advice to pursue a bankruptcy action, even though a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy would allow him to pay the balance in installments while 
preserving his dignity. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established.  
 
The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) is not established because Applicant and his 
spouse made a deliberate decision to borrow the money and buy the business. The 
second prong also is not established, because Applicant has not acted responsibly in 
resolving the debt, for the reasons set out above in the discussion of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
has retained a lawyer to assist him, but there is no evidence the problem is being 
resolved or under control. I conclude AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
Other than making a few unrealistic settlement offers, Applicant has done virtually 
nothing to resolve the debt. His most recent offer to settle the debt for $20,000 was 
rejected about 18 months ago, in June 2007. He did not respond to the offer to settle for 
half his home equity. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated, articulate person. He was candid and 
sincere at the hearing. He regrets the bad business decision that caused his 
indebtedness, but he has not been diligent in resolving it. He has retained a lawyer to 
assist him, but no significant progress has been made. Until he can resolve the debt, he 
will continue to be vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
