1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)      ISCR Case No. 07-17558
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On June 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines B,
foreign influence, and E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 30, 2008, admitting the allegations and
requesting a hearing. The case was originally assigned to another administrative judge
on October 8, 2008, and scheduled for October 29, 2008. On October 16, 2008,
Applicant retained counsel who filed a motion for continuance and change of venue.
The originally-assigned administrative judge granted the motion, and the case was
transferred to me on October 22, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October
These source documents were part of a larger group of documents that counsel had marked as exhibits A1
through Y before the hearing.
The italicized text is the language Department Counsel sought to add to the allegation.2
2
30, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 15, 2008. During the
hearing, I received two government exhibits, 11 Applicant exhibits, and the testimony of
two Applicant witnesses. DOHA received the transcript on December 23, 2008. Based
upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of the facts set
forth in 13 source documents marked and identified as government’s exhibits (GE) I
through XIII. I took administrative notice of the facts set forth in GE I through VIII, and
did not take administrative notice of the facts set forth in  GE IX through XIII
Applicant’s counsel requested that I take administrative notice of the facts set
forth in 13 documents marked and identified as Exhibits C through K, and O through R.1
I took administrative notice of the facts set forth in Exhibits E through K, O, and P. I
declined to take administrative notice of the facts contained in Exhibits C, D, Q and R. 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to revise subparagraph 1.e and
add a new subparagraph, 2.b, as follows:
1.e. You traveled to Israel in September of 2005, September 2006, July of 2007,
June of 2008, and December 2008;  and2
2.b. You falsified material facts on security clearance applications submitted by
you in about 1984 and in January 1992 when, in response to questions concerning your
past use of illegal drugs, namely, marijuana, you answered, “no,” whereas in truth, you
had previously used marijuana in high school, and in 1994.
Applicant’s counsel did not object to the proposed amendment of SOR subparagraph
1.e, and opposed the proposed addition of SOR subparagraph 2.b. I granted the motion
in part, amending subparagraph 1.e, as Department Counsel proposed, and adding
subparagraph 2.b, as proposed, except for the phrase “in about 1984”, and “and in
1994.”
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old married man with one adult child whom he adopted
about 20 years ago. He has approximately a year of college credits earned taking
information technology-oriented courses. For the past 15 years, he has worked for a
The grandchildren are Applicant’s nieces and nephews as described later in the Decision.3
3
defense contractor as a network administrator (Tr. 155). His duties include customer
support and the maintenance of network operating systems.
Applicant has a vast knowledge of applications and “sets the standard” for
business network management throughout the entire branch of the armed services that
he serves (Exhibit S). According to a senior-level supervisor, he is one of the highest
complimented employees on staff (Tr. 143-144).
Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Israel. She lives in Israel, and
is 83 years old. She supports herself through his deceased father’s life insurance policy.
Applicant provides no additional financial support. She was born in the U.S., and
emigrated to Israel in 1994 to be closer to her grandchildren  (Tr. 170). He talks to his3
mother approximately two times per month (Tr. 215).
Applicant’s sister is a dual citizen of U.S. and Israel. She lives in Israel with her
husband. She works part-time as a dress maker (Tr. 163). She was born and raised in
the U.S., and attended college in Israel from 1982 to 1985. She returned to the U.S.
after graduating, married an American, and emigrated to Israel in 1989 for religious
reasons. Applicant talks with her approximately three times per month and shares an
occasional e-mail (Tr. 215). 
Applicant’s brother-in-law, his sister’s husband, is a dual U.S./Israeli citizen. He is
unemployed, and supports his family through his father’s inheritance. Applicant talks
with him “on the rare occasion when he happens to answer the phone” (Tr. 210).
Applicant’s sister has five children, two boys and three girls, ranging in age from
15 to 22. The boys, ages 17 and 22, have serious mental illnesses, do not work, and
live in a residential treatment facility (Tr. 211). Their disabilities prohibited them from
being eligible for the Israeli draft. Applicant talks with them if they happen to be at his
sister’s house when he calls (Tr. 212).
Applicant’s oldest niece is 21 years old. She is an Israeli citizen and resident. He
is unsure if she is currently working (Tr. 213). In December 2008, she got married.
Applicant traveled to Israel to attend the wedding. She has visited Applicant in the U.S.
approximately three to four times over the past four years, most recently in August 2008
(Tr. 214). 
Applicant’s next oldest niece is 19. She is an Israeli citizen and resident. She
works as a beautician (Tr. 168). She got married in June 2008, and Applicant traveled to
Israel to attend the wedding (Tr. 215). She visited him in the U.S. in August 2008 (Tr.
215). Both nieces stayed with Applicant and his wife during their U.S. visit. Other than a
congratulatory call after he was informed of her wedding plans, Applicant has only
talked to his niece by phone when he calls for his sister and his niece happens to
answer the phone.
4
Applicant’s youngest niece is 15 years old. He periodically talks to her when he
calls his sister.
In addition to the trips to Israel in 2008, Applicant has traveled there to visit his
family in September 2005, September 2006, and July 2007. He stays at his mother’s
home during his visits (Tr. 171). Each trip lasted 10 to 14 days (Exhibit 2 at 4). He has
no bank accounts or other property interests in Israel (Tr. 175). 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy with strong historic and cultural ties with the
U.S. (Exhibit I at 2). Commitment to Israel’s security has been a cornerstone of U.S.
Middle East policy since Israel’s inception (Id. at 10). The U.S. is strongly committed to
Israel’s viability as a Jewish state (Exhibit E at 7). Both countries have a mutual interest
in a peaceful, secure Middle East. The threat of terrorist attacks in Israel is ongoing, and
is particularly acute in regions controlled by Hamas (Exhibit 4 at 2; Exhibit II at 4). The
U.S. government warns that American interests could be the focus of such attacks
(Exhibit IV). Approximately 2.3 million tourists visit Israel each year (Exhibit O).
Under Israeli law, criminal suspects are innocent until proven guilty, have the
right to habeas corpus, to remain silent, to be represented by an attorney, to contact
family members, and to have a fair trial (Exhibit III at 3). The judicial system has an
oversight mechanism to investigate suspected abuses (Id.). There have been some
cases of individuals prosecuted and convicted of spying against the U.S. for Israel
(Exhibit VI at 33).
Applicant completed a security clearance application on September 22, 2004. He
answered “no” in response to “Question 27–Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity
- Illegal Use of Drugs   Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, which ever is shorter,
have you illegally used a controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack
cocaine, hashish, narcotics . . . , amphetamines . . . , depressants, or prescription
drugs?” This was not accurate. He smoked marijuana once with friends at a gathering in
2002 (Tr. 171).
In August 2006, Applicant met with a security clearance investigator from the
U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). The subject of illegal drug use did not
arise (Exhibit 2 at 3). Applicant met with another agent on May 21, 2007 (Id. at 5). When
asked, he told the agent that he had never used drugs (Id.). Four days later, he
contacted the investigator, admitted the 2002 marijuana use, and told him it was the
only time he ever had used it  (Id. at 6).  At the hearing, he testified to using marijuana
during high school in the 1970s, and once in 1994 while playing golf (Tr. 186). 
Applicant testified that he falsified the security clearance application because a
facility security officer had told him years earlier never to admit illegal drug use on a
security clearance application (Tr. 182). Over the years, he did not disclose it on
successive security clearance applications in order to keep his responses “consistent”
(Tr. 182). He disclosed it to the investigator who met with him in May 2007, because he
was “sick of lying” (Tr. 178).
5
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
an individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interests” (AG ¶
6). Applicant’s family members residing in Israel raise the issue of whether AG ¶ 7(a),
“contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion.”
Israel’s status as a staunch U.S. ally, and the only stable democracy in a region
dominated by authoritarian governments and terrorist organizations does not eliminate
the risk of coercion generated by the past episodes of espionage. It does, however,
pose less of a risk than that posed by hostile, totalitarian countries seeking to
The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before4
being confronted with the facts.
6
undermine the interests and security of the U.S. worldwide through any means
necessary. Absent these negative characteristics, I conclude the presence of
Applicant’s relatives in Israel creates a risk of coercion, but not a heightened risk of
coercion. AG ¶ 7(a) does not apply.
In reaching this conclusion, I considered the risk of terrorism prevalent in Israel. 
Terrorism is indiscriminate by nature. Consequently, anyone in Israel including the 2.8
million people who visit annually is at risk of being victimized by terrorism.
Conversely, the possibility that terrorism may be employed against specific
individuals, such as the family member of a security clearance holder, is higher in
countries that openly espouse it, are hostile to the U.S., or are controlled partially by
terrorist organizations. None of these characteristics apply to Israel. Although Gaza and
the West Bank are either controlled or influenced by terrorist organizations, Applicant
has no family living in these areas. Consequently, the risk of terrorism in Israel is an
ongoing challenge to its viability, but is not a factor that heightens the risk of coercion in
this specific case.
Applicant’s Israeli relatives do not generate a foreign influence security concern. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information” (AG ¶ 15). Applicant’s admitted security clearance application falsification
triggers the application of AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification
of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement,
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications,
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or
award fiduciary responsibilities.”
I have considered the relevant mitigating condition, AG ¶ 17(a),  and conclude it4
does not apply. Applicant intentionally omitted his past drug use from his security
clearance application in 2004, and denied ever having used marijuana during a meeting
with an investigator approximately two and a half years later. This interview was the
second interview he had undergone during the investigative process. When he
eventually disclosed it, he falsely added that it was a one-time occurrence.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
7
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
Applicant is a talented worker who is highly respected by his client and his
employer. These attributes are insufficient to overcome the security risk generated by
his intentional failure to disclose marijuana use, as required, on his security clearance
application.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
