 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18778 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has 14 unpaid debts totaling approximately $14,000, which are in 
collection or have been charged off. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the 
government’s security concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 16, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations.  
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 1
  
 On April 16, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated November 5, 2008. The FORM contained 10 
attachments. On November 18, 2008, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along 
with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Applicant's response to the FORM was due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant’s response was due on December 18, 2008. As of January 15, 2009, no 
response had been received. On January 16, 2009, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶ 1.d and ¶ 
1.o of the SOR. He also denied SOR ¶ 1. He admitted the remaining factual allegations.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old purchasing agent who has worked for a defense 
contractor since August 2005, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 In 1999, Applicant was involved in a car accident and was on disability for six 
months. In June 2005, Applicant suffered a stroke and a brain aneurism and was out of 
work from June 2005 through September 2005. From October 2005 through December 
2005, he worked part-time until January 2006 when he returned to full-time 
employment. His part-time employment and large medical bills added to his financial 
problems. (Item 6, p 5) In July 2005, Applicant’s automobile was repossessed. 
Following resale of the vehicle, he yet owed $3,770 on the vehicle. 
 
In February 2008, Applicant stated he was working with a financial adviser to 
address his debts. (Item 6, p 2) At that time, he intended to start making monthly 
payments on his debts. He attached a repayment schedule indicating he would pay 
$150 each month on a $1,415 debt (SOR ¶ 1.l) owed a towing company. Applicant 
submitted a proposed repayment plan with his answers to the written interrogatory. 
(Item 6, p 9) No evidence documenting payment of the listed debts was provided.  
 
 As of August 2007, Applicant’s monthly gross income was $3,826 and his net 
income was approximately $3,000. Applicant’s spouse’s gross monthly income was 
$3,000 and her net income was $2,121. After paying monthly expenses, their combined 
monthly disposable income was $2,461. (Item 6, p 7) As of February 2008, their 
combined monthly disposable income was $1,269 (Item 6, p 8)  
 
 The SOR alleges 15 debts, which total $14,421. Applicant denies two debts 
(SOR ¶ 1.d and SOR ¶ 1.o), which total approximately $5,000. He admits the remaining 
13 debts. Six of the debts were for small amounts under $300 each: a $37 medical debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.a), a $28 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.b), a $100 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.k), $142 
(SOR ¶ 1.e), a $158 telephone bill (SOR ¶ 1.g), and a $252 telephone bill (SOR ¶ 1.m). 
The other seven debts were: a $372 medical bill (SOR ¶ 1.c), $1,875 collection account 
 2
(SOR ¶ 1.f), $3,770 collection account (SOR ¶ 1.h), $323 collection account (SOR ¶ 
1.i), a $551 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.j), a $1,415 debt owed an automobile towing 
company (SOR ¶ 1.l), and a $476 gas utility bill (SOR ¶ 1.n). 
 
 Applicant denied the $318 debt. (SOR ¶ 1.d), which was a cell phone account 
closed in 2004. Applicant asserted he thought he had a zero balance when he closed 
the account. (Item 6, p 5) As of March 2008, Applicant owed $317 on this debt. (Item 7) 
Applicant paid two accounts, the cell phone debt and a $10 co-payment on a dental bill. 
Applicant’s November 2008 credit bureau report, lists the cell phone debt as paid. (Item 
10)  
 
 Applicant denied the $4,604 debt. (SOR ¶ 1.o) Applicant offered no further 
explanation or information as to the nature of this debt. The debt appears on Applicant’s 
February 2008 credit bureau report, (Item 6, p 17) but does not appear on his 
November 2008 credit bureau report. (Item 10) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 3
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant has 14 past due unpaid debts totaling approximately $14,000, 
which are in collection or have been charged off. Six of Applicant’s debts were under 
$300 each. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 4
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit report, his 
interview by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, his SOR 
response, and his response to interrogatories. Applicant has admitted responsibility for 
all but two of his delinquent debts. He has provided insufficient documentation to show 
significant progress resolving any of his debts other than the $318 debt (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
There is no documentation that even the six smallest debts which together total 
approximately $700 have been paid.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, and did not occur under circumstances 
not likely to recur. He failed to demonstrate that his debts were largely due to 
circumstances beyond his control, or that he has acted responsibly in addressing his 
debts. Further, he has not sought credit counseling, or otherwise brought the problem 
under control as his circumstances permitted.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. There are 14 unpaid debts. Some of the debts are 
medical debts, others are for utility bills, and one is owed to an automobile towing 
company, which are not unusual debts and are the type of debts likely to recur in the 
future. The debts cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
 5
AG & 20(b) has limited applicability. Applicant=s financial problems were 
contributed to by his 1999 auto accident for which he was on disability for six months 
and a 2005 stroke, which resulted in him being out of work for four months and three 
months part-time working ending in January 2006. Other than the medical bills, 
Applicant has provided no evidence as to how these events impacted on finances. The 
five unpaid medical debts total approximately $1,100. There is no documentation that 
even the two smallest of these medical debts ($28 and $37) have been paid.  
 
There is no showing Applicant has received financial counseling or that his debts 
are being resolved or are under control. Only one debt has been paid. There is no 
repayment plan. AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) do not apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Although the debts are not the type 
that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. The money was not spent frivolously, nor incurred on luxuries; however, the 
debts remain unpaid.  
 
Based on the totality of the evidence available in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
He has not taken effective action to resolve his debts, and has not equipped himself to 
avoid financial problems in the future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 6
 7
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a - c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant     
  Subparagraph 1.e - o:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge
   2
 
 
Name ROSS, Tony Fernanda  Case No. 07-18778 
Social Security Number 045-76-4736 Age 42        July 16, 1966 
Letter of Intent / SOR April 16, 2008 Employer Coleman Aerospace 
Answer Date May 12, 2008 Occupation  pruchasing agent 
 
Final Denial Date  Since When August 2005 
Appeal Date  Clearance None      Secret      Top Secret 
 
Date Assigned April 16, 2008 Guideline financial considerations 
DC Richard A. Stevens Guideline  
Applicant’s Counsel  Guideline  
Notice of Hearing Date  Guideline  
Hearing Date  Guideline              
location FORM   
Transcript Date  FORM Mitigated 
Guidelines 
 
SF 86 Date July 6, 2007   
Due Date    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
 
