 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6, Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01681
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, the government’s exhibits (Gx.),
Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.), and Applicant’s testimony, his request for a security clearance
is granted.
On November 8, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor, where he works as a network security engineer. After reviewing
the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent interrogatories to Applicant to obtain clarification
of and/or additional information about adverse information in his background.  After1
reviewing the results of the background investigation, including Applicant’s response to
the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s2
access to classified information. On July 14, 2008, DOHA sent Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline F (financial considerations).3
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on September 24, 2008, and I convened the hearing on October 23,
2008. The government presented three exhibits (Gx. 1 - 3). Applicant and his wife
testified, and he submitted three exhibits (Ax. A - C). I also left the record open after the
hearing to receive additional relevant information. On December 1, 2008, I received
Applicant’s post-hearing submission, which is included in the record without objection as
Ax. D. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on or about November 3, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes approximately $23,483
for seven delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.g). Applicant admitted with explanation the
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. He denied with explanation the allegations in SOR ¶¶
1.b. In addition to the facts entered through Applicant’s admissions, I have made the
following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 30 years old and has held his current defense contractor job since
August 2005. He was also employed by a defense contractor from October 2003 until
being laid off after his company lost its contract in June 2005. Applicant served on
active duty in the United States Navy from October 1997 until October 2001. Since then,
he has served part-time in the Navy Reserve, and he was recalled to active duty in 2006
for an overseas deployment. He has held a security clearance since 1998. (Gx. 1) 
Applicant and his wife have been married since March 1998. They have two
children, ages 9 and 4. His wife has worked as a benefits eligibility specialist for a state
agency since about 2004. She had worked for another state agency but was laid off due
to budget cuts in 2003. Thereafter, she was unemployed for about six to nine months.
Applicant’s wife also lost income because she was on extended bed rest during her two
pregnancies in late 1998 / early 1999 and in the summer of 2004. (Tr. 67, 80 - 81)
Applicant and his wife acknowledged they did not manage their finances properly
through about 2006. They assert they married too young (they were 19 years old at the
time), and they had no outside support from their families. Applicant admitted he was
irresponsible when it came to his finances and that he left management of their finances
to his wife. However, she was not disciplined enough to live within their means or pay
their bills on time. When Applicant left active duty in 2001, he moved his family back to
3
the state where he and his wife grew up. They did not plan properly for his loss of
income in the form of housing allowances, basic allowance for subsistence, and other
benefits. Additionally, he and his wife had difficulty finding employment that paid enough
to support them and enable them to stay current on the debts they had incurred while
he was in the Navy. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 25 - 29, 49 - 50, 67; Gx. 2; Ax. C)
When Applicant submitted his e-QIP in 2005, he acknowledged at least one
delinquent debt. A credit report obtained during his background investigation showed he
had multiple delinquencies dating back to 2002. More specifically, as alleged in the
SOR, Applicant owed approximately $23,483 for seven delinquent debts. (Gx. 3) The
status of those debts is as follows:
- SOR ¶ 1.a: Applicant is paying $100 each month to BB&T for a credit card
charged off as a business loss. As of October 2008, the balance was reduced
from $6,570 to $5,169. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 50; Gx. 2; Ax. D)
- SOR ¶ 1.b: Applicant repaid a $483 delinquent Capital One credit card account
through a collection agency in April 2008. (Answer to SOR; Gx. 2; Tr. 16, 51)
- SOR ¶ 1.c: In March 2008, Applicant began making $100 monthly payments on
a delinquent loan account with the Navy Federal Credit Union. In December
2008, he increased his monthly payment to $250, the amount owed has
decreased from $8,079 to $4,102. (Answer to SOR; Gx. 2; Ax. B; Ax. D; Tr. 51-
52)
- SOR ¶ 1.d: A $308 debt owed to the Great Lakes Credit Union was paid off
through a collection agency in April 2008. (Answer to SOR; Gx. 2; Ax. D; Tr. 53)
- SOR ¶ 1.e: A $566 debt owed to Hecht Company was paid off in May 2006.
(Answer to SOR; Tr. 45 - 46; Gx. 2)
- SOR ¶ 1.f: Applicant disputes a Direct TV account listed as delinquent in the
amount of $118. He discontinued the service in 2001 when he moved his family
after leaving active duty. The creditor has no record of any debt owing or other
information about Applicant. (Answer to SOR; Gx. 2; Tr. 47; Ax. D)
- SOR ¶ 1.g: Applicant denied he owes $7,359 after completing a lease
agreement for a car in 2003. Applicant leased a car in 1999 and returned it as
agreed in 2003. He was told at the time that he owed nothing further. Several
months later, he received a bill for over $7,000. Applicant verbally disputed the
debt, but did not pursue the matter forcefully until 2008, when he began
responding to the government’s concerns about his finances. Neither Applicant
nor Department Counsel produced a copy of the lease agreement to determine
Applicant’s obligations. Despite the fact he disputes owing this debt, Applicant
has reached a settlement agreement with the law firm collecting the debt
whereby he will repay $2,000 in satisfaction of the debt. To that end, he has paid
$600 and will pay the remainder with his re-enlistment bonus in February 2009.
(Answer to SOR; Gx. 2; Ax. D) Tr. 35 - 43, 57 - 60, 71 - 72)
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
4
Applicant and his wife have a net positive cash flow each month of about $1,300
after expenses, including repayment of some of the debts listed in the SOR. In response
to the government’s interrogatories, Applicant submitted information that shows they
have been acting to pay or resolve debts in addition to those listed in the SOR. They
have also taken courses in financial management and budgeting skills, and have a
detailed system for tracking and prioritizing their monthly bills, and for making decisions
about their finances. (Gx. 2; Ax. C)
Applicant has served with distinction in the Navy and Naval Reserve. He is also
active in his community through his work as a volunteer fire fighter, as a youth sports
coach, and through his church membership. Personal and professional references show
he enjoys a good reputation for reliability, trustworthiness and integrity. (Answer to
SOR; Tr. 23 - 25; Ax. A; Ax. C)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
5
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR ¶ 1. Available information shows approximately $23,483 in delinquent debt for
seven accounts attributable to Applicant since as far back as 2002. Available
information shows Applicant still owes at least $11,271 for three of the debts alleged in
the SOR; that the debts in question have been unpaid or unresolved for several years;
and that Applicant incurred the debts through irresponsibility and excessive use of
personal credit. Accordingly, the record in this case requires application of the
disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
AG ¶ 19(b) (indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic
plan to pay the debt), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
By contrast, the record supports application of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶
20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
6
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), AG ¶ 20(b)(the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances), AG ¶
20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control), AG ¶ 20(d)
(the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts), and AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue). Applicant has paid or otherwise resolved about 53% of the
total debt alleged in the SOR. Additionally, as shown by the repayment of the SOR ¶ 1.e
debt and by the information he submitted in response to the SOR, as early as 2006
Applicant and his wife have been taking what action they could to pay their past due
debts. There is also information that shows Applicant and his wife were hindered in their
efforts at least twice since 2004 by his wife’s pregnancy-related medical issues and her
nine month lay-off. 
As to the debt at SOR ¶ 1.f, Applicant supported his contention the debt is
erroneous. As to the debt at SOR ¶ 1.g, Applicant still denies owing the debt, but feels it
is easier to try to pay it off than to contest it. He has reached a settlement agreement
with the creditor and now owes less than 25% of the original debt. Applicant’s current
finances are sound, they have realized the importance of proper management of their
finances, and they will likely have paid or resolved all of their delinquencies in the next
18 months. On balance, and in consideration of the whole person information discussed
below, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by adverse information
about his finances. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). There has been no misconduct
here. Applicant is a mature adult who did not soon enough appreciate the importance of
personal attention to his finances. He and his wife married young and neither had lived
on their own before. Applicant was on active duty in the Navy and he felt he could leave
their finances to his wife. Ten years have passed and they have personally and
financially matured. Their income is steady, they are current on their obligations, and
they are progressing in their efforts to resolve their remaining delinquencies. More
importantly, Applicant is personally involved with his finances. Having also considered
the positive information about his reliability and trustworthiness in the community, I
conclude his financial difficulties do not current reflect poorly on his judgment and that it
is unlikely he will experience financial problems of his own doing. The circumstances
that gave rise to his financial problems are not likely to recur or cause further
delinquencies. 
The positive information about Applicant’s character and reliability is also
sufficient to show that the adverse information about his finances cannot be used as a
7
means to pressure or coerce him into acting contrary to the national interest. A fair and
commonsense evaluation of this record shows that the security concerns about
Applicant’s continued suitability for access to classified information have been satisfied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
 Subparagraph 1.a - 1.g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Continued eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
