 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
 Department Counsel, pursuant to Paragraph E3.1.7 of the Additional Procedural Guidance at2
Enclosure 3 of DoD Directive 5220.6, requested a hearing by memorandum, dated August 29, 2008. Appellate
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-01081
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant mitigated the security concern caused by his former abuse of marijuana
and the related security concerns that arose therefrom. 
On May 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR, which is in essence the administrative complaint, alleges security concerns
under Guidelines H (drug involvement), J (criminal conduct) and E (personal conduct).
Applicant submitted a response to the SOR that was received by DOHA on July 21, 2008.
He admitted all SOR allegations except the allegation contained in SOR subparagraph 2.a,
which he denied. He requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing.2
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
Exhibit (App. Ex.) I
 Applicant was telephonically contacted by Department Counsel prior to issuance of the Notice of
3
Hearing and agreed to the hearing date of October 22, 2008.
2
The case was assigned to me on September 18, 2008. A notice of hearing was
issued on October 6, 2008, scheduling the hearing for October 22, 2008.  The hearing was3
conducted as scheduled. The Government submitted two documentary exhibits that were
marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 and admitted into the record without
objection. Applicant testified but did not submit any documentary exhibits. The record was
held open to provide Applicant the opportunity to submit documentation in support of his
case. One document was timely received, marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1 and admitted
into the record without objection. Department Counsel’s forwarding memorandum was
marked as App. Ex. II and is included in the file.  The transcript was received on November
6, 2008.     
Procedural Matters
Prior to taking evidence, I clarified the allegation contained in SOR subparagraph
3.a for Applicant’s benefit to make certain he understood to what he had admitted in his
response to the SOR. I thereafter granted him permission to withdraw his previous
admission to that allegation and to substitute a denial thereto without objection by
Department Counsel. 
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding an
additional allegation under Guideline J, to wit: “3.b That information set forth under
paragraph 1 above.” Applicant did not object to the requested amendment. Accordingly,
I granted the motion and made the requested amendment on the face of the SOR.
Applicant thereafter admitted the allegation and indicated he did not require additional time
to respond to it. 
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 22-year-old single man who has been employed by a defense
contractor since July 2007. He works as a janitor assigned to the floor crew that is
responsible for keeping the office floors clean. He graduated from high school in 2004.
Following high school, except for a few months immediately after he graduated spent
working as a laborer, Applicant was unemployed and lived with his mother until he obtained
employment in a pizza restaurant in May 2006. Thereafter, with the exception of a one-
month period of unemployment in June 2007, he worked at the pizza restaurant until he
began his current employment.
 
Applicant first used marijuana in May 2004 when a marijuana cigarette was passed
to him at a party. From then until March 2007, he used and purchased marijuana on a fairly
3
regular basis.  He estimates he smoked marijuana as much as three to four times a week.
(GE 2) Applicant admitted his use of marijuana was illegal.
Applicant stopped using marijuana in March 2007 because he wanted to get the job
he currently has with a government contractor and knew that drug use was prohibited. He
has not used any controlled substance since that time and he does not intend to use any
controlled substance in the future. Applicant submitted a notarized statement to that effect
in which he acknowledged that the use or possession of illegal drugs or controlled
substances in the future “will result in the immediate termination of my clearance
privileges.” (AE 1) This document was faxed to Department Counsel from Applicant’s
employer’s workplace.
Applicant has been dating a woman he has known since childhood who he hopes
to marry. She knows he previously smoked marijuana but she neither uses nor approves
of the use of any controlled substances. Applicant testified his goals in life are to “(L)ive life
to the fullest that I can, make as much money as I can, provide for a family.” (Tr. p. 46) 
Applicant failed to disclose his use of marijuana, as required, in the security
clearance application he submitted in September 2007. Applicant testified he improperly
answered “no” to the applicable question because he rushed through the program without
carefully reading the questions and did not review the completed Electronic Questionnaire
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) before signing it. (Tr. pp. 62-64) Applicant was
interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on
November 14, 2007. In his report of interview, the investigator noted:
The subject was asked about drug use and he immediately admitted to using
marijuana (discrepant). This was different than what was entered on the SF-
86. He did not try to hide this fact, but could not give any reason for not
marking yes to this question. . . . (GE 2) 
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guidelines H (drug involvement),
J (criminal conduct) and E (personal conduct), with their disqualifying and mitigating
conditions, are most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.4
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 5
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
6
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).7
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.8
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.11
 Id at 531.12
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.13
4
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of4 5
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,6
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden
of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of7
the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant8
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable9
clearance decision.10
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard11
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access12
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      13
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement; and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations. Likewise, criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness; and, by its very nature, calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
Applicant illegally purchased and used marijuana on a regular basis between May
2004 and March 2007. Under guideline H, disqualifying conditions (DC) 25(a): any drug
abuse; and 25(c): illegal drug possession, including . . . purchase, sale, or distribution
5
apply. Under guideline J, DC 31(a): a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and
31(c): allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted apply.     
It has now been almost two years since Applicant last used marijuana. His use and
purchase of marijuana occurred while he was somewhat younger and without much
direction in his life. His testimony makes clear that he made a conscious choice to stop
using marijuana when he sought more meaningful employment with a defense contractor
in 2007, and that he has abided by that decision ever since. He is now looking forward to
getting married, raising a family, and earning an income with which he can support that
family. Applicant convincingly testified he does not intend to abuse any controlled
substance in the future and he submitted a notarized statement acknowledging that his
clearance will be immediately terminated if he violates that condition of his clearance
eligibility. 
Applicant is a young man who is guilty of the not uncommon youthful indiscretion
of illegally using marijuana. His testimony and totality of the evidence available in this case
establish he has matured and he is committed to being a useful and productive employee
and family man. While maintaining the Government’s position that Applicant should not be
granted a security clearance, Department Counsel, acknowledged:
Applicant has come to us today and I think it’s pretty clear that he seems
candid and forthcoming, answers questions directly I’ll be it [sic] quietly and
the Government does appreciate that. (Tr. p. 77)
She also noted:
And so, you know, although he’s come here today and he’s been very candid
and open, he does seem in earnest about his present intent to not smoke
marijuana in the future. (Tr. p. 79)
Under Guideline H, mitigating conditions (MC) 26(a): the behavior happened so long
ago . . . or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 26(b):
a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: . . . (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation apply. Under Guideline J, MC 32(a): so much time has elapsed
since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation;
including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
remorse of restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement apply.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Personal conduct is always a concern because conduct involving questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
6
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Applicant’s explanations for not listing his marijuana use in the 2007 e-QIP he
submitted are credible. His appearance, manner of testifying and the substance of his
testimony abundantly establish he is a relatively unsophisticated individual who very
believably could be overwhelmed by the effort of preparing an electronic security clearance
application. Most significant are the notations by the OPM investigator to the effect that
Applicant immediately and completely disclosed his use of marijuana when asked about
it during a routine interview. Applicant was not confronted with any independent information
that would indicate the interviewer was aware of the use. Instead, Applicant was apparently
simply asked a clear question that he could understand. Department Counsel echoed my
impressions about Applicant’s credibility in her closing argument when she observed: “I
think that the Applicant did testify creditably [sic] regarding the allegation under Guideline
E . . . .” (Tr. p. 81) Accordingly, I find Applicant did not deliberately falsify the 2007 e-QIP.
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
I have considered all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this
case, including Applicant’s age, the period of time that has elapsed since he last used
marijuana, the sincerity he demonstrated in his testimony and through the statement he
submitted to remaining drug free, to being a productive member of society, a successful
employee and a committed family man. I have also considered the whole person concept,
the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and the applicable disqualifying
conditions. Applicant has mitigated the security concern caused by his former use of
marijuana and the related criminal conduct. He has overcome the case against him and
satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a & b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
7
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a & b: For Applicant
Conclusion               
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

