 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
 
 
 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05619 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) in November 2005. He also executed a Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86), on August 7, 2008. On October 7, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
 
2 
 
 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 31, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that 
his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing.  The Government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 19, 2008. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 8.  By letter dated November 24, 2008, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the file on 
December 5, 2008.  His response was due on January 4, 2009. He filed additional 
information within the required time period. Department Counsel did not object to 
Applicant’s submissions, and they are hereby admitted to the record.  On January 15, 
2009, the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 24 allegations of financial delinquency under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.x.) and two allegations of disqualifying conduct 
under AG E, Personal Conduct. (Item 1.) In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 31, 
2007, Applicant admitted 18 of the Guideline F allegations of financial delinquency (¶¶ 
1.c., 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.j., `1.k., 1.l., 1.n., 1.o., 1.p., 1.q., 1.r., 1.s., 1.u., 1.w., and 
1.x.).  He denied three Guideline F allegations (¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.v.); and he stated he 
had paid three debts alleged to be delinquent on the SOR (¶¶ 1.i., 1.m., and 1.t). He 
denied the two Guideline E allegations of deliberate falsification of answers on his e-QIP 
and SF-86 (¶ 2.a. and ¶ 2.b.).  (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old and employed as a senior systems engineer by a 
federal contractor. Before becoming a government contractor, he served on active duty 
in the U.S. military from1993 to 2001. Applicant was granted a security clearance in 
2004. He was married in 2000 and divorced in 2005. The record indicates that he has 
no children. In 2006, he reported an adjusted gross income of $71,667, and in 2007, he 
reported an adjusted gross income of $116,761. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6, 8-9.) 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged on the SOR total $45,960. According to the credit 
report supplied by Applicant, the debts fell into delinquency between 1999 and 2007. At 
least eight of those accounts became delinquent between 1999 and 2005. In his answer 
to the SOR, Applicant denied responsibility for a state tax lien of $1,033 and a state tax 
lien of $2,750. Both tax liens were filed against him in 2006. He admitted a judgment 
levied against him in 2002 for $2,720. (Item 1; Item 3; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant also denied a credit card debt of $140 (¶ 1.v.) Both liens and the credit 
card debt were listed as unsatisfied on a credit bureau report, dated July 3, 2008, that 
Applicant provided in response to DOHA’s interrogatories. He provided no 
 
3 
 
 
documentation to corroborate his assertions that the two tax liens were satisfied or to 
establish that he did not owe the credit card debt. (Item 1; Item 6.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he had paid the delinquent debts 
alleged at ¶1.i ($214), § 1.m. ($370), and ¶ 1.t ($503).  However, he failed to provide 
documentation to corroborate the payments he said he had made. He also stated he 
had made an arrangement to pay the delinquent debt alleged at ¶ 1.e., but he failed to 
provide documentation to corroborate a payment plan. (Item 3.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that, in the future, he would pay the 
delinquent debts alleged at ¶¶ 1.f., 1.h., 1.l., 1.n., 1.o., 1.w., and 1.x. He stated an 
intention to satisfy most of his delinquent debts within the next two years. (Item 3.) 
 
 In his July 28, 2008 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a list 
of his delinquent debts that he planned to pay or satisfy within the six months between 
August 2008 and January 2009. He failed to provide documentation to corroborate 
payment or satisfaction of those debts. (Item 6 at 6-7.) 
 
 In his response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a personal financial 
statement.  In his statement, he reported a total net monthly income of $4,386.  He 
listed fixed monthly expenses of $2,600.  He listed a monthly payment of $900 on a 
$30,000 automobile loan. His monthly net remainder was $886.  (Item 6 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant completed and certified an SF-86 on August 7, 2008.  Question 28a on 
the SF-86 asks the following question: “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 
days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant did not respond to Question 28a. He also 
did not respond to Question 28b. At the time he completed the SF-86, he was over 180 
days delinquent on the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.m., 1.n., 1.i., 1.o., and 1.v.  (Item 5.) 
 
 On November 18, 2005, Applicant completed and certified an e-QIP.  Section 27 
of the e-QIP asks several questions about an applicant’s financial record. Question 27d 
asks: “In the last 7 years, have you had any judgments against you that have not been 
paid?”  Applicant responded “no” to Question 27d.  He did not report a judgment filed 
against him in October 2002 for approximately $2,720. (Item 4.) 
 
 Question 28 on the e-QIP requests information on an individual’s financial 
delinquencies. Question 28b asks: “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any 
debt(s)?”  Applicant answered “no” to Question 28(b).  He did not report that the debts 
alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.l. and ¶¶ 1.p. through 1.u., and ¶¶ 1.w. and 1.x. were 
over 90 days delinquent. (Item 4.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his SF-86 by 
not responding to Question 28a. He attributed his omission to mistake.  He also stated 
that when he completed his e-QIP in November 2005, he did not know the extent of his 
debt because his former wife took care of the family finances and paid the couple’s bills.  
(Item 3.) 
 
4 
 
 
 
 Applicant has not had financial credit counseling.  He intends to speak to his 
creditors himself and arrange payment plans. (Response to FORM.)    
 
         Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable to 
pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, such as loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might be 
applicable include evidence the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control (AG ¶ 20(c) or the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies that dates to at least 2001 and 
2002. His delinquencies are recent and on-going. They have occurred under 
circumstances that are likely to recur.  
 
6 
 
 
 
Applicant was married in 2000 and divorced in 2005. Approximately half of the 
debts alleged on the SOR occurred after his divorce. For the last several years, he has 
had an income sufficient to pay or settle his delinquent debts, and he failed to do so. 
The record does not reflect that the circumstances that gave rise to his delinquencies 
were beyond his control. Applicant has made promises to pay or settle most his debts in 
the future. However, in determining an individual's security worthiness, the Government 
cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might resolve his or her outstanding 
debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999).  I 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not mitigate the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 When Applicant completed and signed his e-QIP in November 2005, he 
responded “yes” to a question asking if he had been over 180 days delinquent on any 
debts in the last seven years.  He answered “no” to a question asking if he had any 
judgments placed against him in the last seven years that had not been paid.  He 
answered “no” to a question asking if he was currently over 90 days delinquent on any 
debt. 
 
 When Applicant completed and signed his SF-86 in August 2008, he failed to 
provide an answer to a section of the form asking whether he was currently over 90 
days delinquent on any debt and whether he had any debts in the last seven years that 
were over 180 days delinquent.  
 
 The SOR alleged that Appellant’s responses to the financial questions on two 
security clearance applications showed he had deliberately falsified material facts by 
deliberately failing to admit and disclose a judgment, debts that were delinquent over 
180 days in the last seven years, and debts that were currently 90 days delinquent.  
  
This information raises a security concern under AG ¶ 16(a), which reads as 
follows: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” 
 
7 
 
 
 
  Appellant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated if “the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts.”  AG ¶17(a).     
 
Applicant denied his answers constituted deliberate falsification. He stated that 
he made a mistake in failing to respond to the questions relating to financial 
delinquencies when he completed his SF-86 in 2008.  He further stated that when he 
completed the e-QIP in 2005, he was not aware of his delinquent debts because his 
wife paid the family’s bills. The record reflects that a judgment was filed against 
Applicant in 2002, and at least eight debts alleged on the SOR dated to the period 1999 
to 2005.  
 
As a former U.S. service member, Applicant was familiar with the security 
clearance process and the importance of telling the truth to the government. His 
assertions that his falsifications were the result of mistake or lack of knowledge were not 
credible. Additionally, he provided no credible evidence to mitigate his failure to report 
his financial delinquencies on his SF-86 and his e-QIP.  Nothing in the record suggests 
that he took prompt good faith action to correct the omissions, concealments or 
falsifications before he was confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 17(a).  I conclude that his 
falsifications were deliberate.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant had experience with 
security clearance applications in the past, and he knew it was important to answer 
those applications carefully and truthfully. In 2005, and later in 2008, he did not make 
 
8 
 
 
efforts to correct falsifications and omissions in his responses to financial questions on 
his security clearance applications. 
 
Additionally, Applicant’s financial delinquencies occurred when he was a mature 
adult. He failed to satisfy his creditors even when he had sufficient funds to do so. He 
promised to pay his debts at some time in the future, but he has failed to put forward 
plans which show that he and his creditors have agreed to specific payments at specific 
times to satisfy his indebtedness.  His failure to take affirmative action to pay or resolve 
the majority of his delinquent debts continues to raise security concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.x.: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:   Against Applicant  
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
