 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04050 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
December 5, 2006. On August 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On September 17, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
October 28, 2008. The case was assigned to me on November 17, 2008. On December 
3, 2008, a Notice of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for December 18, 2008. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. Applicant did not receive the Notice of Hearing 
within 15 days as required by the Directive. He waived the 15 day notice requirement. 
(Tr at 6.) The Government offered 13 exhibits which were admitted as Government 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 13, without objection. Applicant testified and submitted nine exhibits 
which were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through I, and admitted without 
objection. The record was held open until January 9, 2009. One additional document 
was timely submitted and admitted as AE J. DOHA received the transcript of hearing on 
December 23, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employed with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed with the defense contractor since 
June 2006. He is single and has no children. (Tr at 7-8; Gov 1.) 
 
From August 1998 to August 2002, Applicant was a full-time college student. On 
May 16, 2002, he met with the dean to discuss what courses he needed to complete to 
be eligible for graduation. At the end of the second summer session, he completed 126 
semester hours but did not have the required credits to graduate. (Tr at 48; Gov 4; Gov 
6; Gov 7; Gov 8; Gov 9.)  He did not meet the requirements for graduation because he 
needed 27 credits in his major and only had 24. He needed four classes in his selected 
concentration and only had three. He needed three classes at the 100 level of his major 
but only had two. (Gov 4 at 7.)    
 
The college where Applicant attended sends out e-mails 6-8 times a year to 
students advising them of deadlines for them to apply for graduation. When advisors 
meet with students, information related to application for graduation and degree 
requirements are discussed.  In order to receive their degrees, students are required to 
apply for graduation. The application for graduation requirements is available on the 
school’s website and is posted throughout the university. When students meet with the 
Dean, the Dean discusses graduation requirements for completing their degree and the 
application for graduation requirements. (Gov 4 at 6.)  
 
Around September 2002, Applicant moved out of the area where his college was 
located. Prior to leaving the university, he had not talked with an advisor to insure that 
he met all of the requirements for his degree. He did not verify with the registrar that he 
met the requirements for graduation. Applicant did not apply for a degree. Although he 
never received his diploma, he never contacted the school to ask about his diploma. 
Applicant was disappointed with his performance in college and wanted to put his 
college career behind him. (Tr at 52-54, 58-60.)  
 
In 2002, Applicant was hired as an administrative assistant with a defense 
contractor. In the spring 2003, he was promoted to the position of legislative analyst. 
This new position required a security clearance. He completed a security clearance 
application on April 7, 2003. In response to question 5 which asks about an applicant’s 
educational background, he listed that he had been awarded a Bachelor of Arts degree 
 
3 
 
 
on August 15, 2002. (Gov 3.) He was granted an interim SECRET security clearance 
pending the outcome of his investigation. (Tr at 35.) 
 
Applicant worked as a legislative analyst but moved to a position as an onsite 
contractor with a DOD agency. He worked at this location for approximately one and a 
half years. In November 2004, he was encouraged to apply for a federal employee 
position with the DOD agency. (Tr at 36-37.) He submitted a resume in conjunction with 
his application for federal employment on November 24, 2004. He listed on the resume 
that he received a Bachelor of Arts degree in 2002. (Gov 13.)   
 
On March 21, 2005, Applicant completed a security clearance application in 
conjunction with his future status as a federal employee. In response to question 5, 
asking about his educational background, he listed that he had been awarded a 
Bachelor of Arts degree on August 15, 2002. (Gov 2.) He became a federal government 
employee in April 2005. His subsequent background investigation revealed that he had 
not been awarded a Bachelor of Arts degree.  He was contacted by  a security official in 
the fall 2005 about his academic credentials. (Tr at 37-40; 58-62.)  
 
On March 29, 2006, Applicant was notified that he was to be separated from 
federal service effective April 5, 2006. He was barred from federal employment for a 
period of three years until February 17, 2009.  The basis for his removal was his 
material intentional false statements pertaining to his educational credentials on his 
March 21, 2005, security clearance application and on a resume submitted on 
November 24. (Gov 4; Gov 5.)  
 
Applicant claims that he was not aware that he had to apply for a degree. He 
believed that you had to apply if you wanted to attend the graduation ceremony but not 
for the degree. He was never concerned that his diploma was never sent to him. He 
never saw posters which were posted throughout the campus about applying for 
graduation. He first discovered that he was not awarded a degree in November 2005 
after the security office asked him about his educational background during his 
background investigation. He contacted the university and discovered that he was not 
awarded a degree. (Tr at 48, 53, 55, 58-61.) 
 
Applicant claims that he did not intend to falsify two security applications dated 
April 7, 2003, and March 21, 2005. He also did not intend to falsify his resume 
submitted in November 2004. He believed that he had completed his degree after 
attending summer school in 2002. (Tr at 26, 34, 52; Gov 4; Gov 10.)  
 
Applicant asks that his superior performance over the past six years be 
considered. While not conceding that he intentionally falsified his educational 
credentials, Applicant states, “That while not insignificant, the offense is unique. The 
behavior is unlikely to recur. It should not case doubt on my reliability, trustworthiness, 
my good judgment.” (Tr at 26.)  After he was barred from federal employment, his 
superiors recommended him for a position with one of their contractors located at 
another site. (AE C; AE F; AE I.) Applicant states that he has maintained an excellent 
 
4 
 
 
record over the past six years, and that the security concerns raised by the alleged 
falsification are not representative of his behavior today and should not be the defining 
point regarding his suitability for a security clearance. (Tr at 27.)   
 
Applicant’s current supervisor states that he is impressed with Applicant’s 
attitude, work ethic, and morality. Applicant’s customers and peers speak very highly of 
him. He recommends Applicant for a security clearance. (AE E.) Applicant’s recent  
performance review dated June 24, 2008, was favorable. The review indicates Applicant 
is a crucial member of the executive support staff. He is “independent and driven.” He 
has “excellent planning and coordination skills coupled with social skills” which allow 
him to be effective at all levels of the agency. (AE B.)  
 
Applicant’s supervisor with the defense agency where Applicant worked as a 
federal civilian wrote a letter on his behalf.  He supervised him during the one year that 
he was a federal employee. Applicant also worked for two years as a contractor for the 
agency prior to becoming a federal employee. His former supervisor states that 
Applicant is one of the most dedicated, conscientious, responsible, and skilled 
professionals that he was worked with during his nearly 30 years of experience in the 
private sector, military, and Federal service.  While a federal employee, Applicant was in 
charge of the Security and Policy Review division. He was responsible for the thorough 
review of documents, presentations, video and still photography, briefings, new 
releases, testing plans, conference exhibits to ensure that all materials were appropriate 
for public release. His job included making sure the materials did not contain classified 
information or information that is contrary to U.S. government policy. They never had an 
inadvertent release of improper materials during the year Applicant was in charge of the 
division.  Applicant excelled as no other person who previously held the position ever 
did. Since departing from federal service, Applicant has worked as a contractor 
assisting the government agency. He continues to exhibit the same skills, dedication 
and diligence in this new position.  If a federal service position were to open in the 
future, he has no reservations encouraging Applicant to apply and compete for the 
position. (AE C.) 
 
Other co-workers have written reference letters attesting to Applicant’s 
professionalism, work ethic, and trustworthiness. (AE D; AE F; AE G; AE H.) During his 
career, he received numerous letters of appreciation. (AE A.) He attends church 
regularly.  He coaches a team in an adult soccer league. He belongs to a rock climbing 
and spelunking group. (Tr at 40-43.)      
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
6 
 
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 Applicant’s case poses an interesting dilemma. Either he deliberately falsified his 
academic credentials on two security clearance applications and on his resume, or he 
was grossly indifferent about following the university policies and procedures as to what 
was required to complete his degree and obtain his diploma. The latter also raises 
concerns about Applicant’s ability to safeguard classified information. If a person has 
difficulty following procedures as to what is required to complete their degree, it is likely 
they will have difficulty following the procedures required to safeguard classified 
information.  
 
 In Applicant’s case, I find there is a preponderance of the evidence that he 
intentionally falsified his security clearance applications, dated April 7, 2003, and March 
21, 2005, and his November 2004 resume when he listed that he obtained a B.A. 
degree in August 2002.  Applicant appears to be a very intelligent individual. I find his 
testimony that he believed that he had a college degree less than credible. The 
university that Applicant attended takes significant efforts to publish the requirements for 
graduation as well as the need to apply for graduation throughout the campus. Applicant 
met with the dean in May 2002 to discuss the requirements needed for graduation.  His 
professed ignorance of the need to apply for his degree conflict with the efforts the 
university takes to counsel students on degree and graduation requirements. 
Graduating from college is a significant milestone in a person’s life. Applicant’s lack of 
concern that he was never sent his diploma defies logic.    
 
 The following Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) applies to the 
facts of this case: 
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities) applies with respect to Applicant’s intentional falsification of his 
educational background in response to question 5 on his security clearance 
applications, dated April 7, 2003, and March 21, 2005, when he listed he earned a 
Bachelor of Arts degree in August 2002. It also applies to the resume Applicant 
submitted on November 24, 2004.  
 
 The personal conduct concern can be mitigated.  The following Personal 
Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) have the potential to apply to Applicant’s case. 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) does not 
apply.  Applicant did not admit that he did not complete his college degree until it was 
 
7 
 
 
discovered during his background investigation, and the issue of his lack of degree was 
raised by the investigator conducting the background investigation. 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(c ) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment) does not apply.  The government expects Applicants to be truthful 
with the government at all times.  Applicant falsified that he had a college degree on 
three separate occasions. Contrary to Applicant’s argument, this was not a one-time 
circumstance. He falsely held himself out as a college graduate on three separate 
occasions between April 2003 to March 2005.  Applicant’s conduct continues to raise 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s six years of 
working for the federal government both as a contractor and a federal employee. While, 
Applicant is highly thought of by his supervisor, former supervisor, and co-workers, his 
lack of candor pertaining to his educational background raise serious security concerns 
under personal conduct. His deliberate falsifications outweigh the favorable information 
about his work performance. In security clearance cases, any doubt as to whether an 
applicant should be granted a security clearance must be ruled in favor of national 
security. Despite Applicant’s outstanding work performance and favorable references, 
doubts remain about his ability to protect classified information because of his deliberate 
falsifications on two security clearance applications and a resume. I find against 
Applicant under Personal Conduct. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
    
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant   
   Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
   Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
