 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02717 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations and personal conduct. He falsified his security clearance application. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on October 23, 2006 
(Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP)) (GE 1). On October 14, 
2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 21, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on November 24, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 1, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on December 16, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
which were received without objection (Tr. 34). Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
presented one witness, and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 6, which were received 
without objection (Tr. 40). I kept the record open to allow Applicant time to submit 
additional matters in support of his case. He submitted AE 7 post-hearing. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 24, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in SOR ¶ 1, 
except for SOR ¶ 1.j, which he denied. He also denied all the allegations under SOR ¶ 
2. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, including his demeanor and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old principal engineer scientist (Tr. 122). He completed his 
Bachelors of Science degree in electrical engineering in June 1976 (Tr. 6). He has 
worked for government contractors for the last 32 years. Except for a five month period 
of unemployment, from May to September 2001, he has been consistently employed 
since November 1995 to the day of his hearing (Tr. 80-83).2 He was underemployed 
from September 2001 until around 2002-2003. 
 
In August 2008, he was hired by his current employer, a government contractor. 
His supervisor over the past four months considers Applicant to be dedicated, honest, 
and a good employee (Tr. 144). He has known Applicant since August 2008, when he 
hired him from another government contractor to come and work for his company. In his 
opinion, Applicant is reliable and always gives his best effort. He believes Applicant 
made an honest mistake when he submitted his security clearance application and 
recommended his continued access to classified information. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant presented character statements from friends, co-
workers (some of them retired service members), and a facility security officer (FSO), 
most of whom have know him for around five years (AE 6 and GE 4). Applicant is 
considered to be honest, trustworthy, and a model employee. At his prior job, he was 
the point of contact for dealing with classified documents and computer systems. He 
has a reputation for knowing and diligently following security rules and regulations. In 
his references’ opinions, he has been a strong team member, an important asset to his 
employer, and a dedicated husband and father. There is no reason to doubt his 
patriotism, honor, and love for the United States. He is not considered a security risk. All 
his references endorsed his continued access to classified information. His FSO 
believes Applicant was provided wrong advice, and that with proper instruction 
2  Applicant also had a two-month period of unemployment during 1995. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant would not have made the mistakes that led to his pending security clearance 
determination. 
 
In 1977-1978, Applicant received access to classified information at the secret 
level from the Department of the Navy (Tr. 7). Thereafter, he had access to classified 
information on-and-off based on his employment needs. Applicant has had continued 
access to classified information at the secret level from 1998 to his hearing (Tr. 134). 
There is no evidence, and the government did not allege, that Applicant has ever 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. Since 1998, 
Applicant has submitted several security clearance applications. However, all but his 
last application were paper applications. His October 2006 application was an e-QIP 
completed using his work computer. He claimed he was unfamiliar with the electronic 
security clearance application, and was confused filing the application. 
 
Applicant married his first wife in 1980 and they were divorced in 1987 (Tr. 116-
118). He adopted his wife’s two children from a prior marriage. The two children are 
now adults and live independently. He married his second wife in 1988 and they were 
divorced in 1997. He married his third wife in 1997 and they were divorced in 1999. He 
married his fourth wife in November 1999 and they were divorced in August 2001. He 
married his current wife in October 2001. He has no other children. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his October 2006 security clearance application, his responses to 
DOHA interrogatories (GE 3 & 4); and two credit bureau reports (CBRs) (GEs 2 & 4).  
 
The SOR alleges 11 delinquent/charged off accounts. Applicant admitted that 
seven of the 11 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR were his legal obligations. He 
challenged three of the SOR allegations because they are duplicates of already alleged 
debts. I find that SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.i allege the same debt (Tr. 127); 1.b and 1.g allege 
the same debt (Tr. 124-125); and 1.d and 1.k allege the same debt. He also claimed 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.i, 1.b and 1.g are the same debt. However, he failed to present 
documentary evidence to establish these four debts are the same. Applicant paid all 
delinquent debts after receipt of his October 2008 SOR, except for SOR ¶ 1.a (same as 
1.i) which remains outstanding. Applicant’s insurer paid SOR ¶ 1.j before his receipt of 
the SOR.  
 
Applicant admitted his debts have been delinquent since 2001. He stopped 
paying his debts when he lost his job and was unemployed for a period of five months in 
2001. Applicant explained that his financial problems were caused by a combination of 
factors; i.e., two periods or unemployment (the first for two months in 1995, and the 
second from May to September 2001), a period of underemployment after September 
2001, and his four divorces (Tr. 27, 43). He testified that prior to 1996, he had excellent 
credit. He acquired most of his delinquent debts between 1998 and 2001 (Tr. 44, 130).  
 
Applicant claimed he made no effort to settle, pay, or resolve the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($10,212) (a water purification system for the foreclosed mobile home (Tr. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
87-88)); 1.e ($10,360) (note for a repossessed car he gave to his ex-wife (Tr. 89)); 1.f 
($25,253) (mortgage for repossessed mobile home Applicant purchased for ex-wife (Tr. 
95-96)); and 1.h ($3,559) (computer he purchased for ex-wife (Tr. 102-103)), because 
these items were awarded to his ex-wife by his 1999 divorce decree (Tr. 104). 
Applicant’s 1999 divorce decree awarded the mobile home to his ex-wife (AE 7). 
However, the divorce decree is silent with respect to the debt for the computer and the 
car. Applicant testified he purchased the computer and the car, and that his ex-wife kept 
both items as part of the division of assets during the divorce. He claimed she agreed to 
pay for both items. Applicant presented no documentary evidence to establish his 
claims.3 
 
In 2003-2004, Applicant and his current wife were in the process of buying a 
home. His delinquent debts surfaced during his home loan application process. 
Applicant claimed that a banker (a friend of his wife) advised him to forget about the old 
delinquent debts – to let them go, because they would eventually drop off his credit 
report (Tr. 66-67, 135, GE 4). Applicant and his wife bought the home in August-
September 2004. 
 
During his December 2006 background interview with a government investigator, 
Applicant was confronted with the same delinquent obligations alleged in the SOR. He 
admitted that the acquired the debts, but claimed that his ex-wife took responsibility for 
most of them, some pursuant to his 1999 divorce decree. Applicant stated he had no 
intention to pay the debts (GE 3).  
 
In October 2006, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (GE 1). In 
response to question 27 (asking whether in the last seven years he had his wages 
garnished or had any property repossessed for any reason), Applicant deliberately 
answered “No” and failed to disclose that he had his car repossessed (SOR ¶ 1.e), that 
the mobile home he purchased was repossessed (SOR ¶ 1.f), and that his mortgage 
was foreclosed for lack of payments (GE 3).  
 
In his answers to question 28 (asking whether during the last seven years he had 
been over 180 days delinquent on any debts, and whether he was currently over 90 
days delinquent on any debts), Applicant answer ‘No,” and deliberately failed to disclose 
the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.f, 1. h, and 1.i. 
 
Applicant repeatedly averred he never intended to deceive the government or to 
falsify his security clearance application – that he made an honest mistake (Tr. 43-45). 
He claimed he omitted the required information because of the following reasons (Tr. 
27-29, 43): (1) it was the first time he completed an e-QIP and he was confused; (2) he 
misread or did not read completely question 27 (Tr. 59-60); (3) an assistant facility 
security officer told him to go back only five years (instead of the seven years required 
by the e-QIP); (4) he believed the delinquent debts had dropped off his CBR (a banker 
told him that the debts would fall off); (5) when he submitted his e-QIP he was in a 
3  Moreover, there is no evidence the creditors agreed to release him from these obligations and 
generally, a family court decision does not release him from responsibility for debts. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
stable marital situation, he was current in all his present debts, and forgot about his past 
delinquent debts; (6) he knew that the debts and foreclosures would be discovered and 
addressed when the investigators reviewed his CBRs (Tr. 62); (7) he did not disclose 
the repossessions and foreclosures because those debts were assigned to his wife by 
the 1999 divorce decree; and (8) he believe the sale of the foreclosed property covered 
the debt owed (Tr. 98-103, 111). 
 
Applicant testified that since September-October 2001, he and his current wife 
have been reestablishing his credit. They have lived within their means, and they do not 
abuse their credit or use credit cards. Since 2001, they have paid all their new debts. He 
has been able to pay his new creditors because of a stable marriage and good working 
opportunities.  
 
As soon as he realized the adverse impact his bad credit would have on his 
ability to possess a security clearance (i.e., he received the SOR), Applicant cashed in 
his 401(k) to pay his delinquent debts (AE 1). He paid all six delinquent debts after 
receipt of his October 2008 SOR (except for 1.a). He explained he never attempted to 
resolve his debts before October 2008, because he did not have the financial means to 
do so. His earnings were not sufficient to pay for his delinquent obligations and his 
family’s day-to-day living expenses (Tr. 72-73). He also explained he made an honest 
mistake when he followed the wrong advice from his banker friend to let the debts lapse 
and fall off of his CBR. 
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse and embarrassment for the way he 
handled his past financial problems. He promised never to get in the same situation 
again. He explained his financial problems were caused by a unique set of 
circumstances and misunderstandings that were unlikely to repeat themselves. He has 
learned his lesson and he is now well aware of what it is required of him to show that he 
is reliable, trustworthy, and financially responsible. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.4 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
4  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”5 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an Applicant’s failure or inability to 
live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleged seven delinquent/charged off accounts (not considering 
duplications) totaling approximately $55,000. Of these, only SOR ¶ 1.a (same as 1.i) 
($1,279), remains outstanding, because Applicant claims it is a duplicate of a paid debt. 
He failed to present documentary evidence to support his claim. Applicant acquired all 
of his delinquent debts from 1998 to 2001. He stopped paying his debts in 2001, when 
he was unemployed/underemployed. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($10,212) and 1.f 
($25,253) were awarded to his ex-wife pursuant to his 1999 divorce decree.6 
 
He presented no evidence (other than his testimony) of any efforts to settle, pay 
or resolve his legal obligations from 2001 to December 2008. He claimed he did not 
have the financial means to pay his legal obligations, delinquent debts, and his day-to-
day living expenses. AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, AG ¶ 
19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
6  See supra foot note 3. 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant receives credit for paying all his delinquent debts (but one), albeit after 
receipt of the SOR. Notwithstanding, I find that AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. His financial 
problems are recent and not isolated. He carried a large delinquent debt for seven 
years, waiting for the statute of limitations to lapse and his debts to fall of his CBR. The 
ongoing nature of his delinquent debts and the number of debts show “a continuing 
course of conduct.”  
 
 Applicant presented evidence that established circumstances beyond his control 
contributing to his inability to pay his debts, i.e., his numerous divorces; he was 
unemployed/underemployed during five months in 2001; and for a period of time he was 
underemployed and did not have the financial means to pay his past debts and his 
family’s day-to-day living expenses. AG ¶ 20(b) applies, but only partially.  
 
 Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. He carried a large delinquent debt for seven years, waiting for the 
statute of limitations to lapse and his debts to fall of his CBR. He deliberately failed to 
take any action to resolve his delinquent debt. He was continuously and gainfully 
employed since September 2001 to the present. He changed employers several times, 
on each occasion improving his economic situation. He purchased cars, bought a home, 
and contributed to his 401(k). However, Applicant failed to take any action to resolve his 
debts until after he received the SOR.  
 
 He claimed he did nothing to resolve his delinquencies because of the bad 
advice he received. In 2003-2004 when he allegedly received the bad advice, Applicant 
was 47 years old, a college graduate, a successful employee of government contractor 
for many years, and had had access to classified information (on-and-off) for 25 years. 
Applicant knew or should have known that the government requires individuals 
entrusted with access to classified information to be responsible, trustworthy, and to 
display good judgment.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) applies. He paid his delinquent debts (except one). He has stable 
employment with sufficient income, and he no longer has any financial problems. 
Notwithstanding, Applicant favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate the financial 
considerations concerns. Considering the totality of the circumstances, Applicant’s last 
minute actions to repay his creditors do not raise to the level of good-faith efforts to 
resolve his debts. His failure to pay his debts for seven years shows lack of judgment 
and an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. His actions raise questions 
about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. AG ¶ 15.  
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant omitted relevant information in his answers to questions 27 and 28 of 
his security clearance application. I conclude Applicant’s omission of the foreclosure 
and repossession of his mobile home (SOR ¶ 1.f) was not deliberate. His 1999 divorce 
decree awarded his ex-wife the mobile home. It was reasonable for Applicant to believe 
that the mobile home was no longer his property, and that all financial responsibility for 
it rested with his ex-wife.7 The divorce decree is silent with respect to Applicant’s 
repossessed car, or any other loan, or item he purchased for his ex-wife. He presented 
no documentary evidence to show that the car, loans, or any items were his ex-wife’s 
financial responsibility. 
 
Considering the record as a whole, I find Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.e, and 1.h. He personally acquired these debts and 
stopped paying them when he lost his job and was unemployed for five months. He 
rediscovered his debts in 2003-2004 when he was in the process of buying his home, 
and elected not to pay his delinquent obligations. He chose to let the statute of 
limitations run so that the debts would expire, and with time, fall off his CBR. He was 
confronted with the delinquent debts in 2006 and he again stated his intent not to pay 
them. In light of Applicant’s education, maturity, his employment history, his demeanor 
and testimony, and the lack of credibility of his numerous explanations, I find he knew 
about the debts and chose to ignore them. In 2006, when he completed his security 
clearance application, Applicant knew or should have known about his delinquent 
obligations and deliberately failed to disclose them. 
 
Because of his extensive experience working for government contractors and 
holding a security clearance, Applicant knew the importance of accurately completing 
his security clearance application and telling the truth. Nevertheless, he failed to provide 
information that was material to making an informed security decision and made a false 
statement. AG ¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire,” applies. 
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
7  Generally, a family court decision does not release a debtor from responsibility for debts unless 
the creditors consent, or they are part of the legal action. 
 
10 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
  After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find none applies to this case. 
Applicant made no effort to correct his omissions until he was confronted with his 
delinquent debts. I do not believe his claims that security personnel told him to go back 
only five years, or that a banker told him to disregard his delinquent obligations. 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant’s extensive list of conflicting explanations 
is not credible. I specifically considered AG ¶ 17(c), and find it does not apply since his 
behavior is recent and shows Applicant’s lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
11 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, educated, and 
well trained man. He has diligently and successfully worked for numerous government 
contractors for 32 years. He has held access to classified information on-and-off for 
approximately 30 years without any complaints or violations.  
 
Because of his years in the service and his many years holding access to 
classified information, Applicant knew or should have known the importance of the trust 
placed on him by the Government. Notwithstanding, he failed to be candid and honest 
on his security clearance application and during his testimony at hearing. His behavior 
shows he lacks judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e, and 1.h:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i -1.k:  For Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a      For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.b      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
