1
                                     
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-03389
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
__________
Decision
__________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Foreign Preference
(Guideline C). Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On February 26, 2007, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF
86). On July 15, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended,
modified and revised. The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline C.
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked.
2
                                     
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations in a sworn statement signed on
August 4, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was
assigned to me on October 20, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 5,
2008, for a hearing on November 18, 2008, and it was held on that day. 
At the hearing, the government offered two exhibits (Exhs.) that were admitted in
evidence without objection. Applicant submitted no exhibits at the hearing but testified
on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 26,
2008. At the request of Applicant, the record was held open for 30 days and three
evidentiary documents were submitted within that time and admitted without objection. 
Procedural Rulings
Notice of Hearing
The hearing notice was dated less than 15 days before the hearing date. I
advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before
the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15 days notice and indicated
he was ready to proceed (Tr. 7).
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations of the SOR in his answer but
denied the general allegation that he has a preference for a country other than the U.S.
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 41-year-old heavy equipment operator employed by a government
contractor since 2007 who was born in Mexico. His father was a laborer in the harvests
in the U.S. at various locations. The family decided to stay in the U.S. Applicant
obtained an associate’s degree from a technical college in 1987. He obtained a green
card in 1978 and became a U.S. citizen in 1993. 
When Applicant was married in 1991, his wife owned some property in Mexico
only a few miles from the U.S. border. In 1994 he built a house on the property using his
money. He was, at that time, working for a U.S. company that had business in Mexico
and he often traveled there for work (Tr. 35). He obtained a Mexican national identity
card identifying his Mexican parentage to facilitate travels to Mexico for his work (Tr. 22
and 60). He has not had a Mexican passport since becoming a U.S. citizen (Tr. 66). 
In 2003 he applied for and received Mexican citizenship. He acknowledged this
on his SF 86. The reason for so doing was so that he could legally assume ownership of
the house, and be able to sell the house at a future time since Mexico requires property
owners to be citizens (Tr. 36). He was also fearful about his investment since, because
of the Mexican law requiring ownership, squatters claim such property and it is difficult
to evict them. He is now trying to sell the house through advertisements in local
3
                                     
Mexican newspapers (Exh. A). The value of the property is between $30,000 and
$50,000. He owns a home in the U.S. valued at $140,000 and intends to buy another.
In 2006 he voted in the Mexican elections (Tr. 26). That election was a general
election with candidates for president as well as local officials. The principal reason he
voted was to have some influence in the selection of local officials who would be
deciding municipal issues. He also voted for one of the presidential candidates in the
same election (Tr. 27). He regularly votes in all U.S. elections (Tr. 30). 
Applicant has expressed a willingness to revoke his Mexican citizenship (Tr. 49).
He has a strong preference for U.S. citizenship based on having lived here for 30 years
and love for the country (Tr. 30). He has met with the Mexican consulate in the city
where he lives to explore revocation of Mexican citizenship. However, he does not want
to revoke until he can sell the property in Mexico (Tr. 34). He is somewhat fearful of
discussions with the consul at this time as he feels they may cause some difficulties for
him or the property if he should revoke his citizenship now (Tr. 52-53). When he
became a Mexican citizen again in 2003 and voted in the 2006 election he was not
employed by a defense contractor and had no idea these actions might later jeopardize
his work. 
Applicant has three children who are 18, 14 and 2. He has another who is 18 by
another woman for whom he pays child support. He has never served in the military in
either the U.S. or Mexico. He is an hourly worker with an annual income of
approximately $60,000. He does not hold a security clearance but was given an interim
clearance soon after filing his application for a security clearance. It was revoked when
this matter arose (Tr. 68). He does not have access to classified information but needs
a clearance to have access to the military installation where he works. 
Applicant is highly regarded by his supervisors who describe him as loyal,
competent, and hard-working (Exhs. B and C). 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
4
                                     
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information.
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition,
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant]
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3.
Analysis
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly
above, I conclude that the following Adjudicative Guidelines provide the standard for
resolution of the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
Guideline C Foreign Preference
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all
appropriate legal precepts, factors and conditions above, I conclude the following with
respect to all allegations set forth in the SOR: 
5
                                     
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in
AG ¶ 9: 
“[W]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign
country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or
make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
AG ¶ 10 describes possible conditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member. This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign
country;
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or
other such benefits from a foreign country;
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements;
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business
interests in another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and,
(7) voting in a foreign election;
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an
American citizen;
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in conflict with the national security interest; and,
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship.
The fact that Applicant has used foreign citizenship to protect financial interests
in a foreign country by becoming a citizen of Mexico, and by voting in a foreign
election to influence the outcome of local elections to protect property interests have
raised security concerns under Sec. (a). (5) and (7). of the guideline.
6
                                     
AG ¶ 11 provides the following conditions that could mitigate security concerns
(MC):
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or
birth in a foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual
citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when
the individual was a minor;
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant
security authority.
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and,
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United
States Government.
The only possible MC applicable is paragraph (b) since he has expressed
such a willingness to revoke his Mexican citizenship. However, he has placed
conditions on doing so, namely the sale of the property in Mexico. The Appeal Board
has held in a similar case also involving Mexico that a person owning property there
who expressed a willingness to revoke but declined to do so to protect property
interests had placed conditions that were not consistent with the requirement of
willingness to revoke (ISCR Case No. 01-16098 Appeal Board May 29, 2003).
Although Applicant has taken some steps to sell the property which would
remove the condition, that has not yet happened. Thus, his intent remains conditional.
As long as he owns the house he likely will have dealings with officials in Mexico, and
he is fearful of repercussions if it becomes known that he is renouncing his citizenship.
Since the Applicant’s vote in a foreign election was not encouraged by the U.S. that
MC is not applicable. 
I place no emphasis on the fact that he was initially a citizen of Mexico by
virtue of his parentage, but only on actions he has taken after becoming a U.S. citizen.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
7
                                     
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference allegations. While there is no reason
other than the dual citizenship and voting to question Applicant’s ability to hold a
security clearance, his refusal to revoke his Mexican citizenship until he sells his
property places a condition on the willingness to revoke and precludes a finding in his
favor. While Applicant took these actions which cause him to be denied a security
clearance before his employment by a defense contractor, he has chosen a course
that protects his foreign property interests and is unwilling to take steps to reverse
those actions at this time. There is no reason based on the facts that are known that
he should not receive a security clearance at some future time when he can do so
without fear of losing his investment or his property. While he is making efforts to
resolve the issue through sale of the property, that has not occurred as yet. 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), a careful consideration of the whole person factors and
supporting evidence, application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative
process, and interpretation of my responsibilities under the guidelines. Applicant has
not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude
he is not eligible for access to classified information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
 Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.d.:  Against Applicant
 Subparagraph 1.e.:  Against Applicant
8
                                     
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security
clearance for Applicant at this time. Clearance is denied.
Charles D. Ablard
Administrative Judge
