1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-04229
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on January 11,
2008. On June 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on October 28, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November
18, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 10, 2008. The
Government offered Exhibits (GE 1-5), which were received into the record without
objection. Applicant testified in his own behalf. He submitted Exhibits (AE A-F), without
objection. I held the record open until January 9, 2009 and Applicant timely submitted a
2
document marked as AE G. Department Counsel had no objection and the document
was received into the record. DOHA received the transcript on December 18, 2008.
Based upon a review of the record, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated August 6, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.n. He provided additional information to support his
request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in May 2000. In May 2003, he received a degree in electronic engineering.
He has been employed with his current employer since August 2008 (GE 1).
In 2004, Applicant had some delinquent debt as a result of “mistakes that he
made with his credit” (GE 4). He trusted his family and friends with his credit but they
defaulted on payments to the accounts in his name. He obtained a loan consolidation in
the amount of $3,000 to help pay that debt. He is still paying on the loan (Tr. 38). He
believes the balance is $1,900.
Applicant worked full time after high school. He worked steadily until March 2007
when he was laid off from his job. At that time his hourly salary was $17 an hour. He
was unemployed for two weeks (Tr. 63). He took temporary jobs that ranged in pay from
$11 to $12 an hour. Applicant could not maintain his expenses and accumulated
delinquent debt (Tr. 14).
In March 2006, Applicant purchased a truck for his parents. He signed for the car
loan but his parents did not assume the monthly payments as planned. The payments
were delinquent without Applicant’s knowledge. He tried to settle with the company in
2006 but he did not have a sufficient lump sum (Tr. 32). 
Applicant is single but plans to wed next year (Tr. 16). He stated he will need
money to pay for the wedding. He has a two-year-old daughter from a long term
relationship that ended in 2008. He pays child support in the amount of $500 a month to
her mother (AE B). A garnishment of $40 a month from his paycheck is for insurance for
his daughter (GE 4).
The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts/collection accounts. The total amount of
the delinquent debt is approximately $19,647.
SOR ¶ 1.a is a collection account in the amount of $958 for a cell phone. This
account is unpaid.
SOR ¶ 1.b is a collection account in the amount of $100. Applicant settled this
account for $30 (AE D).
The SOR did not include an allegation 1.h.1
3
SOR ¶ ¶1.c., d., and e. are three separate collection accounts with the same
cable company. Applicant paid $106 on one account. The other two accounts are
unpaid (Tr. 44).
SOR ¶ 1.f is for a telephone account in collection for $358. Applicant’s parents
used the phone but did not pay the bills. This account remains unpaid.
SOR ¶ 1.g is a collection account for $640. Applicant does not know the origin of
this account. The account is unpaid.1
SOR ¶ 1.i. is an account in the amount of $79. The account is paid (AE C).
SOR ¶ 1.j is a collection account for a water bill in the amount of $179. The
account remains unpaid.
SOR ¶1.k is a collection account for the truck purchased for his parents in the
amount of $14,245. This is unpaid.
SOR 1.l is a collection account for a cell phone that belonged to Applicant’s
girlfriend. The account for $589 is unpaid.
SOR 1.m is for a collection account in the amount of $1,135. Applicant has no
knowledge of this account.
SOR 1.n is for another cell phone account that belonged to his girlfriend’s sister
in the amount of $449 which is unpaid.
Applicant earns approximately $50,000 a year. After monthly expenses and
payment on some debt, he has approximately $500 net remainder (Tr. 60). He is current
with his car payment. His own credit card bills are paid. He has $100 in savings.
Applicant has not received financial counseling. His parents now agree to give him $400
a month to help him pay his delinquent debts (AE G). He promised to pay a few more
debts in the weeks after the hearing but he did not submit any documentation to support
this assertion.
Applicant’s annual performance appraisals rate him as “fully meeting
requirements” with “exceeds requirements” in several areas. He displays an ability to
handle a large workload while adhering closely to policies and procedures (AE G). He
displays a positive attitude at work.
Applicant’s interpersonal and communication skills include excellent listening and
troubleshooting skills. He can diagnose a problem and devise viable solutions. He has
an ability to remain unflustered during frenzied periods at work. He is an asset to his
team. His supervisor recommends him for a security clearance (AE G).
4
Applicant’s colleagues and friends attest to his reliability, maturity and high level
of dedication to his work. He has received various awards in recognition of his
achievements. He is a loyal and trusted friend who is respectful and conscientious.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
5
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant has numerous delinquent debts ($19,647) and could not
meet his financial obligations from 2003 until the present. The evidence is sufficient to
raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying
conditions may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@
Applicant=s financial worries are partially the result of allowing his credit to be used by
family and friends who defaulted on paying their bills. However his delinquent debts
have various sources and have been ongoing. This potentially mitigating condition does
not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, his
financial problems may have increased with a short period of unemployment and lower
wage rate, but Applicant did not act responsibly in identifying and resolving his debts.
He did not take an active stance when he learned about many of them. Applicant has
worked steadily for many years with a few periods of unemployment, I find this
potentially mitigating condition does not apply.
6
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). This does not apply. Applicant has no budget
and has had no financial counseling. He is paying child support insurance through a
garnishment. He does not have a handle on his financial affairs at this time. He plans to
pay his delinquent debt but has no firm plan in place at this time.
AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant initially
obtained a loan consolidation plan to repay earlier debt in 2004. Since then he has not
attempted to resolve his financial issues. He paid several small debts but the majority
are unresolved. I conclude this potentially mitigating condition does not apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant stated that the alleged
debts were due to his parents and friends not paying on the accounts that Applicant
allowed them to use. He acknowledged that he signed for the accounts and is
responsible for them. I conclude this potentially mitigating condition does not apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude that under the whole
person, there is not sufficient mitigation to overcome the government’s case.
Applicant has worked for a number of years since receiving his degree. He has a
very good work record and a recommendation from his supervisor. He is a valuable and
trusted employee. He received good evaluations. His friends and colleagues attest to
his loyalty, responsibility, and dedication. He has a two-year-old-daughter that he
supports. He helped his parents and friends when they needed credit. However, that
7
exacerbated his financial difficulties. The largest debt is the purchase of the truck for his
parents. He acknowledges that he is the signer on the loan and is responsible for the
debt.
Applicant promises to pay his delinquent debts soon. His parents are providing
$400 a month toward that plan. However, Applicant has not yet established a payment
plan. He paid several small debts but the majority of his delinquent debt is unpaid. He
has not provided sufficient mitigation to sustain his burden in this case. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
