 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. -------- 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 27, 2007. On 
August 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines H and E. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 30, 2008; answered it on October 15, 
2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on October 20, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on November 
5, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on the same day. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on November 17, 2008, scheduling the hearing for December 9, 2008. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record 
closed upon adjournment of the hearing. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
December 18, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.b. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 21-year-old apprentice electrician employed by a defense 
contractor (Tr. 27). He is in a leadership position where he supervises three or four 
other workers (Tr. 28). He has worked for his current employer since October 3, 2005. 
He has a high school education, was married in October 2007, and has a 16-month-old 
daughter (Tr. 28-29). He has never held a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant overdosed on an over-the-counter antihistamine in September 2004. 
He was diagnosed as suffering from depression and received treatment and counseling 
from October through December 2004. His doctor prescribed an antidepressant that 
appeared to be effective, but he stopped taking it in February 2005, because he was 
feeling better and his father was opposed to him taking medications to improve his 
mood (GX 3 at 4; Tr. 38).  
 
 Applicant used marijuana about ten times between September 2004 and January 
2005, while he was in high school. He testified he first used it because of peer pressure, 
but he continued to use it because it relieved his depression (Tr. 42-43). 
 
In June 18, 2007, after Applicant had submitted his security clearance 
application, he and his three associates were stopped by police because his car 
windows were tinted too darkly. The police searched his car and found a small quantity 
of marijuana. At the hearing, he admitted smoking one marijuana cigarette on that date 
(Tr. 30-31). On July 10, 2007, he was sentenced as a first offender and fined about 
$160, placed on supervised probation for six months, and ordered to perform 24 hours 
of community service. His driver’s license was restricted for six months. His probation 
ended in December 2007. When interviewed by a security investigator in January 2008, 
he told the investigator only his friends who were with him on June 18, 2007 knew about 
his marijuana use (GX 3 at 5). 
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories on May 27, 2008, Applicant answered “yes” 
to the question, “Do you intend to use narcotics, dangerous drugs, psychoactive or 
controlled substances, to include marijuana or hashish in the future?” He testified that 
 
3 
 
 
he probably misread the question and that he does not intend to use marijuana in the 
future (Tr. 32). 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified he used marijuana on June 18, 2007, to relieve 
stress, because his then-fiancée’s parents were upset that she was pregnant (Tr. 34). 
He testified he had not used marijuana since his arrest in June 2007 and he does not 
intend to use it again (Tr. 32). He believes he can now handle the stress in his life 
because he is in a happy marriage and has resumed taking a prescription 
antidepressant (Tr. 36). He believes he would be fired from his job if he used marijuana 
again (Tr. 44). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana from September 2004 to “at least” 
July 2007 (¶ 1.a); was charged in June 2007 with possession of marijuana and was 
convicted (¶ 1.b); used marijuana in July 2007 after submitting his security clearance 
application (¶ 1.c); intends to continue to use drugs, including marijuana in the future (¶ 
1.d); and is disqualified from holding a security clearance under 50 U.S.C. § 435c 
because he is a current drug user (¶ 1.e). 
 
The concern under this guideline is as follows: AUse of an illegal drug or misuse 
of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24. This guideline encompasses behavior involving ADrugs, materials, and other 
chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as 
amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens).” AG ¶ 24(a)(1). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. 
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions under this guideline are AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), 
(g), and (h). AG ¶ 25(a) is raised by Aany drug abuse.@ AG 25(c) is raised by Aillegal drug 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution.” AG ¶ 25(g) is raised by “any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance.” AG ¶ 25(h) is raised by an “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or 
failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.” Applicant’s use of 
marijuana in high school and again in June 2007 raises AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c). AG ¶ 25(g) 
is not raised because he did not have a clearance when he used marijuana. AG ¶ 25(h) 
 
5 
 
 
was raised by Applicant’s response to DOHA interrogatories in May 2008 indicating his 
intent to continue using marijuana. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c, alleging Applicant’s use of marijuana after applying for a security 
clearance, does not raise any enumerated disqualifying conditions other than those 
raised by SOR ¶ 1.b, which is cross-alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. To avoid duplicative 
allegations, I have resolved SOR ¶ 1.c in Applicant’s favor and resolved the underlying 
security concerns under Guideline E. 
 
 An applicant “who is an unlawful user of a controlled substance or an addict” is 
disqualified from holding or receiving a clearance. 50 U.S.C. § 435c. The allegation in 
SOR ¶ 1.e was based on Applicant’s affirmative response to the DOHA interrogatory in 
May 2008, asking if he intended to use drugs in the future. He repudiated that response 
at the hearing, testifying that he probably misread the question. I found his repudiation 
implausible and unconvincing. I believe it more likely that Applicant was still ambivalent 
about using marijuana when he responded to the DOHA interrogatories in May 2008.   
 
 When Applicant received the SOR in August 2008, he realized that his security 
clearance and his job were in jeopardy. Shortly thereafter, he resumed use of 
antidepressants, and he no longer relied on marijuana to relieve his depression. He 
testified at the hearing he had not used marijuana since June 2007, and there is no 
evidence of use after that date. He believes he would be fired if he was found to have 
used marijuana again. Notwithstanding Applicant’s response to DOHA interrogatories in 
May 2008, I conclude he is not a current user of marijuana. Therefore, I conclude he 
has refuted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.e and is not statutorily disqualified from being 
granted a clearance. 
 
 Even though Applicant is not statutorily disqualified, the government produced 
substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c), shifting 
the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns raised by drug involvement may be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 26(a). The first prong of ¶ 
26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on the recentness of drug involvement. There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. ISCR Case No. 
02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
 
6 
 
 
At the time of the hearing, Applicant had abstained from using marijuana for 
about 18 months and had been off probation for about a year. However, I am satisfied 
he did not decide to stop using marijuana until sometime between May 2008 (the date 
of the DOHA interrogatories) and the hearing. In light of his history of substance abuse 
starting with his abuse of an over-the-counter antihistamine in September 2004, his 
regular use of marijuana until January 2005, his use of marijuana in June 2007 in 
response to a bout of depression, and his ambivalent response to DOHA interrogatories 
in May 2008, I conclude that insufficient time has passed to demonstrate his 
rehabilitation. Thus, I conclude the first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) is not established. 
 
The second prong (“so infrequent”) also is not established because of his 
repeated use of marijuana. The third prong (“under such circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur”) is not established because Applicant continues to require medication to 
control his depression and he has an erratic record of compliance with medical advice 
regarding use of prescription medications to control it. The final prong is not established 
because doubts remain about his current reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
Security concerns arising from drug involvement also may be mitigated by 
evidence of Aa demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.@ AG 
¶ 26(b)(1)-(4). The first of these indicia is not established because there is no evidence 
he has stopped associating with his drug-using friends. The second is established, 
because he is no longer living at home, is married, has an infant daughter, and now 
works for a defense contractor. The third is not established because, as noted above, 
he has not abstained from using marijuana for a sufficient time to demonstrate 
rehabilitation. The fourth is not established because he did not submit a signed 
statement of intent. I conclude there is insufficient evidence “demonstrated intent” to 
fully establish AG ¶ 26(b). 
 
 Finally, security concerns also may be mitigated by Asatisfactory completion of a 
prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and 
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional.@ AG ¶ 26(d). Applicant received counseling and 
treatment after his abuse of an over-the-counter antihistamine, but he continued to 
abuse drugs, and there is no evidence of a favorable prognosis. Thus, I conclude AG ¶ 
26(d) is not established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges SOR ¶ 1.c (Applicant’s marijuana use after applying for 
a security clearance). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows: 
“Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness 
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” 
 
7 
 
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions arising under this guideline for Applicant’s 
drug involvement are AG ¶¶ 16(c), (d), (e), and (g).  
AG ¶ 16(c) is raised by: 
[C]redible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
AG ¶ 16(d) is raised by:  
[C]redible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. 
 AG 16(e) is raised by “personal conduct, or concealment of information about 
one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing.” Finally, AG ¶ 16(g) is raised by “association with 
persons involved in criminal activity.”  
 
 Applicant’s repeated use of marijuana, association with marijuana users, and 
illegal conduct that could affect his personal, professional, and community standing 
raise AG ¶¶ 16(c), (d), (e), and (g). 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated by showing “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
While Applicant’s last marijuana use was arguably “minor” and was treated as such by 
the court, the remaining elements of this mitigating condition are not established by the 
evidence. As noted above under Guideline H, insufficient time has passed to determine 
whether his drug use will recur. His use of marijuana after applying for a security 
clearance casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude 
AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct also may be mitigated if “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
 
8 
 
 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant has acknowledged his marijuana 
use. He has obtained medical assistance and resumed his use of prescription 
antidepressants instead of relying on marijuana to relieve his depression. However, it is 
too soon to determine whether his marijuana use will recur. Thus, AG ¶ 17(d) is not fully 
established. 
 
 Security concerns may be mitigated if “the individual has taken positive steps to 
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). 
The record does not reflect whether Applicant’s supervisors are aware of his marijuana 
use. During his security interview in January 2008, he told the investigator only his 
friends with whom he used marijuana in June 2007 are aware of his use of marijuana. I 
conclude AG ¶ 17(e) is not established. Even if his supervisors were aware of his 
previous drug use, security concerns would not be mitigated because of the applicability 
of AG ¶¶ 16(c), (d), and (g). 
 
 Finally, security concerns may be mitigated if “association with persons involved 
in criminal activity has ceased.” AG ¶ 17(g). There is no evidence in the record to 
support this mitigating condition. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a young man whose high school years were troubled by depression 
and use of marijuana. His use of marijuana while his security clearance application was 
 
9 
 
 
pending demonstrated bad judgment and immaturity. Since October 2007, he has 
worked in a job he enjoys. He appears happily married and willing to assume the 
responsibilities of a husband and father. He has resumed taking his medications 
regularly. He presented himself at the hearing as sincere. He may well have turned his 
life around, but it is too soon to determine if his checkered past is behind him.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on drug involvement and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. Future reconsideration may be warranted if he continues on his 
current path of abstinence from use of illegal drugs. See Directive ¶¶ E3.1.37 through 
E3.1.41 (reconsideration authorized after one year). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
