                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02189
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On June 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 11, 2008 and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on August 26, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on
December 2, 2008.  A hearing was held on December 2, 2008, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of two exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and one exhibit.
The transcript (R.T.) was received on December 15, 2008.  Based upon a review of the
2
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified information is
granted.
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of 17
documents:  Background Note: Iran, U.S. Department of State (March 2008); Country
Specific Information, Iran, U.S. Department of State (July 2008); Travel Warning, Iran,
U.S. Department of State (January 2008); Country Reports on Human Rights Practices -
2007, Iran, U.S. Department of State  (March 2008); Country Reports on Terrorism,
Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, U.S. Department of State (April
2008);Iran: State Sponsors of Terrorism, U.S. Department of State (September 2008);
The President of the U.S., Continuation of the National Emergency with Respect to Iran
(November 2006); Resident George Bush, Message to the Congress of the U.S. (March
2008); Iran: Nuclear Intentions and Capabilities, National Intelligence Estimate
(November 2007); Annual Threat Assessment of the Director of National Intelligence for
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (February 2008); William J. Burns, Under
Sec. For Political Affairs, U.S. Department of State, Testimony Before the Senate
Foreign Relations Comm., the Strategic Challenges Posed by Iran (July 2008); U.S.
Maintains Pressure on Iran (March 2008); UN Security Council Resolution 103 on Iran’s
Nuclear Program, U.S. Department of State (April 2008); Iranian Pleads Guilty to
Attempted Exportation of Arms and Money Laundering, U.S. Attorney’s Office (April
2005); New York Man Sentenced for Illegally Exporting Stolen NBC Night Vision Lenses
for Delivery to Iran, (August 2005); Singapore Businessman Convicted of Secretly
Diverting U.S. Military and Civilian Aircraft Parts to the Islamic Republic of Iran (May
2006); Pennsylvania Company Fined for Export Violations Involving Iran, UAE and Syria
(May 2006).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292, at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. April 12,
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875, at 2 (App. Bd. October 12, 2006)(citing ISCR Case No.
02-18668, at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)).  Administrative notice is appropriate for
noticing facts or government reports that are well known.  See Stein, Administrative Law,
Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause shown, administrative notice was
granted with respect to the above-named background reports addressing the geopolitical
situation in Iran.  Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves,
consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did  not foreclose
Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the
reports addressing Iran’s current state. Applicant did not exercise his option of
challenging these documents.
Procedural Issues and Rulings
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record to afford him an opportunity to provide written character endorsements.   For good
cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to December 8, 2008 to supplement
the record.  The Government was afforded two days to respond.  Within the time
permitted, Applicant faxed endorsements from his pastor and his program manager,
3
which were, in turn, faxed to me. These submissions are admitted as Applicant’s exhibits
B and C. 
Summary of Pleadings
                                       
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged to have (a) a maternal aunt and uncle who
are citizens and residents of Iran, (b) a maternal aunt who is employed as an accounting
manager for an Iranian government department, (c) an uncle who is retired from the
same Iranian government department, (d) five paternal aunts who are citizens and
residents of Iran (e) told a DoD investigator in a March 2007 interview that the only time
he could be vulnerable to blackmail or coercion by foreign interests would occur if his
parents and/or brothers were in danger while they were traveling in Iran, and (f) told the
same DoD investigator that he had no renounced his dual citizenship with Iran doe to
possible threats to his aunts and uncles currently living in Iran.
For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR
with explanations.  He claimed he has no financial interests of any kind in Iran, and that
his parents sold all of their property in Iran and own their own businesses in the U.S.  He
claimed that neither he nor his parents have any divided loyalties and cites for support
his honorable service in the U.S. Navy from 1996 to 2004, which included numerous
awards for leadership and merit (receiving an honorable discharge in June 2004).  He
acknowledged his deep devotion to his parents and brothers and a willingness to give his
life for theirs, but cautioned against the unlikelihood he would ever be placed in a life-
threatening situation (noting his parents rarely travel to Iran).  He professed his love and
profound patriotism for the U.S.  He claimed he has no Iranian passport; he made no
visits to Iran in 24 years, and he had no intention to make any trips to Iran in the future,
absent any change in the ruling government in Iran to one friendly to the U.S.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old engineering planner for a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant was born in Iran and immigrated (with his parents at age 11) to the U.S.
in 1984 to escape the Iran-Iraq war and seek a better life in the U.S. (R.T., at 51). He
enlisted in the Navy in June 1996 (before becoming a U.S. citizen) at the age of 23 (R.T.,
at 64), and was honorably discharged in 2001.  While serving in the Navy he held a
confidential security clearance (R.T., at 65).  He assures he would do nothing that might
jeopardize U.S. interests or his shipmates who could still be in the Navy (R.T., at 68).
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in December 2006 (R.T., at 64).  He
completed his undergraduate education at a U.S. university and received an MBA in
4
2005 (see ex. 1; R.T., at 69-70).  Applicant converted to Christianity in 1991 and was
baptized 10 years later (R.T., at 44).  He is unmarried and has no children (see ex. 1).
Applicant’s has two brothers: one older and one younger who live in the U.S. near
applicant’s parents (R.T., at 53). His older brother teaches business classes in a local
community college, while his younger brother completed his college studies and works
for a U.S. pharmaceutical company (R.T., at 62).  Neither have any plans to return to
Iran.  His parents’ most recent trip to Iran was in 1999 (for a cousin’s wedding).  They
have no plans to return again, except possibly to attend a funeral or wedding of a family
member (R.T., at 54-55).  His parents have no ties to the Iranian government (R.T., at
54-55).  They have a net worth in excess of $2 million, which is comprised of their home
and convalescent homes they own (R.T., at 58-60).  Neither his mother nor father have
any relationships or ties to the Iranian government, and (like Applicant) are very
westernized  (R.T., at 56-58).  His father did serve in the Iranian military when the Shah
was in power (R.T., at 51-52).
Applicant has a maternal aunt and uncle who are citizens and residents of Iran.
His uncle is not a blood relative, however, and has limited contact with his family.  His
aunt is a practicing accountant, and his uncle is retired (R.T., at 38).  To the best of his
knowledge, none of his aunts and uncles (maternal and paternal) residing in Iran have
any ties to the Iranian government (R.T., at 43).  Applicant has no strong feelings for
either of his maternal aunts or any of his paternal aunts and uncles residing in Iran (R.T.,
at 39, 47-48).  He estimates to have spoken to his maternal aunt and uncle maybe three
times in the last 20 years (R.T., at 47).  He has not spoken to any of his paternal aunts
and uncles within the last 20 years (R.T., at 49-50).  He could not identify most of his
aunts in a line-up, were he asked to do so (R.T., at 50-51).  Applicant believes that his
maternal aunt and uncle living in Iran are westernized and are trying to immigrate to New
Zealand (R.T., at 38, 45-46).  
Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has regularly voted in U.S. elections
(R.T., at 72).  He has a savings plan with his employer valued at round $20,000.00.  He
owns a home and has a net worth between $400,000.00 and $500,000.00 (R.T., at 71-
72)  He is a deacon for his church and serves on the board of directors for a
management society, and he has served on various employer-related association boards
(R.T., at 72-75).  
Were Applicant’s parents to return to Iran and encounter trouble with Iranian
authorities, he would help them, but never to the extent of jeopardizing U.S. national
security interests (R.T., at 76-77).  Should any of his aunts or uncles residing in Iran ever
be taken hostage by Iranian authorities, he would not feel the same strong emotions he
would have for his parents in a similar situation (R.T., at 77-78).  He could not recall the
circumstances in his clearance interview in which he expressed reservations about
renouncing his Iranian citizenship out of concerns for his aunts and uncles residing in
Iran (R.T., at 79).  Applicant considers himself a loyal U.S. citizen only and accepts he is
a dual citizen of Iran because the Iranian government classifies him as an Iranian citizen
(R.T., at 79-80). He assured, too, that he does not care what the Iranian government
5
might think about any steps he might take to renounce his Iranian citizenship (R.T., at
79-80).  At the same time, he expressed no intention to initiate steps to renounce his
Iranian citizenship. 
Political and economic background of Iran
According to official U.S. State Department documents, Iran is an Islamic republic
that is constitutionally constructed and has a head of state, an elected president and
counsel of ministers, a legislative body composed of a 290-member Islamic consultative
assembly, and a judiciary (see Background Note on Iran, supra, at 5).  Throughout its
long history, Iran has been ruled by numerous dynasties.  Following a nationalist uprising
against the Shah in 1905, Iran enacted a limited constitution in 1906.  Two years later, oil
was discovered, and Iran began its steady ascension  to a modern, secularized political
system. 
Under the reign of Reza Shah Pahlavi (an Iranian officer, who seized control of
the government in 1921), Iran enacted policies of modernization and secularization,
established a central government and reasserted its authority over the tribes and
provinces (see Background Note on Iran, id., at 3).  During the Allied occupation of
western Iran in 1941, the Shah was forced to abdicate and was succeeded by his son,
Mohammad Reza Pahlavi (see Background Note on Iran, id.).
Domestic turmoil swept Iran in 1978 as the result of heated religious and political
opposition to the Shah’s rule and political/economic programs (especially the Shah’s
internal security and intelligence service).  And in February 1979, exiled religious leader
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returned from France to direct a revolution resulting in a
new, theocratic republic guided by Islamic principles.  Iran’s 1979 constitution allocates
the duties of the chosen religious leaders and governing bodies in such a way that their
duties often overlap.  Legislative issues on which the Majles (Iran’s legislative governing
body) and the Council of Guardians (making up Iran’s religious leadership) fail to agree
are resolved by the Council of Expediency (a body created by Ayatollah Khomeini in
1988).  Following the Ayatollah’s death in June 1989, the Assembly of Experts (an
elected body of senior clerics) chose the outgoing president of the republic (Ali
Khamenei) to be the Ayatollah’s successor as national religious leader (see Background
Note on Iran, id., at 4).
Iran’s post-revolution has been marked by an eight-year war with Iraq, internal
political struggles and unrest, and economic disorder.  Its post-revolution regime has
been associated with human rights violations and political turmoil, including the seizure
of the U.S. Embassy in November 1979 by Iranian militants and the hostage taking of 52
Americans (see Background Note on Iran, supra, at 6).  Succeeding power struggles
have severely eroded the center and left of Iran’s political institutions, leaving only the
clergy.  Both human rights and state sponsored terrorism remain serious problems in
Iran and the Middle East.  According to State Department reports, Iran’s Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps and Ministry of Intelligence and Security Forces have been
directly involved in terrorist acts, and continue to support Palestinian groups with
6
leadership cadres in Syria and Lebanese Hizballah to use terrorism in pursuit of their
goals (see Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2007, supra, at 1-5; Country
Reports on terrorism, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, supra, at 1-2).
State Department reports claim Iranian authorities continue to provide military support
and guidance to some Iraqi militant groups that target Coalition and Iraqi security forces
and Iraqi civilians (see Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of
Terrorism Overview, id.).
 Long estranged from the West, Khomeini’s regime charted regional goals that
curtail the presence of the U.S. and other outside powers in the region.  Iran’s Islamic
foreign policy continues to stress (1) vehement anti-U.S. and anti-Israel positions, (2)
elimination of outside influence in the region, (3) support for Muslim political movements
abroad, (4) critical support to non-state terrorist groups, and (5) considerable increase in
diplomatic contacts with developing countries (see U.S. Dept. of State Background Note
on Iran, supra; Iran: Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, supra, at 1-16;
Country Reports on Terrorism 2007, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview,
supra, at 1-2).  In this vein, Iran maintains regular diplomatic and commercial relations
with Russia and the former Soviet republics.  Of special U.S. concern has been Russian
sales of military equipment and technology to Iran (see  U.S. Dept. of State Background
Note on Iran, id., at 8).
Potential obstacles to improved relations between Iran and the U.S. include
Iranian efforts to acquire technology that could be used to develop nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction; its support for and involvement in international
terrorism; its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and its
dismal human rights record (see Statement of President George W. Bush, Message to
the Congress of the U.S., supra; President of the U.S., Continuation of the National
Emergency with Respect to Iran, supra; National Intelligence Estimate, Iran, Nuclear
Intentions and Capabilities, supra; Annual Threat Assessment of the Director of National
Intelligence for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, supra).
State Department country reports cite significant restrictions on the right of
citizens to change their government, summary executions (minors included),
disappearances, torture and severe punishments (such as amputations and flogging),
violence by vigilante groups with ties to the government, poor prison conditions, arbitrary
arrest and detention (including prolonged solitary confinement), lack of judicial
independence and fair public trials, political prisoners and detainees, excessive
government violence in Kurdish areas and unknown groups in Arab regions of the
country, severe restrictions on civil liberties and freedom of religion, official corruption,
government transparency deficiencies, legal and societal discrimination against women,
ethnic and religious minorities, trafficking in persons, incitement of anti-Semitism, severe
restriction of workers’ rights, and child labor (see Iran, Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices-2007, supra, at 1-24). 
Addressing reports of human rights violations in Iran, the UN General Assembly
adopted a human rights resolution on Iran in December 2005 that expressed serious
7
concern at the continuing use of torture in Iran and cruel, trafficking in persons, inhuman
and degrading treatment or punishment, such as floggings and amputations, as well as
public executions (see Iran, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, supra,
id., at 3-24). 
Even though Iran’s constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, these
practices remain common. Its regular and paramilitary security forces that share
responsibility with Iranian police for law enforcement and maintaining order are reported
to have committed numerous, serious human rights abuses in recent years (see Iran,
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, Iran, supra). Security forces
responsible for arrest and detention often do not inform family members of a prisoner’s
welfare and location, and often deny visits by family members and counsel.
State Department travel warnings urge U.S. citizens to carefully consider the risks
of travel to Iran (see Travel Warning, Iran, 2008, supra), a country with which the U.S.
does not currently have diplomatic or consular relations.  Citing Iran’s non-recognition of
dual citizenship and general declination to permit the Swiss to provide protective
services for U.S. citizens who are also Iranian nationals, Americans who travel to Iran
are strongly encouraged to register through the State Department’s travel registration
website (see Travel Warning, Iran, 2008, id.).
Dual citizens residing or visiting in Iran are subject to all Iranian laws affecting
U.S. citizens, as well as laws applicable to persons of Iranian nationality that impose
special obligations on citizens of that country (see Travel Warning, Iran, 2008, id.; Iran,
Country Specific Information, supra, at 1-2).  Dual nationals remain subject to Iran’s
military service requirements and can be conscripted into service while on Iranian soil.
While such conscripted service seems unlikely to confront Applicant, given his age and
longstanding U.S. citizenship, it remains a possibility should he decide to visit Iran.
Reports indicate, too, that Iranian security personnel may at times place foreign visitors
under surveillance, and even arrest or detain Iranian-Americans suspected of “acting
against national security”  (see Iran, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007,
supra, at 5-6; Iran, Country Specific Information,  id., at 2-3). 
 Because the Iranian government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat
U.S.-Iranian dual nationals as Iranian citizens, regardless of their U.S. naturalization
status, dual nationals who enter Iran only on a U.S. passport risk detention absent
persuasive proof of their formal renunciation or loss of their Iranian citizenship (see Iran,
Country Specific Information, Iran, supra,  at 1-2). 
Character assessments
Applicant has received excellent endorsements from his company’s management.
His supervisors describe him as a dependable staff planner and team player who is
highly motivated and very trustworthy (see ex. A).  His coworkers credit him with strong
character and integrity with a reputation for dedication and sincerity on and off the job
(ex. A). 
8
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
administrative judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in
E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended to
assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the
foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  See Adjudicative Guideline, ¶ 6.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue
an Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
9
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who immigrated with his parents to the U.S.
from Iran in 1984 to escape the turmoil wrought by the Iran-Iraq war.  Security concerns
focus on members of Applicant’s family (i.e., his maternal and paternal aunts and uncles)
who are citizens and residents of Iran.  Because the Iranian government’s military and
intelligence authorities have a history of violating Iranian and international laws and
diplomatic protocols, they are more likely to use improper and/or illegal means to obtain
classified information in Applicant’s possession or control through his family members
still residing in Iran. 
By virtue of the Iranian citizenship and residency of Applicant’s maternal aunts
and uncles in Iran, they present potential heightened security risks covered by
disqualifying condition  (DC) 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the Adjudication Guidelines for foreign influence.
The citizenship/residence status of these family members in Iran pose potential concerns
for Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign influence that could compromise
sensitive or classified information under Applicant's possession and/or control. 
Although none of Applicant’s family members residing in Iran have any identified
Iranian prior military or intelligence service, they have worked for an Iranian government
agency.  His aunt works currently for the same governmental in Iran that his husband
previously retired from. On the strength of these connections alone, they resent some
concerns over the potential for compromise and coercion for so long as they reside in
Iran.  Were either of these family members to be placed in a hostage situation, Applicant
could be subject to conflicts over ensuring their well being and protecting classified
information.  For this reason, DC 7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information,” applies to the
facts of this case. 
10
To be sure,  none of Applicant’s  aunts and uncles residing in Iran have any
history to date of being subjected to any coercion or influence.  These historical
antecedents, when considered together with Applicant’s limited contact with these
extended family members, do limit the severity of a conflict situation.  However, the
absence of any past coercive measures taken by Iranian authorities does not completely
absolve Applicant from coercive risks in the future.   Iran does have a checkered history
of hostage taking and abusive measures taken against its own citizens and U.S.
diplomats, and, as a result, must be assigned heightened risk status under the Guideline
B guideline. 
Still, upon fully considering Applicant’s very limited contact with his relatives in
Iran, his demonstrated devotion to U.S. interests and values, and the lack of any
reported associations between his aunts and uncles and Iran’s military and intelligence
agencies, risks of undue foreign influence on Applicant and/or his family members
residing in Iran in the foreseeable future are likely to be minimal.  Heightened security
risks created by Iran’s political status are considerably weakened as the result of the
conflation of Applicant’s demonstrated commitments to the U.S., his limited contacts with
his aunts and uncles in recent years , and the lack of any record of pressure or
compromise attempts wrought against Applicant’s relatives residing in Iran.  
The Adjudicative Guidelines governing security clearances do not dictate per se
results or mandate particular outcomes for any chosen set of guidelines covering risks of
foreign influence.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be
weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing.  Personnel
security assessments necessarily embrace similar risk assessments under the new
Directive guidelines for assessing foreign influence risks and concerns associated with
the individual's having family abroad, which include both common sense assessments of
country risks and information available from public sources. 
Unlike the old Adjudicative Guidelines, though, the new ones do take into account
the country’s demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in
gauging whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create
a heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign
regime involved do matter. 
As demonstrated, Iran has long been known to be a repressive country, who has
committed numerous, serious human rights abuses in recent years, and shown little
respect for the rule of law.  The U.S. has no diplomatic relations with Iran.  Iran remains
a country on the State Department ‘s state terrorist list, and one with a known history of
hostage taking and human rights abuses of wide magnitude and scope. Iran is
consistently characterized as a country hostile to American political and security interests
since the 1979 fall of the Shah of Iran and ensuing establishment of an Islamic republic
with close ties and support to non-state terrorist groups.  Based on reported terrorist
activities in the country and in other countries in the region with support links to Iran, Iran
11
cannot be deemed to provide an acceptable political and security environment for
managing hostage risks.  
To be sure, little is known about Applicant’s maternal aunts and uncles
relationships with the Iranian agency they have current and past associations with,
respectively. Even less is known about applicant’s paternal aunts and uncles.
Applicant’s maternal and paternal aunts and uncles residing in Iran.  Concerns about a
potential hostage situation are considerably diminished, however, by the lack of any
close Applicant relations or contacts with these relatives. 
Based on Applicant’s case-specific circumstances, MC 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.”  is unavailable to Applicant.  While his parents and siblings (long U.S. citizens and
residents) are for the most part insulated from potential pressures and influence from the
Iranian government and its military and intelligence officials., the same cannot said for
Applicant ‘s aunts and uncles residing in Iran without more data on their associations, or
lack thereof, with Iranian government agencies.  Applicant, accordingly, may not take
advantage of any of the mitigation benefits of MC 8(a).
 By contrast, MC 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the
individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of
interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” is fully available to Applicant.  Applicant’s
demonstrated loyalty and commitment to the U.S. and its institutions and values, his
parents’ U.S. citizenship and residency, the absence of any history of coercive measures
taken against any of Applicant’s aunts and uncles, and Applicant’s very limited contacts
and ties with these same aunts and uncles, are well supported in this administrative
record.
Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty, patriotism, and professional commitments to
the U.S., are credible and substantial.  Considered together with his very limited contact
with his extended family members residing in Iran, the absence of any historical attempts
to pressure or coerce any of Applicant’s family members in Iran, and Applicant’s very
limited contacts and ties with these same aunts and uncles, Applicant’s case-specific
circumstances are enough to neutralize all potential conflicts that are implicit in his
relationships with his spouse and his wife’s parents.  MC 8(c), “contact or communication
with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could
create risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” has some applicability herein to
Applicant’s situation.
12
One other mitigating condition has mixed application to Applicant’s situation.  MC
8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements regarding
the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or organizations
from a foreign country,” has some prospective value based on Applicant’s long tenure of
holding a security clearance in the Navy and his demonstrated loyalty and commitments
to U.S. security interests.  It is true that our Appeal Board has accorded very little weight
to stated intentions to take corrective steps in a hypothetical set of circumstances,
absent record evidence that an applicant has acted similarly under comparable
circumstances.  See ISCR Case No. 07-00029, at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007); ISCR Case
No. 06-24575, at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007). Applicant’s long and meritorious Navy
service and demonstrated loyalties to U.S. core security interests and values make him a
very credible applicant for reporting any potential compromise attempts on any of his
relatives residing in Iran.  
Given that Iran remains a hostile country with no diplomatic relations with the
U.S., and one that lacks a secure infrastructure and track record for respecting human
rights and the rule of law, the risk of a pressure or influence situation involving even an
extended family member of Applicant’s must be carefully scrutinized.  Conflation of all of
the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s devoted Navy service and commitments to
U.S. security interests and core values, Iran’s country status, Applicant’s limited contacts
with his aunts and uncles residing in Iran, the unlikelihood of his parents or brothers
traveling to Iran in the foreseeable future, and the absence of any prior pressure
attempts by the Iranian government to pressure, exploit or coerce any of Applicant’s
relatives residing in Iran augur well for Applicant in making the necessary predictive
judgments about whether risks of pressure an coercion are mitigated.  
Whole person assessment permits mitigation of Applicant’s exposure to potential
painful choices over ensuring the safety and well being of his maternal aunts and uncles
residing in Iran.  To his credit, Applicant is a fully Americanized U.S. citizen with
demonstrated strong loyalties and commitments to U.S. core values.  The trust he has
inspired with his supervisors, coworkers, and friends promise to ensure that he would
report any Iranian pressures or contacts to his facility security officer and not permit
himself to be pressured by Iranian authorities in any hypothetical hostage situation. 
Applicant’s honorable service in the U.S. Navy, his past holding of a security
clearance in the Navy, the strong roots his parents and brothers have established in the
U.S., and the unlikelihood that any of his immediate family members will be traveling to
Iran in the foreseeable future make the potential risks of a hostage situation in Iran that
could require Applicant to make difficult choices between protecting his family and
safeguarding classified information unlikely.  
                                                                                                                                
            By all accounts, Applicant and his immediate family members residing in the U.S.
are fully Americanized and committed to the obligations and responsibilities expected of
U.S. citizens.   By contrast, Applicant is not very close to his aunts and uncles residing in
13
Iran and much less likely to compromise national security to protect them in any potential
confrontation with Iranian authorities. 
After carefully considering Applicant’s familial connections in the U.S. and Iran
and the risks of Applicant submission to Iranian pressures should any of his family
members residing in Iran be pressured or coerced by Iranian authorities at some time in
the foreseeable future, the weighted risks of a compromise are sufficiently discounted to
become manageable ones at this time under a whole person assessment of all of the
critical circumstances considered in this case.
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's relations with
his aunts and uncles residing in Iran are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive
judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to
his familial relationships with relatives residing in Iran.  Favorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the allegations covered by sub-paragraphs 1.a through 1.f of Guideline B.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in E2(a) of the Adjudicative Process of
Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.f: FOR APPLICANT
Conclusions
 In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
14
