1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-04725
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on February 6,
2007. On June 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and E
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on October 28, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November
18, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on December 9, 2008. The
Government offered Exhibits (GE 1-3), which were received into the record without
objection. Applicant testified in her own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE A-B), without
objection. I held the record open until January 9, 2009, so that Applicant could submit
2
additional documents. The submission was timely received and marked as AE C.
Department Counsel did not object to the documents. DOHA received the transcript on
December 17, 2008. Based upon a review of the record, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, dated June 27, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, of the SOR. She denied the other allegations,
including ¶ 2.a-2.b of the SOR. She provided additional information to support her
request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She graduated from
high school in June 1979 and attended college for about one year. She has worked for
her current employer for 14 years, but she did not require a security clearance for her
position (GE 1).
Applicant married in 1986 and has two children from the marriage. They are now
young adults. She also has two grandchildren who live in her home (Tr. 23). The
marriage was quite volatile. Applicant never knew when her husband would bring home
his paycheck. There were times when her husband would just disappear for a period of
time. She tried to save the marriage by attending counseling. Her husband was an
alcoholic and did not make himself amenable to the counseling. In 1994, her husband
suddenly left the marriage. The final divorce occurred in 2007 (Tr. 14).
Applicant had a difficult transition after separation and divorce. Her husband
provided occasional support from 1994 until 2000 but at the same time he was taking
money out of her account without her knowledge (Tr. 25). Applicant was trying to
support herself and her two children but the income was reduced from two incomes to
one. Her job paid an hourly rate of $11 an hour which was much less than her
husband’s income. She had bills from various credit accounts to pay as well as her
living expenses, including the mortgage on her home. As a result, Applicant fell behind
with payments on bills. She had a home but she sold it in 2006 and moved to another
state for more income. With the sale proceeds ($7,000), she paid approximately $2,400
on delinquent accounts. The accounts were debts that she and her husband accrued
during the marriage (Tr 28). 
Applicant incurred moving expenses when she relocated for a new position. The
remainder of the $7,000 from the sale of the home was spent on the expenses that
resulted from the move and relocation.
In 2007, Applicant fell ill and was hospitalized for a period of time (Tr. 55). She
received short term disability. She also incurred some medical bills from this period of
time that she could not pay (Tr. 55).
3
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts for a total of approximately $32,756 (GE 2
and 3). Applicant established a debt consolidation plan in 1995. She was paying $400 a
month to take care of her payments, but she could not keep up with the monthly
amount. She contacted another company who advised her to try to settle with the
creditors. She was also advised by the company to close her accounts (Tr. 16). Some of
the creditors listed are not familiar to her. Applicant inquired about the accounts that
were unknown to her. Some of the accounts were old and she has not been able to
track them down. She sought the advice of a group that her employer recommended.
On their counsel, she is taking care of the smaller debts at this time. She does not have
any credit cards at this time. She was also advised by the company not to contact too
many creditors because it “restarts” a cycle and it could appear that she is trying to get
more credit (Tr. 17).
Applicant admitted owing six debts listed in the SOR. Applicant has paid the debt
in ¶ 1.a for $139. This is a medical account (AE A). She also has several other medical
accounts listed in the SOR (¶¶ 1.k and 1.l). These accounts are being resolved through
a payment plan. She pays $25 monthly on a total of $1,400.
Applicant has four SOR allegations (¶¶ 1.b, c, n. and o) that relate to AT&T
wireless accounts. These appear to be duplicates. Applicant disputed that the accounts
had not been paid. She contacted AT &T and learned that she is current on her
account. She produced documentation that confirms that she has no delinquent debt on
the AT&T wireless account (AE C). The other accounts alleged in the SOR have not
been paid but Applicant has contacted them. She plans to settle the larger ones as soon
as she pays off the smaller ones.  
Applicant had not looked at her credit report prior to the security investigation. As
noted above, she did not recognize some of the debts. She attended a few financial
counseling classes in 2006. She was again advised that since so many of her accounts
are old, she should not attempt to contact the creditors who held large accounts until
she was in a position to make a settlement or pay on the debt each month (Tr. 32).
Applicant’s current monthly net income is $2,800 (Tr. 49). After monthly
expenses she has a net remainder of approximately $200 (Tr. 51). She is paying on her
current car loan. She completed financial counseling through work. She also pays on a
few other small accounts that are not on the SOR. She had some extra financial
expenses due to the hurricane evacuation last year (Tr. 37). 
Applicant completed her first security application on February 6, 2007. In that
application she answered “yes” to section 28(a) and (b) which asks for information on
debts either 180 days delinquent in the last seven years or 90 days currently delinquent
(GE 1 ). She listed approximately $1,600 in delinquent debt (GE 1). 
Applicant explained that she completed the application on line at work during her
lunch period (Tr. 44). She did not have the information on her accounts with her and
was overwhelmed. She was candid that she had delinquent debt but was not sure about
4
the status of the accounts and answered the questions to the best of her ability. She
said it was a misunderstanding and that she was not familiar with the process. She was
credible in his testimony that she had no intent to deceive the government.  
When Applicant was interviewed as part of the security clearance process, she
explained her financial status and her delinquencies. She indicated that she did not
recognize the names of some of the accounts. She reported to the investigator that in
her 2006 credit report the debts were not listed. She does not want to file bankruptcy
because she wants to pay her debts (Tr. 47).
Applicant conducts herself in a professional and trustworthy manner. Her current
supervisor recommends her for a security clearance based on her performance,
personal conduct, and professional conduct in the workplace (AE) B. She performs her
duties in a timely manner with the highest integrity. She pushes forward for new
challenges to meet customer demands. Applicant’s program manager describes
Applicant as a kind and thoughtful person who consistently demonstrates high
standards and ethic in her actions with others. She leads a team and provides
exceptional work to the government customer. Applicant is rated as a very dependable,
positive, and competent professional. She is recommended for a security clearance by
all her managers.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
5
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on numerous accounts
during her marriage and was unable to meet her financial obligations from 1994 until the
present time. Her credit reports confirm the debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise
these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
6
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial worries arose when her husband left the marriage in 1994. Her husband also
took money from her account without her knowledge. Her income was much less than
her husband’s and she had difficulty supporting herself and her two children. She
established a debt consolidation plan in 1994 but she could not keep up with the
payments. She sought financial guidance and counseling. While those circumstances
may have precipitated the debt, the inquiry does not end at that point. She paid several
smaller debts in the SOR and intends to repay the larger ones as soon as she can. She
has not been able to settle some of them due to the large amount of money that is
required for the settlement. Her conduct over the last six months with her creditors
removes security concerns or doubts about her current reliability, trustworthiness, and
good judgment. This potentially mitigating condition applies.
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant experienced
separation and divorce. She lives within her means. She supported her family with an
income that was much reduced. She was ill for a period of time. Applicant tried to
consolidate her debts as early as 1994. She could not keep up with the payment due to
high interest charges. She was as aggressive as she could in initially addressing or
resolving her delinquent debts. I find this potentially mitigating condition applies. 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant attended financial counseling though her work
company. She investigated her credit report to track down unknown debts. She has paid
some debts. I find her efforts are sufficient to carry her burden in this case. I conclude
these potentially mitigating conditions apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant provided
documentation concerning the duplicate AT&T accounts. 
7
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities” is potentially disqualifying.
In this case, when Applicant completed her 2007 security application, she
answered “yes” to the question about any debts that were 90 or 180 days delinquent.
She listed $1,600 in  debt and explained that she did not have any paperwork with her. I
found her credible. The allegation of falsification is unsubstantiated. I do not find that
she deliberately provided false information on her SF 86 in 2007.
Thus, Applicant’s allegation of deliberate omission is mitigated under AG 17(f)
“the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.”
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
8
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are sufficient to
overcome the government’s case. 
Through no fault of her own, Applicant’s marriage created havoc with her
financial situation beginning in approximately 1994. Her husband disappeared at times
and did not help support Applicant and her two children. Applicant tried to keep the
marriage together but despite counseling was unable to do so. Her husband left the
marriage in 1994 and also took money from her accounts without her knowledge. She
was working and continued to do so but at a much lower rate of pay. She supported her
two children. She maintained them in the family home. She paid the mortgage and daily
expenses. She acted responsibly after her husband left her in 1994 and established a
debt consolidation program. However, she could not maintain that program. She had
limited resources and made decisions which provided her family with their basic needs.
She sought financial counseling and heeded the advice of the company. She was told to
pay smaller debts first and to pay the larger ones later. She tried to settle some
accounts but did not have the requisite amount to do so. She decided not to file
bankruptcy because she wants to pay her debts.
She moved to another location to improve her pay. She sold her house and used
part of the proceeds to pay her delinquent debts. She lives within her means. She had
an illness about a year ago which added to her debt. She is paying the medical
accounts. 
Applicant’s acquisition of debt was not the result of poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Based on the facts
regarding her lifestyle and husband’s abandonment, there is no indication that her debt
raises questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, or ability to protect classified
information. Although she still has $32,000 in debt, she has made appropriate strides to
address that debt and instituted organized repayments on some accounts. In light of
these financial considerations and the “whole person” analysis, I find that Applicant has
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from under the financial
considerations and personal conduct guidelines. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
9
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d-o: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
