FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 08-04677
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SCA), on August 28,
2007. On August 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial
considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). The action was taken
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted her answer to the SOR on August 29, 2008. DOHA issued a
Notice of Hearing on October 3, 2008, and the hearing was held on October 29, 2008.
At the hearing, four exhibits (GE 1 through 4) were admitted in evidence without
objection to support the government’s case. Applicant testified and placed exhibits AE A
through AE H in evidence. The government’s objection to AE D and AE E was
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
2
overruled. At the close of the hearing, the government moved to admit statutes of the
United States (U.S.) Code of Federal Regulations in evidence to establish the
declarations in AE D and E were invalid. Applicant’s objection to the motions was
sustained. DOHA received the transcript on November 6, 2008. 
In the time allowed for Applicant to submit additional documentation, she
submitted AE I through AE U that were objected to by the government when the initial
hearing request was made to keep the record open for 10 days after the close of the
hearing. The objection for additional time to present additional exhibits was overruled at
the hearing (Tr. 99). On November 12, 2008, the government furnished me with the
Applicant’s post hearing exhibits, and renewed its objections to the post hearing exhibits
for the same reasons expressed during the hearing. The objections to the admission of
the post hearing exhibits are overruled. The post hearing exhibits contain updated
information addressing several of the debts listed in the SOR, and Applicant’s statement
that she was looking for another debt plan. Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Rulings on Procedure
Before the hearing on September 23, 2008, the government made a motion to
amend the SOR (Amendment to the SOR) by adding Paragraph 2 (personal conduct,
Guideline E) with two subparagraphs. That motion appears as GE 5. The exhibit
includes both the Government’s motion and Applicant’s reply dated September 30,
2008. In her reply, she denied both subparagraphs of the Amendment to the SOR.
Applicant’s answer to the Paragraph 2 of SOR was transmitted to the government by
facsimile. Pursuant to ¶ E.3.1.13 of DoD Directive 5220.6, the motion to amend the
SOR adding paragraph 2, and two subparagraphs is granted. The motion appears as
follows:
2. Guideline E: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process. Available information raising this concern shows that:
a. You falsified material facts on an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
processing (e-QIP) executed by you on August 28, 2007, on which you were required to
reply to the following question, Section 27: Your Financial record b. In the last 7
years, have you had your wages garnished or had any property repossessed fro
any reason?” You answered “No” to that question; whereas in truth, you deliberately
failed to disclose the repossession of your automobile as set forth in subparagraph 1.I,
of the Statement of Reasons. 
 Codified to 12 C.F.R. § 202.61
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
3
Answer: ADMIT  or  DENY (After circling the word DENY, Applicant provided her
initials.)
b. You falsified material facts on an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-Qip), executed by you on August 28, 2007, on which you were required
to reply to the following questions, “Section 28: Your Financial Delinquencies a. In
the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)? [and] b.
Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”  You answered “No” to
both of those questions; whereas in truth, you deliberately failed to disclose the debts
set forth in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g. 1g, 1.I, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, 1.p, 1.q,
and 1.r of the SOR.
Answer: ADMIT or DENY (After circling the word DENY, Applicant provided her initials.)
At the hearing, the government objected to the introduction of AE D and AE E
because: (1) the proponent was representing himself as an expert in financial matters
and his allegations of improper methodology or deceptive acts used by the creditors in
reporting overdue debts; and, (2) the stated opinions provided by the proponent
regarding how certain financial accounts were being reported in Applicant’s credit report
should be considered hearsay (Tr. 15-19). I overruled the objection, and indicated the
exhibits would be offered for the limited purpose of demonstrating Applicant sought
financial help, and did enroll in a debt consolidation plan (Tr. 18-19).
Before the closing-arguments portion of the case, the government cited Title 15
U.S. Code (U.S.C.), the statutory authority for Section 1691 and Regulation B of the
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 202  to establish that the certifications1
made by the declarant in AE E of Applicant’s credit worthiness are inaccurate. Applicant
objected based on my earlier ruling regarding both exhibits AE D and AE E, indicating
the declarations of the declarant had no other meaning except to show Applicant was
enrolled in a debt consolidation program. Because of my earlier ruling (Tr. 17-18)
regarding AE D and AE E, I sustained Applicant’s objection to the government’s
statutory argument (Tr. 97).
Post hearing exhibits AE I through AE U. On November 12, 2008, the
Government renewed their objections to the proposed exhibits on the grounds they
were untimely and denied the Government an opportunity to cross-examine the source
of the information. I am overruling the objection because I usually allow the parties to
present additional evidence after the hearing to promote the development of a full
record, and do so herein.
 However, GE 1 shows no break in employment during the period of the parents’ illness. Applicant was2
employed from August 2000 to October 2003 by a transportation company. From October 2003 to April 2006,
Applicant was employed by another transportation company.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
4
Findings of Fact
The SOR lists 18 debts under the financial considerations guideline. The second
guideline (paragraph 2, personal conduct) lists two allegations. Applicant denied all
allegations under paragraphs 1 and 2.
Applicant has been married since 1999. She has two children ages 30 and 23
(Tr. 70). She has been a truck driver since 1996, and currently ids a truck driver with her
husband. She seeks a secret security clearance. On May 27, 2008 (GE 2), Applicant
completed a personal financial statement (PFS) showing she was earning about
$10,382.00 a month, minus $3,696.00 in monthly expenses and $1,938.00 in monthly
payments, leaving a monthly remainder of $4,748.00 a month. 
Financial Considerations (FC)
After the parents of Applicant’s husband became seriously ill in 2002, Applicant
and her husband moved to his parents’ living location so that Applicant could take care
of them while her husband continued to work. Applicant stopped working to care for
them (Tr. 27).  The record is silent on when his parents passed away. I find from her2
husband’s testimony (Tr. 35) that their passing occurred in 2004. The move caused
financial problems for Applicant and her husband. Her husband recalled becoming
delinquent on four or five debts, including the debt to the truck credit company (SOR 1.I,
Tr. 30; AE F). When they could no longer afford the installment payments on the truck,
they turned the truck into the dealer before it was repossessed (Tr. 31, 63). Applicant’s
husband recalled they may have missed one installment payment on the vehicle before
returning it, and they continued to make monthly payments to a law firm on the
deficiency balance after the car was auctioned (Tr. 31-33). Applicant’s husband called
the truck company and the company’s law firm many times because the truck debt was
inaccurately reported on the wife’s credit report (Tr. 33). No additional evidence was
provided. 
Applicant’s husband recalled some of the other reported delinquent accounts,
including the accounts identified in SOR 1.j and 1.l (Tr. 34). Her husband remembered
contacting several of the creditors by phone for an extension of time to pay, but only two
agreed to provide extra time for payment (Tr. 36). 
The first time Applicant and her husband contacted the debt consolidation
service (AE D) was in June 2008. According to her husband, at the time of the hearing,
the service was in the process of restructuring a payment plan after first determining
which creditors were the actual holders of the delinquent accounts (Tr. 37-38).
Applicant’s husband was certain that his wife, who handles the payments to the debt
 The last activity refers to the last time action was taken on the account, e.g., making a payment or rewriting3
the underlying contract under different terms. 
 She modified her testimony by indicating she did not have actual proof that the debt service was paying the4
creditor but she could access that information by calling the debt service (Tr. 56-57). No information was
provided. 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
5
service, made seven documented payments of $380.00 under the plan (Tr. 38-39, 55).
Applicant testified she did not have an opinion about the debt service even though she
had been contacting them about once a month (Tr. 62-63). Applicant has receipts of
payments to the debt service, and also proof of making at least eight payments of
$125.00 to the truck credit company (SOR 1.I, Tr. 50-51, 94).
Applicant’s husband testified that he and his wife knew they had delinquent debt
after 2002, and even talked about the debt problems (Tr. 41). Applicant’s husband
indicated he was about to launch his own documented plan to eliminate the debt and
start up his own business (Tr. 41-42). No additional information was furnished regarding
the husband’s plan. Applicant’s husband noted that, “It had been quite a long time since
my wife and I had run a credit report on her (Tr. 40).”
The 18 debts shall be discussed in the order they appear in the SOR. The debts
total $39,966.00. 
• 1.a. $14.00. The last activity  reported by the credit agency on this debt was3
October 2005 (GE 4). Applicant initially denied the debt was her responsibility (Tr. 51-
52). Applicant submitted an unprocessed check of $14.00 to the creditor on November
1, 2008. I find for Applicant under SOR 1.a. even though the check (and the remaining
checks presented in Applicant’s post hearing submission) is not the best evidence that
the overdue accounts were paid. 
• 1.b. $126.00. The last activity on this debt was May 2002. Applicant admitted
the debt, and initially stated this account was being paid through her debt consolidation
service (Tr. 52).  In AE J, Applicant paid the creditor $126.00 on November 1, 2008.4
Applicant’s payment of the debt after indicating the debt was being paid by the debt
service warrants a finding for Applicant under SOR 1.b.
• 1.c. $1,451.00. Applicant denies she owes the delinquent account. The last
activity on the debt is November 2001. No additional information was provided. SOR
1.c. is resolved against Applicant. 
• 1.d. $1,164.00. Applicant denies she owes the debt. The last activity on this
account was in July 2002. No additional evidence was provided on this account. The
account is resolved against Applicant. 
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
6
• 1.e. $147.00. GE 4 indicates that this debt and the one identified in 1.f. are the
same. Applicant admits she owes the account (Tr. 53). The last activity on this debt was
February 2004. Applicant paid the debt on November 1, 2008 (AE K). This
subparagraph is found for Applicant. 
• 1.g. $1,168.00. Applicant denies she owes this account (Tr. 54). The last
activity on this account was July 2001. Applicant settled the account a check for
$584.00 dated November 1, 2008 to the collection agency. I find this account in her
favor. 
• 1.h. $4,303.00. The last activity on the account is June 2001. Applicant
admitted the debt but denied the amount because she had a $500.00 limit on her
account. No additional information was provided. I find against Applicant under SOR
1.h. 
• 1.i. $25,034.00. The last activity on this account is January 2002. Applicant
returned the truck before it was repossessed because they anticipated they could no
longer afford the installment payments. Applicant denies the amount alleged in SOR 1.i.
Concerning payments made to the 1.i. creditor, the contents of the AE R show Applicant
made sporadic payments between August 2002 and November 2007. For example, she
made a payment in December 2006 and May 2007. AE R contains two reply letters from
the credit company’s law firm thanking her for the two aforementioned payments. The
last two pages of AE R are dated November 16, 2007, and reflect a balance in SOR 1.i.
of $3,928.00, not $25,034.00 as alleged in SOR 1.i., but twice as much as the amount
she claimed in her testimony (Tr. 93-94). SOR 1.i. is resolved against Applicant. 
• 1.j. $143.00. The last activity on this debt was May 2001. Applicant admitted the
debt, but indicated she was making payments through the debt service plan (Tr. 55). AE
M indicates that Applicant did not pay the debt until November 1, 2008. Subparagraph
1.j. is found for Applicant.  
• 1.k. $131.00. The last activity on this account was October 2005. After initially
denying this debt, she paid the creditor on November 1, 2008 with a check for $131.00
(AE N). SOR 1.k. is resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
• 1.l. $381.00. GE 4 reflects this is the same account as SOR 1.p. The last
activity on this account was June 2001. Applicant believed her debt service was making
payments on the account, and she could obtain the payment information from the debt
service official (Tr. 55-56). AE O shows Applicant paid the creditor on November 1,
2008. SOR 1.l. is resolved for Applicant.
• 1.m. 1,389.00. The last activity on this account was September 2001. Applicant
admitted the debt but denies the amount. I find Applicant owes this account.
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
7
• 1.n. $1,643.00. The last activity on this account was June 2002. Applicant
admitted this debt, but denied the amount. She averred the debt is the same as the
account identified in SOR 1.r. There is insufficient information in the credit reports to
corroborate her claim. Though she testified the debt was being paid through the debt
service plan (Tr. 58-59), she subsequently withdrew from the plan (AE T). She
presented no independent evidence supporting her testimony that the debt was being
paid through the service plan. I find against Applicant under SOR 1.n. and 1.r.
• 1.o. $47.00. Though GE 4 reflects the last activity on the account was
September 2007, Applicant paid the account off in October 2005 (AE P). SOR 1.o. is
resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
• 1.p. $278.00. See SOR 1.l. this account is resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
• 1.q. $159.00. The last activity on the account was in November 2004. Applicant
initially denied the debt. She presented AE Q to support her claim the debt was paid.
Applicant’s handwritten statements in AE Q are not sufficient to verify payment made.
SOR 1.q. is resolved against Applicant.
• 1.r. $2,275.00. See SOR 1.n. This account is resolved against Applicant.
After the double entries (SOR 1.f., and 1.p.) are subtracted from the total
delinquent debt in the SOR ($39,966.00), the total debt is $39,575.00. Next, when the
debt for the truck (SOR 1.i., $25,034.00) is reduced to approximately $4,000.00 (AE R,
the current balance with additional interest added), then subtracted from $39,575.00,
the delinquent debt Applicant owes to 16 creditors is $18,575.00. After subtracting
$1573.00 (the amount Applicant repaid to eight creditors plus two creditors with double
entries) from $18,575.00, Applicant still owes eight creditors $17,002.00.
Applicant has never had financial counseling (Tr. 86). Applicant claimed she
employs a month-to-month budget although the income she and her husband earn
changes every week (Tr. 86-87). 
AE U consists of 14 pages, and represents the documents relating to Applicant’s
debt service plan which she joined in May 2008. A number of figures appear on the first
page (monthly installment agreement), including the monthly payment of $380.00, and
the total fee of $9,000.00. After initial payments were by Applicant in May and June
2008, the AE U contains only her promise to pay certain amounts. There is no
verification in the exhibit that Applicant made seven payments of $380.00 as testified by
her husband (Tr. 38). Lastly, there is no list of creditors included in the plan and/or
payout amounts.
In AE T, dated November 4, 2008, Applicant expressed dissatisfaction with her
debt service plan, indicating she was misled. She stated she would be addressing the
other debts that are not hers through another service. She intended to pay all her
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
8
accounts in a timely fashion. She provided no evidence showing she had actually
enrolled in another plan. 
Personal Conduct (PC)
On August 28, 2007, Applicant signed a security clearance questionnaire (SCA).
In response to question 27b. requiring information about garnishments or
repossessions, Applicant answered “No.” Even though her truck was repossessed in
2002, the surrounding circumstances of the event support a finding she did not
deliberately omit the information. 
In the same questionnaire, question 28a., Applicant also denied she had any
debts over 180 days delinquent in the last 7 years. In response to question 28b., she
denied she had any debts over 90 days delinquent. After weighing and balancing the
testimony of Applicant and her husband, there are a number of inconsistencies in her
claims that undermine her overall credibility. However, due to forgetfulness and the lack
of financial counseling, I am unable to make the factual finding that she deliberately
concealed the information from questions 28a. and 28b. of her SCA in August 2007. 
Character Evidence
Applicant submitted several character letters beginning with a coworker/friend
who has known Applicant for five years. The coworker considers Applicant trustworthy.
Based on her observation of Applicant for about a year, a second coworker and friend
knows that Applicant loves her job and is very security conscious. A third character
statement comes from Applicant’s national congressman who advised Applicant that the
appropriate government officials had been contacted, and that the congressman would
monitor the case. 
A driver and manager of Applicant’s employer noted that he considers Applicant
trustworthy based on his interaction with her since early 2008. The facility security
officer (FSO) has known Applicant professionally wince February 2008, and is
appreciative of Applicant’s dependability, leadership, and attention to detail. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
9
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
18. The Concern. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”
FC disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts)
applies to Applicant’s delinquent debts. When the SOR was published, Applicant owed
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
10
more than $39,900.00 she was unable to pay. There are more than 16 overdue debts
listed with delinquency dates as early as 2001. FC DC 19.c. (a history of not meeting
financial obligations) also applies. 
The mitigating conditions have been evaluated. FC mitigating condition (MC)
20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply, as Applicant still
owes eight creditors approximately $17,002.00. The number of delinquent debts,
amount of the debt, and age of the listed accounts, continues to cast doubt on
Applicant’s current reliability, and judgment. Applicant’s initial representations that some
of the debts were being paid by the debt service plan, and later declaration that she had
withdrawn from the plan because she had been misled, undermines her credibility. Her
credibility is weakened further by the absence of supporting documentation of her claim
of having made a number of $380.00 payments to the debt service, and $125.00
payments to the law firm. 
The mitigation Applicant receives under FC MC 20.b. (the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control) is
substantially reduced because the illnesses to the parents of Applicant’s husband
occurred over four years ago. In addition, GE 1 reflects that Applicant did not
experience a break in employment as her husband testified. FC MC 20.b. has only
limited application. 
FC MC 20.c. (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or under control)
receives limited favorable attention due to the fact Applicant has never received
counseling. Though she claimed she had a monthly budget to manage her finances,
she declined to produce evidence to support her testimony. While exercising good
judgment to enroll in a debt service to gain control over her financial troubles, she no
longer is involved in the service. Applicant receives limited mitigation under FC MC 20.c.
Applicant would have received significant mitigation under FC MC 20.d. (the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts) had she been more forthright about her debts. However, given her lack of candor
in explaining the status of several of the debts, and misrepresenting the payment she
made to the debt service plan and the credit company law firm in SOR 1.i., her
mitigating evidence is insufficient to prevail over her history of failing to meet financial
obligations.
Personal Conduct (PC)
15. The Concern. “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty,
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
11
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance
process.” 
Applicant’s “No” answers to both debt questions (28.a., 28.b.) of his SCA in
August 2007 activates PC DC 16.a. (deliberate omission, falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire used to determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness) Applicant repeatedly denied omitting factual information
from her SCA. While there are significant inconsistencies between Applicant’s and her
husband’s testimony that impact negatively on Applicant’s credibility, I am unable to
conclude that Applicant deliberately omitted her financial information. I have considered
her change of positions concerning several of her debts. I have considered her claims
she made about the truck and debt service. It is reasonable to conclude she forgot
about the debts because of their age. I find it also reasonable to conclude she did not
include the truck as one of the delinquent debts because she thought, though
incorrectly, that the truck debt may have been resolved when she returned the vehicle
to the dealer. Without the element, PC DC 16.a. does not apply. Accordingly, the PC
guideline is resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC) 
I have examined the evidence under the disqualifying and mitigating conditions of
the FC, PC and CC guidelines. I have also weighed the circumstances of this case
within the context of nine variables known as the whole person concept: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I have considered the facts of this case in light of the disqualifying and mitigating
conditions of the FC guideline, and also in light of the general factors of the whole
person concept. The statements of five of Applicant’s coworkers and friends
demonstrate that Applicant is dependable and trustworthy. However, these statements
do not include any probative information of whether these declarants are familiar with
Applicant’s financial problems. Based on the time line of when the debts became
delinquent, Applicant has a seven-year history of financial problems. Though the
evidence suggests Applicant deliberately omitted material financial information from her
SCA, there is insufficient evidence for me to conclude that she deliberately concealed
her debts from her SCA and the government in August 2007. On the other hand,
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
12
Applicant has not met her burden of persuasion under the FC guideline by not
demonstrating more responsibility in managing her finances. 
Having evaluated the evidence as a whole, Applicant has failed to mitigate the
security concerns associated with her financial problems. Applicant exercised good
judgment by finally taking responsibility for nine of the debts listed in the SOR. But,
given the lack of evidence showing that the debts in SOR 1.c., 1.d., 1.h., 1.i., 1.m., 1.n.,
and 1.r. are being addressed, the record is insufficient to conclude that Applicant has
successfully mitigated the continuing security concerns associated with her financial
indebtedness. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o. For Aplicant
Subparagraph 1.p. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r. Against Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Personal Conduct, Guideline E): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b. For Applicant
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
When unredacted this document contains information
EXEMPT FROM MANDATORY DISCLOSURE under the FOIA
Exemption 6 applies
13
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
