                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05585 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on January 9, 2008 (Item 5).  On August 6, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) for Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F (Item 1).  The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 30, 2008, admitting all of the 
allegations in the SOR (Items 3 and 4).  She elected to have the matter decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on September 23, 2008.  Applicant received a complete file of relevant 
material (FORM) on October 27, 2008, and was provided the opportunity to file 
objections, and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions.  Applicant did not respond to the FORM or provide additional material.  The 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
case was assigned to me on January 21, 2008.  Based on a review of the case file and 
pleadings, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel noted a typographical error in SOR 1.d in that the amount 
past due was listed at $1,64.00 when it should have been $1,064.00.  Applicant was 
notified of the requested amendment when the FORM was sent on September 23, 
2008.  Applicant did not respond to the FORM and therefore did not object to the 
amendment.  SOR 1.d is amended to show the amount past due as $1,064.00. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 34 years old and has been employed as a customer service 
representative for a defense contractor since June 2000.  She is listed as married on 
the e-QIP with no children but it is unclear from the file if she is still married.  There is an 
indication that she was planning to divorce her husband in 2007 (Item 5, e-QIP, and 
Item 6, Answers to Interrogatories).  In her answers to the Interrogatories, dated July 
23, 2008, Applicant provided a Personal Financial Statement listing her monthly net pay 
as $1,600, with monthly expenses of $1,155, leaving discretionary or disposable funds 
of $345 monthly.  In response to questions by a security investigator, Applicant stated 
her monthly income was $1,942, with a net remainder for discretionary spending of 
$563 (Item 6 at 12-13).  Applicant listed in response to financial questions on the e-QIP 
a garnishment in 2007, a repossession in 2005, a bankruptcy in 2001, and an 
automobile loan in 2001 that was more than 180 days past due. (Item 5, e-QIP at 24-
25).   
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2001 and her debts of about 
$10,000 were discharged in November 2002 (SOR 1.a; Item 6, Answers to 
Interrogatories, dated July 23, 2008).  The SOR lists six delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $20,461 that arose after the discharge in bankruptcy and are confirmed 
by a credit report dated February 1, 2008 (Item 7).  Applicant admits these debts (Item 
4).  She also provided a credit report of July 15, 2008 as part of her response to 
Interrogatories that also confirms the debts (Item 6, at 18-31).  The debts include a 
mortgage past due in the amount of $6,291 (SOR 1.b); a credit card debt place for 
collection for $776 (SOR 1.c); another mortgage past due for $1,064 (SOR 1.d); an 
automobile loan charged off for $4,956 (SOR 1.e); an account placed for collection for 
$778 (SOR 1.f); and a charged off cell phone debt for $596 (SOR 1.g; See Item 7, 
Credit Report, dated February 1, 2008).   
 
In response to interrogatories, Applicant stated that her husband took a toll on 
their finances by taking out pay day loans.  She is trying to clear the debts and stated 
that she has worked out a payment plan with creditors and her husband is attempting to 
not have their house foreclosed.  She also noted that she did not remember a tax debt 
to the city where their house was located.  She noted that she is a trustworthy person 
who has never broken the trust of her customers.  She values the trust of her customers 
 
3 
 
 
and would never do anything to compromise their security.  She did not present any 
documents to verify the attempt to repay the loans or to keep the house from being 
foreclosed (Item 6, Answers to Interrogatories, at 2-3). 
 
During an interview with a security investigator on March 11, 2008, Applicant 
stated that she left her husband in January 2008 and planned to file for divorce.  She 
left him because of his mental instability and alcohol consumption problems.  These 
problems caused them financial problems.  When they first married in 2002, they had a 
joint checking account but it was closed because her husband wrote worthless checks.  
He wrote worthless checks to cash advance stores that she had to make arrangements 
to repay.  She did not know what he did with the funds.  They were able to purchase a 
house but they could not make the mortgage payments.  She initially borrowed funds 
from her grandmother to make the back mortgage payments.  Applicant stated that she 
has every intention of paying all of her debts.  Applicant was starting the process to 
seek assistance from a credit counselor.  She presented no information that she 
continued to pursue credit counseling (Item 6 at 8). 
 
Applicant stated the mortgage debts at SOR 1.b and SOR 1.d are the same 
mortgage debt with one listing the immediate past due and one listing the entire amount 
past due.  After she left her husband, he was to make the mortgage payments but did 
not because he was unemployed.  She expects the house to go into foreclosure.  Since 
the debts are the same, I find for Applicant as to SOR 1.d.  
 
The credit card debt at SOR 1.c was used to buy personal items like groceries, 
gas, and a week-end trip.  She was unable to make payments because of her 
husband's actions.  She did not remember any notices for court action but did 
remember a garnishment notice.  Applicant's husband promised to assist her with the 
car loan at SOR 1.e but he did not.  After she was unable to make payments and the 
car was repossessed in 2006, she received a call from the finance company to make 
payment arrangements but she did not return the call since she did not have funds to 
make payments.  The debt at SOR 1.f was for a computer she planned to use to attend 
college courses.  She was unable to attend the course or make payments on the 
computer because of the financial problems caused by her husband.  Applicant and her 
husband had cell phone service through the same carrier.  They fell behind on payment 
after about six months of service.  She receives occasional letters from a collection 
company concerning payments, but she has not responded.  She believes the debt is 
about $500 (Item 6 at 10-11).  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Consideration: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18)  Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
5 
 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an Applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance.  An Applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  Applicant’s five delinquent debts that arose after debts were discharged in 
bankruptcy are a security concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying 
Conditions (FC DC) ¶ 19(a) "inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts"; and FC DC ¶ 
19(c) "a history of not meeting financial obligations".  Applicant accumulated delinquent 
debts because she was unable to pay her financial obligations.  The debts were 
accumulated after her previous debts had been discharged by bankruptcy.  Applicant 
blamed her inability to make payments because of the actions of her husband.  
However, she has been steadily employed since her previous debts were discharged 
and she did not provide information to establish how her husband's actions impacted 
her ability to make payments on her debts while being steadily employed.  The record 
from credit reports and responses to interrogatories show her inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts and that she has a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) "the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment".  Applicant has taken no action to 
pay the delinquent debts so the debts are current.  The debts are from various sources, 
credit cards, a loan, a phone bill, a mortgage, and a car loan, so they are not infrequent.  
Since the debts are current and not paid, they cast doubt on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  The mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(b) "the conditions that resulted in the financial problems 
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation) and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances".  Applicant claims the debts were 
cause by her husband's action in taken out cash loans and not paying their debts.  She 
acknowledged receiving information and calls concerning some of the loans but has not 
taken any action to return the calls or to seek payment plans on the debts.  She has 
been steadily employed and has a net remainder of funds each month.  She presented 
no information on how or why her husband's actions impacted her ability to make some 
payments on her debts.  There has been no attempt to pay past due obligations when 
she has a positive monthly cash flow which indicates she is not trying to resolve her 
indebtedness.  While some of the debt may have been caused by her husband's action, 
the debt payment is also her responsibility and payment was within her control.  She 
has not established she acted responsibly in managing her finances and making 
payments on her obligations. 
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) "the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts".  For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
 
6 
 
 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay.  A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed.  
Applicant presented no information to show she has a plan to pay the debts or any 
action that she has taken to pay her debts.  Applicant has sufficient income to make 
some payments on her delinquent debts but has not attempted to do so.  Applicant's 
debts were discharged in bankruptcy in 2002 and she started accumulating delinquent 
debts again in 2004  Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible means of resolving 
indebtedness.  However, the circumstances of the bankruptcy action can be examined 
to determine any security significance.  The filing of the bankruptcy action in itself does 
not create a security concern.  Applicant accumulated delinquent debt after the 
bankruptcy discharge indicating a continual irresponsible and indifferent attitude 
towards her finances.  There is no indication Applicant acted responsibly towards her 
debts or that the situation is under control.  Some of her creditors tried to establish 
contact with her to resolve the indebtedness but she deliberately did not respond to 
them.  Her finances are not under control and she has not acted responsibly.  Applicant 
has not presented sufficient information to indicate a good faith effort to pay creditors or 
resolve debts.  She has not presented sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for financial considerations. 
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 Applicant has not taken action to resolve her past due debts.  Her indifferent 
attitude, her failure to respond to her creditors, and her lack of actions shows she is not 
trustworthy, responsible, or that she exercises good judgment.  Applicant has been 
irresponsible towards her delinquent debts and financial obligations.  This is an 
indication that she might be irresponsible towards the protection and handling of 
classified information.  I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from her finances.  Clearance is denied. 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
