 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02550 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brandon M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Rebecca L. Marquez, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations and personal conduct. He falsified his security clearance application. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted security clearance applications on September 24, 2002 
(Standard Form (SF) 86) (GE 1); August 5, 2003 (Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions) (GE 3); August 29, 2003 (SF 86) (GE 4); and September 6, 2006 
(Questionnaire for National Security Positions) (GE 9). On July 30, 2008, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 28, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on October 31, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 5, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on November 24, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 14, 
which were received without objection (Tr. 25). Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted exhibits (AE) 1 and 2, which were received without objection. I kept the 
record open to allow Applicant time to submit additional matters in support of his case. 
He submitted AE 3 post-hearing. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 2, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 
1.j, and 1.k (some with explanations). He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 
1.i, and 2.a. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, including his demeanor 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old contracts manager (Tr. 45). He completed his 
associate’s degree in 1976, and has taken additional college courses over the years (Tr. 
45). He served honorably in the U.S. Air Force (10 years) and his state’s Air National 
Guard from 1968 to 1990. He retired at the rank of E-7 from the Air National Guard (Tr. 
47).  
 
Applicant has had continued access to classified information from 1968 to March 
2008 (Tr. 46-51). He received access to classified information at the secret level from 
around 1968 to 1978 while serving in the Air Force. From 1978 to 1990, he served in 
the Air National Guard where he also held access to classified information. In 1988, his 
secret access was upgraded to a top secret clearance, and that access continued until 
he retired from the service in 1990 (Tr. 48). Because of his employment for government 
contractors, Applicant also had access to classified information, through different 
government agencies, at the secret and top secret levels concurrent with his military 
access.  
 
In August 2002, he was hired by his current employer, a government contractor. 
His supervisor over the past six years considers Applicant to be extremely reliable and 
honest. In his opinion, Applicant has demonstrated integrity and professionalism at 
work, and earned the respect of co-workers and managers within the company. He 
considers Applicant to be trustworthy and recommended his continued access to 
classified information (AE 2).  
 
Since 1968, Applicant submitted many security clearance applications, both for 
his military and civilian job positions (Tr. 64). He was very familiar with the security 
 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
 
 
clearance application process. His Department of Defense access to classified 
information was suspended in March 2008 as a result of a decision by another 
government agency to deny his access to sensitive compartmented information 
(Appellate Exhibit 1). 
 
Applicant married his first wife in 1971 and they were divorced in 1979. He 
married his current wife in April 1980 (Tr. 83). He has three grown children: two 
daughters ages 27 and 20, and a son age 25 (Tr. 52). 
 
Applicant testified he started gambling around 1996-1997 (Tr. 54). In 1998, his 
past time became an addiction and he developed into a compulsive gambler. His 
earnings and credit cards were not sufficient to support his gambling habit (Tr. 54-55). 
In 1999, Applicant became the treasurer of a large sports club. Between 1999 and 
September 2003, Applicant embezzled $114,000 from his club to support his extensive 
gambling habit and expenses (Tr. 56). In September 2003, he disclosed his 
embezzlement to the club’s attorney. Shortly thereafter, Applicant made an equity loan 
and borrowed money from relatives to make three lump sum payments to the club 
totaling $75,000 (Tr. 34, 60). In March 2004, Applicant signed a promissory note 
agreeing to pay the remaining $39,000. He paid the money ahead of schedule and his 
promissory note was released in January 2006 (GE 14, Tr. 36, 58-61). Applicant 
disclosed his gambling problems to his wife and close family members. 
 
Because of his remorse and guilt over his gambling habit and embezzlement, 
Applicant became depressed. He was diagnosed with Major Depressive Disorder, 
Single Episode, Severe Without Psychotic Features (AE 3). He underwent professional 
psychological counseling/treatment from October 2003 to April 2005 and received anti-
depression medication (Tr. 38-41). His depression is currently under control and he no 
longer takes medications. At his hearing, Applicant described himself as a recovering 
compulsive gambler, but averred he no longer has the urge to gamble (Tr. 42). On July 
12, 2005, during a security clearance interview conducted by another government 
agency, Applicant stated that his then gambling activity was limited to a scratch off ticket 
per month (GE 5). 
 
Applicant has been regularly attending Gambler’s Anonymous (GA) since 
October 2003 to the day of his hearing. He has actively participated in GA’s activities, 
and has held positions of responsibility in the local GA group, including service as 
secretary and twice as treasurer. He also served as treasurer for the state organization 
that oversees and guides all GA’s groups within his state (Tr. 42-44). According to the 
Chairman of his state’s Intergroup of Gamblers Anonymous, Applicant has earned the 
respect and trust of his peers with his excellent performance, work ethics, and 
dependability. He has achieved outstanding improvements in his character and 
commitment to excellence (AE 1). 
 
Applicant smoked marijuana in late 2002 at the age of 52 (Tr. 40-41). He 
explained that he and a group of co-workers who like to play musical instruments got 
together to play music around the 2002 Christmas Holidays. During the evening, a co-
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
worker lit a marijuana cigarette that was circulated around the group. Applicant smoked 
and passed the marijuana cigarette around his circle of friends several times (GEs 6 
and 11).  
 
Applicant claimed that his last use of marijuana was in 2002 (Tr. 62-63). Prior to 
2002, his last use of marijuana was in 1987. Applicant knew that marijuana is a 
controlled substance, and that possession and use of marijuana is illegal. Both times 
Applicant used marijuana he had access to classified information. 
 
In September 2002, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (GE 1). 
In response to question 28 (asking whether he had ever illegally used a controlled 
substance while possessing a security clearance), Applicant deliberately answered “No” 
and failed to disclose his 1987 marijuana and cocaine use.2 
 
On August 5 and 29 of 2003, Applicant submitted two additional security 
clearance applications (GEs 3 and 4). In response to questions 24.a of the August 5, 
2003 SF 86, and question 27 of the August 29, 2003 SF 86 (both asking whether in the 
last seven years he had illegally used any controlled substance), Applicant deliberately 
answered “No” and failed to disclose his 2002 marijuana use.3 In his response to 
question 24.b of the August 5, 2003 SF 86, and question 28 of the August 29, 2003 SF 
86 (both asking whether he had ever illegally used a controlled substance while 
possessing a security clearance), Applicant deliberately answered “No” and failed to 
disclose his 1987 cocaine use and his 2002 marijuana use. 
 
In September 2006, Applicant submitted a fourth security clearance application 
(GE 9). In response to questions 24.a (asking whether in the last seven years he had 
illegally used any controlled substance), Applicant answered “Yes;” however, he failed 
to disclose the month/year, drug used, and the number of times used. In his response to 
question 24.b (asking whether he had ever illegally used a controlled substance while 
possessing a security clearance), Applicant deliberately answered “No” and failed to 
disclose his 1987 cocaine use and his 2002 marijuana use. 
 
Applicant claimed his failure to disclose his marijuana use in his August 29, 2003 
SF 86 was not deliberate or with the intent to mislead the government. He explained the 
2  On July 2, 2004, during a security clearance interview conducted by another government 
agency, Applicant provided the following information concerning his past use of illegal drugs: in 2002 he 
used marijuana at a friend’s house; in 1987 he snorted cocaine; between 1978 and 1979, he used 
marijuana twice while in the Air National Guard; between 1972 and 1974, while serving in the Air Force, 
he used marijuana on two separate occasions while holding a security clearance; between 1969 and 
1972, while serving in the Air Force (stationed in Germany) and holding a secret clearance, he used 
hashish one time per week. He contributed money to the purchase of hashish, and purchased hashish 
himself twice (GEs 5 and 13). Applicant failed to disclose this information in his subsequent security 
clearance applications.  
 
3  His falsification of the August 29, 2003 SF 86, is the only falsification alleged in the SOR 
concerning Applicant’s illegal drug use or drug activity. Specifically, SOR ¶ 1.f only lists his failure to 
disclose his 2002 marijuana use. All other falsification allegations concern his alleged failure to disclose 
financial information. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
he did not recall his past use of marijuana when he submitted his SF 86 (Tr. 68). At the 
time, he was suffering from depression and taking anti-depression medication (Tr. 37-
41). He further explained: “It was to me such a simple casual thing in the setting that I 
was in. I more than likely didn’t even think of it” (Tr. 66). 
 
In his answers to the four SF 86 financial questions concerning financial 
delinquencies (asking whether during the last seven years he had been over 180 days 
delinquent on any debts, and whether he was currently over 90 days delinquent on any 
debts), Applicant did not disclose his $114,000 embezzlement debt. Applicant admitted 
that he embezzled the money and owed the debt, but that he was never delinquent on 
his repayments to the club. The SOR did not allege any other delinquent debts that the 
Applicant failed to disclose. 
 
Applicant was denied eligibility for access to sensitive compartmented 
information by two other government agencies in 2005 and 2007. Both denials were 
based, in part, on the same questionable behavior alleged in the pending SOR.  
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.4 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”5 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
4  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
5  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. AG ¶ 15.  
 
Between 1997 and September 2003, Applicant developed into a compulsive 
gambler and embezzled $114,000 from a club in which he held a position of trust. He 
stole the money to support his extensive gambling habit and expenses. He continued 
gambling (playing scratch off tickets) until at least January 2005.  
 
Applicant deliberately falsified his August 29, 2003 security clearance application 
when he failed to disclose his 2002 marijuana use. 
 
Applicant claimed his falsification of the August 29, 2003 was not deliberate or 
with the intent to mislead the government. He claimed he did not recall his 2002 use of 
marijuana when he submitted his SF 86. He explained that at the time, he was suffering 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
from depression and taking medications. Considering Applicant’s testimony in light of 
extensive and detailed record evidence, I find his testimony was less than candid.  
 
Applicant falsified his September 2002 security clearance application6 when he 
failed to disclose that his 1987 marijuana and cocaine use while possessing a security 
clearance. He falsified his August 5, 2003 security clearance application when he failed 
to disclose that within the last seven years (in 2002) he had illegally used marijuana. He 
also falsified his answers to question 24.b of the August 5, 2003 SF 86, and question 28 
of the August 29, 2003 SF 86 (both asking whether he had ever illegally used a 
controlled substance while possessing a security clearance), when he deliberately 
answered “No” and failed to disclose his 1987 cocaine use, and his 2002 marijuana use. 
 
He further falsified his September 2006 security clearance application when he 
answered “No” to question 24.b (asking whether he had ever illegally used a controlled 
substance while possessing a security clearance), and deliberately failed to disclose his 
1987 cocaine use, and his 2002 marijuana use. 
 
 Considering the record as a whole, I am convinced Applicant deliberately failed 
to disclose the information. Numerous factors weighed in my analysis to reach that 
conclusion, including: Applicant’s statements to other government agencies, his maturity 
(both at the time of the illegal drug use and when he submitted his security clearance 
applications), his service and employment history, his demeanor and testimony, and the 
lack of credibility of his explanations.  
 
Because of his extensive experience in the Air Force, the Air National Guard, 
holding a security clearance, and with the security clearance process, Applicant knew 
the importance of accurately completing his security clearance application and telling 
the truth. Nevertheless, he failed to provide information that was material to making an 
informed security decision and made false statements. AG ¶ 16(a) “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire,” applies. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e and 1.g – 1.i, alleged Applicant falsified his September 24, 2002, 
August 29, 2003, and September 6, 2006 security clearance applications, because he 
failed to list his $114,000 embezzlement debt in his answers to the three SF 86 financial 
questions concerning financial delinquencies. In its pertinent parts, the financial 
questions asked whether during the last seven years Applicant had been over 180 days 
delinquent on any debts, and whether he was currently over 90 days delinquent on any 
6  The Government did not allege the falsifications of the questions concerning Applicant’s use of 
illegal drugs and drug activity in his security clearance applications from September 2 and September 24, 
2002, August 5, 2003, and September 6, 2006. Thus, the falsification of these security clearance 
applications cannot be used as grounds to deny Applicant’s application under Guideline E. However, I am 
required to consider Applicant’s overall questionable behavior when evaluating the seriousness of the 
conduct alleged in the SOR to determine factors such as the extent to which his behavior is recent; the 
likelihood of recurrence; his credibility, i.e., Applicant’s explanations concerning the circumstances of the 
incidents alleged; and his rehabilitation. ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 3 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006). 
 
 
8 
 
 
debt. The Government’s evidence failed to establish Applicant was ever late or 
delinquent on his payments. 
 
Applicant stole the $114,000 and acquired a legal obligation to return the money. 
After confessing his embezzlement, Applicant shortly thereafter paid $75,000 in three 
lump sum payments and signed a promissory note for the remainder of the debt, which 
he timely paid. 
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find none of the mitigating 
conditions apply to this case. Applicant’s behavior shows a recurrent pattern of 
falsifications (AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply). His falsification of the security clearance 
application is a serious offense, his behavior is recent, and it shows Applicant’s lack of 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. (AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply). 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an Applicant’s failure or inability to 
live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant’s compulsive gambling habit led him to embezzle $114,000 from a club 
in which he held a position of trust. He stole the money to support his extensive 
gambling habit and expenses. He continued gambling (playing scratch off tickets) until 
at least January 2005.  
 
 Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability of the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 19: 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust; 
 
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling 
problems, or other issues of security concern; and 
 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or 
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling 
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family 
conflict or other problems caused by gambling. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 I find Applicant’s questionable behavior to be relatively recent. He gambled from 
1997 to at least 2005, and his embezzlement took place from around 1998 to 2003, 
thus, it was not infrequent.   
 
 Applicant’s GA sponsor and psychologist believe he is doing well, and that he 
overcame his depression and gambling habit. Notwithstanding, the record shows 
Applicant gambled at least until 2005. Because Applicant was diagnosed as a 
compulsive gambler and he has continued to gamble until at least 2005 (albeit by 
purchasing scratch off tickets), I am not convinced that the circumstances that led to his 
gambling habit and embezzlement are not likely to recur. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (c) do not 
apply.  AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because Applicant took immediate action to repay his 
obligation. However, financial considerations remain a security concern because his 
financial concerns are directly linked to his compulsive gambling habit. Applicant has 
continued gambling at least until 2005. As such, I consider his behavior recent, likely to 
recur, and it cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
10 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, educated, and 
well trained man. He honorably served 22 years in the Air Force and Air National Guard, 
and has been successful working for numerous defense contractors for many years. He 
has held access to classified information at the secret and top secret level for 
approximately 40 years.  
 
Because of his years in the service and his many years holding access to 
classified information, Applicant knew or should have known the importance of the trust 
placed on him by the Government. He used illegal drugs in numerous occasions while 
holding access to classified information and violated the trust placed on him when he 
embezzled money to support his extensive gambling habit. Moreover, he failed to be 
candid and honest on his security clearance application and during his testimony at 
hearing. His behavior shows he lacks judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c, and 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e, 1.g - 1.k :  For Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
