1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                           )
                                                                    )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-05263
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
    
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On August 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 3, 2008, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on October 30, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on
December 3,  2008.  A hearing was held as scheduled, for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny,
or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted
of three exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and 10 exhibits.  The
transcript (R.T.) was received on December 12, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case
2
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified information is
granted.
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to consider retention of
his British passport and document its surrender should he make the decision to do so.
For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days, to December 12, 2008 to
supplement the record. The Government was afforded two days to respond.  Within the
time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with e-mailed letters confirming his
decision to surrender his British passport and documented surrender of his passport to
his employer’s facility security officer (FSO).  Department counsel did not object to these
post-hearing submissions. Applicant’s two post-hearing exhibits were admitted and
considered as exhibits A and B.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline C, Applicant is alleged to have (a) exercised dual citizenship with
Great Britain, (b) possessed a British passport, and (c) used his British passport to enter
and exit Great Britain in May 2006 and June 2007. 
For his answer, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR with
explanations. He claimed he travels extensively for business and used his British
passport to enter and European countries for convenience purposes.  He claimed he has
he lived in the U.S. for over 30 years and bears allegiance to the U.S. since he  became
a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 2006.  He claimed to have designed and patented a
new permanent resident card (introduced in 1998) that has proved extremely resistant to
fraudulent duplication or alteration and has become the standard for ID cards world-wide
and a permanent resident card (PRC) that is recognized by U.S. Government agencies.
He claimed to be working on the design of the next generation secure PRC and claimed
his use of his British passport when traveling to Europe is in the best national interests of
the U.S. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 57-year-old chief operating officer (COO) of a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant was born and raised in Great Britain to parents of British citizenship. 
He earned a PhD in Chemistry in Great Britain in 1975 and completed post-graduate
work in Canada in 1976 (R.T., at 52).
3
Applicant immigrated to the U.S. in 1976 to work for a manufacturing company.
He worked for this company for several years before moving to another region of the
U.S. to pursue different scientific interests (R.T., at 52-53). 
Applicant  became a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 2006 and obtained his U.S.
passport the same month and year (see ex. 2; R.T., at 72)).  Applicant delayed applying
for U.S. citizenship, because at the time, he did not think he would be staying in the U.S.
(R.T., at 54).  Since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2006, though, he has voted in every U.S.
election for the past two years and has been called for jury service (R.T., at 60).
Applicant is married and has two children (19 and 21 years of age, respectively).
His wife (W) became a naturalized U.S. citizen in February 2006 and is a dual citizen
with Great Britain.  Applicant’s children are completely Americanized and have no
intentions of returning to Great Britain (R.T., at 58).  They, too, hold dual citizenship
status with the U.S. and Great Britain (R.T., at 56-57).  They were able to obtain dual
citizenship through Applicant and W (ex. 2).  Neither Applicant nor W have exercised any
rights of British citizenship, except for Applicant’s possession and use of his British
passport between May 2006 and June 2007 when he travels to Japan, Great Britain and
other European countries (see ex. 2; R.T., at 72-73). 
Applicant designed and patented a unique PRC in 1995 and 1999 (see exs. A and
B; R.T., at 41).  He assigned the patents to the corporation he co-founded in 1982 (R.T.,
at 63).  He developed this card initially for use in Canada as a secure tamper-proof ID
card.  Applicant considers this card to be totally immune to compromise and the most
secure publicly issued ID card in the world.  Newspaper accounts covering his PRC and
competitive ID cards developed abroad corroborate his claims (see ex. C). For
comparative purposes, a recent newspaper article covering competitive secure ID cards
in Thailand reports technology theft and risks of future compromise (see ex. G; R.T., at
47-48). 
 Applicant’s PRC, by contrast, is tamper proof and is used by a number of U.S.
Government agencies (see exs. C through  F; R.T., at 42-49).  Published Department of
Justice (DoJ) accounts of this laser-etched  ID card credit its use with the seizure of
more than 2,000 counterfeit cards in 1998 alone (see ex.  C). Immigration officials with
DoJ stress the unique engraving features of Applicant’s PRC and predict that its use will
virtually eliminate mass production of counterfeit ID cards (ex. C).  Applicant is currently
working on the next generation U.S. Green Card, which he expects to introduce in March
2009 (R.T., at 48-49). 
Applicant travels extensively throughout Europe to market his PRC and (since
becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen) uses his British passport to facilitate his trips to
Japan, Great Britain and other European countries (see ex. 2; R.T., at 46-47, 72-73).
Heretofore, he has expressed his intention to retain his British passport and citizenship.
He cites his ease of access to European countries with European membership as an
important travel benefit when he uses his British passport for entry purposes, and for this
4
reason, he has worked hard to retain his British citizenship and passport (R.T., at 63-66,
73-74). 
Were Applicant to use his U.S. passport on his trips to Europe and Japan, he
assures that he would need a visa to return to the U.S. (R.T., at 65). This, in turn, would
require a visa application, and an estimated week’s travel delay (R.T., at 65-66).  By
contrast, when he travels to Japan and other European countries on his British passport,
he does not need a visa to enter these countries (R.T., at 65-66, 73).  Accordingly, he
uses his British passport to enter Japan, Great Britain and other European countries, and
his U.S. passport to exit these countries for the U.S. (R.T., at 67, 69, 73). Applicant does
not validate his visa claims, though, and it is not fully clear in this record whether this is
or always has been official U.S. visa policy for returning dual nationals. 
Before obtaining his U.S. passport (in 2006), Applicant used his British passport
exclusively to travel to and from Great Britain and other countries (R.T., at 70, 73-74).
After he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, he tended more to blending his use of his
British passport with his U.S. passport.
Should surrender of his British passport become necessary to ensure his
obtaining his security clearance necessary, Applicant indicated he would be willing to
surrender the passport to his FSO (R.T., at 50).  Expressly afforded an opportunity after
the hearing to relinquish his British passport (R.T., at 86-92), Applicant documents his
surrender of the passport to his FSO (see ex. K and L).  Under the terms of his passport
surrender, his FSO agrees to notify DoD of any return of Applicant’s passport in the
future (see exs. K and L).
Applicant maintains weekly contact with his parents who are citizens and
residents of Great Britain (see ex. 2).  He sees his parents yearly on average when he
either visits them in Great Britain or they visit him in the U.S.
Applicant owns a home in the U.S. valued at around $1.3 million and has an
overall net worth of around $1.5 million (R.T., at 58-59).  Neither he nor W have any
assets or financial interests in Great Britain (see ex. 2; R.T., at 59, 61-62).  He has a
base salary of $300,000.00 a year with the company he owns and operates as a defense
contractor (R.T., at 62).  His company who own the patents on his PRC does not license
the patents, and so, it does not collect any royalties on them (R.T.,a t 63).  As an
employee (COO) of his company, he received $1 per patent as consideration for his
transfer of ownership of the patents to his company (R.T., at 63).  The patents remain
the property of his company and would stay with the company in the event he were to
sever his ties with it.
Applicant documents his grants of a security clearance with another U.S. agency
(DoJ), and urges DoD to follow the same guidelines used by the DoJ (see ex. J; R.T., at
49-50).  He is highly regarded by the DoJ who commissioned him to develop a PRC for
their use in 1995.  The DoJ made a leadership award to Applicant in December 1999 in
recognition of the PRC he developed for them in the same year (see ex. D).  Applicant
5
received praise and acknowledgments from other public agencies for his PRC designs
as well (see exs. C through  F; R.T., at 42-45).  Applicant is roundly credited with raising
security standards for identification cards.
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
administrative judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in
E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended to
assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
      Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may
be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the
interests of the United States.  See Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), ¶ 9.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that
to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in
the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance
depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all
adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted facts
alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts proven
have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
6
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis 
Applicant presents as a naturalized U.S. citizen who was born to British parents,
immigrated to the U.S. in 1976, and later married W, who like Applicant is a naturalized
U.S. citizen with dual citizenship with Great Britain.  Both W and Applicant’s children have
dual citizenship with Great Britain as well. 
Aside from possessing a British passport and using it on a number of occasions to
enter Japan, Great Britain, and other European countries for convenience reasons,
Applicant has never exercised any active indicia of dual citizenship with Great Britain.
Claiming his principal affections lie with the U.S., he, nonetheless, retained his British
passport and citizenship. 
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite
critical considerations over acts indicating a preference or not for the interests of the
foreign country over the interests of the U.S. The issues, as such, raise concerns over
Applicant’s  preference for a foreign country over the U.S.
By virtue of his birth in his native Great Britain to his parents of British birth and
citizenship, Applicant was endowed with dual British citizenship, which could be
renounced by his expressed intention or actions.  This, Applicant  has never done, out of
respect for his British roots and heritage.  For the first 30 years of his residency in the
U.S., he used his British passport exclusively on his personal and business trips to Japan,
Great Britain and other European countries
Since becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant has taken no actions and
exercised no British privileges that can be fairly characterized as active indicia of dual
citizenship, save for his limited use of his British passport when traveling to European
countries.  He has not voted in any British elections or served in the British military.
Neither he nor W own or hold any assets or financial interest in Great Britain.  By
contrast,  he and W have a sizable asset portfolio in the U.S. 
Applicant has accepted no preferential educational, medical or other benefits from
Great Britain since becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen.  Nor has he ever performed or
attempted to perform duties, or otherwise acted so as to serve the interests of Great
Britain in preference to the interests of the U.S.
7
Because Applicant possessed and used his British passport, the Government may
apply disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 10(a) of AG ¶ 9, which provides:
exercise of any right, privilege or obligations of foreign citizenship after becoming a
U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  This includes
but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in                  
                   another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
(7) voting in a foreign election.  
Applicant continued to use his British passport to facilitate his entry into Japan,
Great Britain and other European countries between May 2006 and June 2007.  He never
voted in a British  election and never served in the British military.  He has never sought
to hold political office in Great Britain since immigrating to the U.S. or used his British
citizenship to protect his financial or business interests.  Although his delays in applying
for U.S. citizenship are a little troubling, his demonstrated loyalties and commitments
have consistently been directed to the U.S. and its core values.  His property and financial
interests are located exclusively in the U.S., and he has voted consistently in U.S.
elections since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2006.  There is no probative evidence of his
ever receiving any educational. Medical or retirement benefits from Great Britain. 
By relinquishing his British passport, Applicant has complied with the mitigation
requirements of MC ¶ 11 (e), “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated,” of AG ¶ 9. And, while his
surrendering his British  passport to his FSO does not automatically mitigate any past use
of the passport to enter and exit European countries, his recited limited use of the
passport is insufficient by itself to demonstrate Applicant’s preference for Great Britain
over the U.S.
Failure to satisfy a mitigating condition may be taken into account when assessing
an applicant’s overall claim of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances, but may
not be turned into a disqualifying condition.  See ISCR Case No. 01-02270 (Appeal Bd.
Aug. 29, 2003).  That Applicant may wish to keep his British citizenship out of respect for
8
his family roots and heritage is not sufficient reason either to preclude him from mitigating
security concerns over his holding dual British citizenship.  
Whole person precepts favor Applicant’s preference for the U.S. over Great Britain.
He is a longtime resident of the U.S. (since 1976) and a naturalized U.S. citizen who has
always demonstrated his loyalty for the U.S.  His principal financial interests are situated
in the U.S.  And, his wife and two children are all U.S. citizens: his children by birth and W
by naturalization.
Overall, Applicant persuades that his preference is with the U.S.  He satisfies his
proof burden in several ways: demonstrated lack of any prior exercise of any privileges
associated with his British citizenship, save for his limited use of his British passport.
Applicant absolves himself of foreign preference concerns and carries his evidentiary
burden on the presented issue of whether his preference lies with his native country
(Great Britain) or the country (U.S.) where he was naturalized.  Favorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c of
Guideline C.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in E 2(a) of the Adjudicative Process of
Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.c: FOR APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
9
