                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:  )
 )
 )
           -------------------------                             )       ISCR Case No. 08-06296
           SSN: -----------------  )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance                   )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On August 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded (undated) to the SOR in September, 2008, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on September 23, 2008, and was scheduled for
hearing on November 13, 2008.  A hearing was held on November 13, 2008, for the
purpose of considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant, continue, or deny, Applicant’s application for a security clearance.  At hearing,
the Government's case consisted of five exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness
2
(himself) and three exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on November 21, 2008.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record with documentation of a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. For good cause
shown, Applicant was granted 30 days to supplement the record.  The Government was
afforded two days to respond.  Within the time permitted, Applicant requested an
additional 30 days to file his bankruptcy petition, citing his recent retainer of bankruptcy
counsel who requires up front fees of $2,000.00 and a few additional documents from
Applicant before he will undertake preparation of the filing.  Department counsel did not
object to the extension request.  And for good cause shown, Applicant was granted an
additional 30 days (to January 12, 2008) to document the filing of his Chapter 7
bankruptcy petition.  Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition.  The submission was admitted as exhibit D.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have (a) accumulated five debts
exceeding $320,000.00 and (b) petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief in February
2000 (discharged in May 2000).  For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of
the of the allegations. He claimed that his home is no longer in foreclosure, and that he
is currently working with the lender on a remodification loan.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 39-year-old security officer for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
are incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional
findings follow.
Applicant married his current spouse in September 1993 (see ex. 1, R.T., at 70).
He has three children from his marriage (R.T., at 71).  In 1998 he was injured on the job
and suffered knee and shoulder injuries (R.T., at 69, 83-84).  He was awarded
workman’s compensation benefits which sustained him for a year (R.T., at 85-87).
Because his workman’s compensation benefits were less than his work income, he
used his credit cards to cover his monthly expenses (R.T., at 85-87).  With his income
significantly reduced, Applicant struggled to pay his bills, even with some financial
assistance from his union.  
Unemployed and unable to cover his credit card debts, Applicant petitioned for
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 2000.  He scheduled $20,000.00 in debt and virtually
no assets.  He received his discharge in May 2000, in what was essentially a no-asset
case. 
3
Applicant returned in work in 2000, and for awhile was able to keep up with his
accounts.  He purchased a home in 2001 for about $225,000.00 (R.T., at 94-95).  He
made a down payment of $7,000.00 and obtained a fixed mortgage on the home for
$225,000.00 (R.T., at 95).  Under the terms of his mortgage, he was obligated to make
$1,800.00 a monthly payments.  In 2002, he refinanced his home in the strength of a
variable rate mortgage that was lower than his original fixed rate and netted him
$20,000.00 in personal proceeds from his refinance (R.T., at 96).  
During a layoff from his principal employer, Applicant worked in manufacturing
jobs.  He worked in these jobs off and on between January 2002 and October 2004 (see
ex. 1).  He continued paying on this refinanced mortgage for six months.  In December
2003, his employer shuttered its facility and laid off all of its employees, Applicant
included (see ex. 1; R.T., at 84).  
Beginning in October 2004, Applicant prepared for a career as a real estate
agent (ex. 1).  While studying for his real estate license, he went to work for an
assembly system.  This employer encouraged him to purchase his own truck for work
use (see ex. C; R.T., at 62).  Under his arrangements with his employer, his employer
would pick-up his fuel and other work-related expenses.  Based on these suggestions,
Applicant went out and purchased a personal truck for around $20,000.00 (ex. C; R.T.,
at 62-63) with the intention of using it to pick up and deliver machines for his employer
(R.T., at 64).  He made payments on this truck before defaulting in June 2007 after his
company (confronting a faltering economy) cut his hours (see exs. 2 through 5 and C).
He owes approximately $20,275.00 on this truck on a loan account that was charged
off, according to his credit reports.  When business did not materialize as Applicant
anticipated, he tried to return the truck to the dealer (R.T., at 64-65).  However, the
dealer refused to accept the truck.  As a result, Applicant still retains this truck, which is
not operable (R.T., at 65).  
Applicant struggled  with his real estate business for about two years ((October
2004 to October 2006).  And for a brief period, he was making enough money to take
care of his family and safely discharge his truck and mortgage obligations.   With
improved income from his real estate practice and supplemental trucking business, he
was able to refinance his home a second time, this time with an even lower variable
rate.  As a part of his 2005 refinance, he was received back $30,000.00 in proceeds
from the loan payout (R.T., at 97-98).  He continued paying on this refinanced mortgage
for six months, until both his real estate and supplemental delivery work .
When the assembly system he affiliated with ceased doing business, Applicant
affiliated with a trucking concern to earn enough income to support his family (see ex.
C).  To undertake this work, he needed to have a certain type of commercial truck to
meet his delivery orders.  So, in November 2005, Applicant leased a truck that would
enable him to do additional odd jobs to supplement his real estate income (R.T., at 51-
52, 58).  The lease value of this truck was $24,000.00 (R.T., at 107).  Under the terms
of his  lease, he could return the truck in one year for no penalty (see ex. C; R.T., at 59).
His monthly payments were $1,050.00 (R.T., at 59). 
4
Applicant made his required monthly payments on his truck lease for over a year;
even though he was barely able to break even on the jobs he contracted for (ex. C;
R.T.,at 59-60).  So, after a year, Applicant approached his lessor about returning the
truck (R.T., at 60).  The dealer agreed to take the truck and try to sell it for him, but
cautioned that Applicant would be responsible for the full price of the truck (a switch in
terms according to Applicant).  Applicant accepted the lessor’s return terms and
returned the truck to the lessor.  While the lessor held the truck, Applicant continued to
make his $1,000.00 monthly payments (R.T., at 61).  Six months later, the lessor
advised that it could not sell the truck. Resigned to losing his truck through
repossession, Applicant stopped making payments (R.T., at 61).  He was later advised
that the truck was sold at public auction, leaving an $18,117.00 deficiency balance for
Applicant to tender to satisfy his lease obligations (R.T., at 61-62).  Applicant has never
been able to work out any payment arrangements with the lessor, and the debt has
since been charged off (see exs. 2 through 5).
For the past two years, the real estate market in his locality has steadily
deteriorated.  Unable to make much headway as a real estate agent, he essentially
withdrew from the business in October 2006 and took a job as an in-house steel
representative (see exs. 1 and C).  Not long after he took this job, he suffered a non-
work-related ankle injury, and was eventually laid off due to the uncertainty of his
doctor’s release (see exs. 1 and C).
Applicant’s efforts to sell his house to cover his mortgage debt have not been
successful (R.T., at 67), and he stopped making payments on his home (see 2 through
5).  He has had little feedback from his lender on his short sale and refinancing requests
(R.T., at 67, 100-01). In his last communication with the mortgagee, the lender informed
him it was thinking about filing for foreclosure.  Whether the lender will follow through
with foreclosure is unclear.  Applicant assures that the home next door to him recently
sold for just $105,000.00, which is less than half of what he owes on his mortgage (R.T.,
at 102).  
Besides the charged off debts from his defaults on the two vehicles he acquired,
Applicant accumulated two other debts.  One was a credit card account he opened in
June 2003 with creditor 1.a.  His credit reports show a balance due of $4,004.00 on this
account was, which was charged off in December 2006 (see exs. 3 through 5; R.T., at
53).  The second listed past due debt was a joint retail account opened with creditor 1.b
in July 1997.  His credit reports reflect a balance due of $187.00 on this account, which
was charged off in August 2007 (see exs. 2 through 5).  Applicant tried to work out
payment arrangements with both creditors, but was refused (R.T., at 56-57).
In his hearing testimony, Applicant expressed his intentions to pursue Chapter 7
bankruptcy (R.T., at 103-04), and documented his retainer agreement with a local
bankruptcy attorney (see ex. B).  After the, Applicant pursued Chapter 7 bankruptcy
through the attorney he retained to initiate a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in his behalf.
He documents the filing of a Chapter 7 petition in January 2009 (see ex. D).  In this
petition, Applicant scheduled secured debts as follows: his mortgage of $454,824.00 on
 The unsecured portion of this creditor’s claim is $280,324, which represents the difference between the creditor’s1
secured claim on Applicant’s home and the estimated fair market value of the home ($174,500.00).  Essentially, the
unsecured portion constitutes the expected deficiency were the creditor to foreclose non judicially and perforce
waive any deficiency against the debtor.  What remains unclear is how the estimated overall secured claim reached
the aggregate of $454,824.00.  Applicant’s estimated secured debts on the home totaled only $275,000.00. 
Presumably, the $454,824.00 figure represents the present value of the loan at its maturity.
5
his home valued at just $174,500, property taxes of $2,007.78, and the deficiency of
$18,117.00 on his leased truck (ex. D).   He scheduled unsecured non-priority claims of1
$52,954.11 (ex. D).  He has no retained assets other than his home and vehicle
(covered by creditor 1.d).  He lists income for the past four years as follows: $46,000.00
from his 2008 employment, $44,761.00 from his 2007 employment, $12,028.00 from his
personal business in 2006, and just $5,314.00 from his 2006 employment (see ex. D).  
Applicant’s Chapter 7 package includes his certification that he received financial
counseling within 180 days of filing his bankruptcy petition, in accordance with the
Bankruptcy Code’s legal requirements (see ex. D).  A certificate of counseling by a
certified financial counselor (dated December 1, 2008) is included in Applicant’s
bankruptcy petition (ex. D).  The certificate of counseling recited that the counseling
session was conducted by internet and telephone and did not include a prepared debt
repayment plan.
Applicant is highly regarded by friends and coworkers (see ex. A; R.T., at 78-79).
These friends and coworkers are universal in their praise of Applicant as a model
employee and friend who is honest, trustworthy, and very responsible.  Each of his
documented references describe him as inspiring and motivating with excellent
character qualities (see ex. A).  He assures he lives within his means and drives an old
Pinto vehicle.
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
6
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.” Adjudication Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is a meritorious security guard for a defense contractor who
accumulated a number of delinquent debts over an eight-year period spanning 1999  and
2007 due to work-related injuries and lay-offs.  Some of these debts were resolved by a
Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2000.  The remaining debts are being resolved by a
7
second Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition.  Considered together, and without resolution, his
recurrent debt problems raise  security significant concerns.
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially
overextended as to indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide
by rules and regulations, which can raise questions about the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information, and place the person at risk
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant’s accumulation of
delinquent debts and his past inability to pay  these debts (except through bankruptcy)
warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines¶ DC
19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and ¶19©) “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to recurrent income shortages following
job-related injuries and ensuing employment disabilities and job layoffs. He resolved his
earlier round of delinquent debts with a successful bankruptcy discharge in 2000.  With a
family to support since 2003, recurrent layoffs through no fault of his own, and a
collapsing real estate market in his locality, he has had to struggle financially to cover his
living expenses.  As a result, he accumulated additional delinquent debts since 2000.
Two of Applicant’s largest listed debts involve deficiencies on vehicle acquisitions
(both purchased and leased) that he had acquired to enable him to perform delivery
services that did not materialize as anticipated in the face of a slumping economy in his
locality.  His largest debt involves his home that he has not been able to sell or refinance
on more favorable terms with his lender.
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant has initiated considerable efforts to resolve his
listed debts, but without any tangible success to date.  Afforded an opportunity to petition
for Chapter 7 relief following the hearing, Applicant documents filing a new Chapter 7
petition: this one in January 2009.  By all accounts this promises to be a no-asset case,
which should encounter no opposition. 
Given Applicant’s exhibited extenuating circumstances associated with his
recurrent job-related injuries and layoffs, the limited resources that have been available
to him and his family to address his accumulated debt delinquencies, and his
documented  responsible efforts to resolve his debts (first through repayment inquiries
and then through Chapter 7 bankruptcy), Applicant may rely on ¶ MC 20 (b), “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control
(e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a
death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances,” of the Guidelines for financial considerations.  Extenuating
circumstances continue to impact Applicant in his current efforts to resolve his
accumulated debts.  
8
Mitigation credit is also available to Applicant based on his credible proofs of good
faith repayment efforts and bankruptcy initiation when repayment initiatives failed to
produce any tangible payment results, age of the debts, and good-faith disputes.  Age of
the debts included in Applicant’s first bankruptcy is covered by two of the mitigating
conditions for financial considerations: ¶ MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago,
was so infrequent, or occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” has
applicability, while not dispositive.  ¶ MC (d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” has some applicability as well.
                                                       
While the counseling advice Applicant relied on from his bankruptcy attorney does
not technically fit the definition of counseling services under the Guidelines, he is to be
credited with earnestly looking for sources of financial advice with the resources
available to him.  He may take advantage, too, of¶ MC 20©), “the person has received or
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved or is under control.”  Based on the certified counseling he is
credited with receiving and his initiated efforts to date, prospects for his gaining important
insights in handling his finances in the future appear to be promising.
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases (as here).
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
debt accumulations, his documented steps taken to resolve them, and the responsibility
and trustworthiness he is credited with in his work and personal life as a struggling head
of a family, Applicant mitigates security concerns related to his proven debt
delinquencies.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
sub-paragraphs 1.a through 1.g of the SOR.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E 2(a) factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.g: FOR APPLICANT
9
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
