 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6, Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-02118
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, the government’s exhibits (Gx.),
Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.), and Applicant’s testimony, his request for a security clearance
is granted.
On September 18, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor, where he works as software engineer. After reviewing the results
of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) sent interrogatories to Applicant to obtain clarification of and/or
additional information about adverse information in his background.  After reviewing the1
results of the background investigation, including Applicant’s response to the
interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s2
access to classified information. On August 12, 2008, DOHA sent Applicant a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline E (personal conduct) and3
Guideline H (illegal drug involvement).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on October 1, 2008, and I convened the hearing on October 23, 2008.
The government presented two exhibits (Gx. 1 and 2). Applicant testified and presented
three witnesses. He also submitted 12 exhibits (Ax. A - L). DOHA received the transcript
of hearing (Tr.) on or about November 3, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant used marijuana between 2003
and at least January 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he has purchased marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.b);
that he used cocaine between 2006 and at least February 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.c); and that
he intentionally falsified his answer to e-QIP question 24 (Your Use of Illegal Drugs and
Drug Activity), wherein he stated that he used cocaine three times in August 2006, but
failed to disclose his most recent alleged use in February 2007 (SOR ¶ 2.a). Applicant
admitted with explanation the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c, but denied with
explanation the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. In addition to the facts entered through
Applicant’s admissions, I have made the following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 26 years old and employed since September 2007 as a software
engineer for a defense contractor. Applicant attended a well-known university from
August 2000 until May 2007, when he graduated with a B.S. degree in software
engineering. (Gx. 1) His college career spanned seven years because his major was a
five year program, his minor required courses that sometimes were unavailable to him
because of his major, and because he took one semester off to work. Applicant
graduated with a 3.2 GPA. (Tr. 57, 65 - 67)
Applicant used marijuana at least one hundred times between about October
2003 and January 2007. His last use occurred while he was home on break and driving
around with his brother. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 71 - 72) While the frequency of his marijuana
use varied, over time it averaged between one and two times each month. Applicant
also purchased small amounts of marijuana for personal use. He estimates he
purchased about one-eighth of an ounce of marijuana between 20 and 25 times
between 2003 and 2007. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2) Applicant also used cocaine three times
between 2006 and 2007. His last use occurred in February 2007. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 58)
 Directive. 6.3.4
3
Applicant used primarily while at school, although he and his brother and at least one
friend used drugs during Applicant’s visits home in 2007.
Applicant stopped using drugs in 2007 because he was graduating from college
and would be entering the workforce. He began contacting potential employers and
interviewing for jobs around April 2007. As part of the hiring process for a potential
Department of the Navy position, Applicant underwent drug screening in June 2007. All
tests were negative. (Ax. E) When he was hired for his current position in September
2007, he was not subjected to drug screening but declared his drug usage in his e-QIP.
In October 2008, in preparation for his hearing, Applicant obtained two urinalysis tests
that showed he had no illegal drugs in his bloodstream. (Ax. C and D) He has also
submitted a notarized statement of his intent to abstain from illegal drugs in the future
and acknowledging that his clearance will be automatically revoked should he use
drugs. (Ax. I) Finally, Applicant obtained his own psychological evaluation that showed
Applicant has not been and is not now dependent on illegal drugs. (Ax. J)
Applicant was interviewed about his drug use in December 2007 by a
government investigator. In addition to providing details about his use of marijuana, he
confirmed he had used cocaine three times as stated in his e-QIP. He also disclosed
that his first use of cocaine was in October 2006 and that his last use of cocaine was in
February 2007. In his e-QIP, he stated all of his cocaine use was in August 2006. There
was no discussion during the interview about the discrepancy between Applicant’s e-
QIP and his statement to the investigator. (Gx. 2)
Applicant was a good student in high school (Ax. L) as well as in college. He was
active in a variety of community and academic organizations. He is an excellent
employee, having received very high marks on his first annual performance appraisal.
(Ax. G) His co-workers and supervisors speak in glowing terms about his work
performance and his personal integrity. (Ax. A; Ax. B; Ax. H; Ax. K) They are aware that
Applicant “experimented” with drugs in college but do not appear to have detailed
knowledge about the extent of his drug use. Their recommendations of him are based
on their knowledge of his current lifestyle and job performance. (Tr. 21 - 46)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 15 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) and AG ¶ 24 (Guideline H - Illegal Drugs).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.7
Analysis
Personal Conduct.
A security concern may exist when, as stated in AG ¶ 15, available information
reflects
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
5
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
Here, it was alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a that Applicant was trying to mislead the
government about his drug use when he listed his last use of cocaine as having
occurred in August 2006 when it actually occurred in February 2007. Because
Applicant denied this allegation, the government bore the burden of “presenting
witnesses and other evidence to establish facts that have been controverted.”
(Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.14) As stated in the disqualifying condition
at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or
award fiduciary responsibilities;) in order for his answer to be disqualifying, it
must be shown Applicant knowingly provided false information about relevant
information in his background in an attempt to mislead the government about that
information. Applicant’s e-QIP statement about his cocaine use, viewed together
with his disclosure of his extensive marijuana use and purchases, shows that he
did not intend to deceive the government about his drug use. It would make little
sense for him to try to deceive the government about infrequent use of one illegal
drug when he disclosed in the same document that he used another illegal drug
on a frequent and extensive basis.
The government has not contested Applicant’s statement in the e-QIP that
he used cocaine three times. Further, it is not contested that his use of both
marijuana and cocaine ended at the same time. Thus, the scope of his use is not
in question. Nor was he confronted by the investigator with other information
about his cocaine use. Applicant’s e-QIP statement about the dates of his
cocaine use was an estimate that he clarified without apparent prompting during
his interview. The fact his e-QIP answer did not show cocaine use more recent
than August 2006 does not appear to have hindered the government’s
assessment of his drug involvement. In sum, all of the information bearing on
Applicant’s truthfulness and candor about his background shows he did not
intend to provide a false answer in his e-QIP as alleged. Accordingly, the security
concern alleged in SOR ¶ 2 is resolved for the Applicant.
Drug Involvement.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegations
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c that Applicant used marijuana extensively from 2003
until 2007, that he purchased marijuana for his personal use on several
occasions during that period, and that he used cocaine three times between
August 2006 and February 2007. Accordingly, the government’s information
raises a security concern addressed in AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
6
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions listed at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see definition [at AG ¶ 25(a)]) and AG
¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia). By contrast,
available information requires application of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶
26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and AG ¶ 26(b) (a demonstrated
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) dissociation from drug-using
associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were
used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation). As of the hearing, Applicant had not
used any illegal drug for about 20 months. His personal and professional circumstances
have changed so that he does not associate with his college friends who used drugs
and he does not live near the college and hometown where he used drugs. Applicant
stopped using drugs before he left school and, by all accounts, lives a mature, sober
and responsible lifestyle. While I do not agree that his drug use was “experimental” as
he has argued, his use was confined to the context of his college lifestyle from which he
has moved on. 
I have considered all of the information bearing on the allegations under this
guideline, including positive information about his current circumstances, his stated
intent to not use drugs in the future under pain of immediate revocation, the negative
drug test results and the favorable clinical evaluation of his drug history. I conclude
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by the government’s information
about his drug involvement. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and H. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant used illegal
drugs willingly and extensively for a period of about four years until he was 24 years old.
He did so almost exclusively within the context of his college career, which was longer
7
than most for a variety of legitimate reasons. His drug involvement ended of his own
volition before he left school as he knew such conduct would be incompatible with
starting a software engineering career. As required of all applicants, he has been candid
about his drug involvement and I found his demeanor at hearing to be sincere and
credible. The positive information about his current circumstances supports a
conclusion that he fully appreciates the security significance of his past conduct and that
he is unlikely to use drugs in the future. A fair and commonsense evaluation of this
record shows that the security concerns about Applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information have been satisfied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
 Subparagraph 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Request for a security clearance
is granted.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
