1 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                      )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01282
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
    
For Government: Jeff A.. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On July 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant
to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 7, 2008, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on September 23, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing
on December 2, 2008.  A hearing was held on December 2, 2008, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of three exhibits; Applicant relied on two witnesses (including himself)
and one exhibit.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on December 10, 2008.  Based upon
2 
a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified
information is denied.
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of 17
documents:  Background Note: Iran, U.S. Department of State (March 2008); Country
Specific Information, Iran, U.S. Department of State (July 2008); Travel Warning, Iran,
U.S. Department of State (January 2008); Country Reports on Human Rights Practices -
2007, Iran, U.S. Department of State  (March 2008); Country Reports on Terrorism,
Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, U.S. Department of State (April
2008); Iran: State Sponsors of Terrorism, U.S. Department of State (September 2008);
The President of the U.S., Continuation of the National Emergency with Respect to Iran
(November 2006); President George Bush, Message to the Congress of the U.S. (March
2008); Iran: Nuclear Intentions and Capabilities, National Intelligence Estimate
(November 2007); Annual Threat Assessment of the Director of National Intelligence for
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (February 2008); William J. Burns, Under
Sec. For Political Affairs, U.S. Department of State, Testimony Before the Senate
Foreign Relations Comm., the Strategic Challenges Posed by Iran (July 2008); U.S.
Maintains Pressure on Iran (March 2008); UN Security Council Resolution 103 on Iran’s
Nuclear Program, U.S. Department of State (April 2008); Iranian Pleads Guilty to
Attempted Exportation of Arms and Money Laundering, U.S. Attorney’s Office (April
2005); New York Man Sentenced for Illegally Exporting Stolen NBC Night Vision Lenses
for Delivery to Iran, (August 2005); Singapore Businessman Convicted of Secretly
Diverting U.S. Military and Civilian Aircraft Parts to the Islamic Republic of Iran (May
2006); Pennsylvania Company Fined for Export Violations Involving Iran, UAE and Syria
(May 2006).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292, at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. April 12,
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875, at 2 (App. Bd. October 12, 2006)(citing ISCR Case No.
02-18668, at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)).  Administrative notice is appropriate for
noticing facts or government reports that are well known.  See Stein, Administrative Law,
Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause shown, administrative notice was
granted with respect to the above-named background reports addressing the geopolitical
situation in Iran.  Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves,
consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did  not foreclose
Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the
reports addressing Iran’s current state.  
Procedural Issues and Rulings
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record with written character endorsements.  For good cause shown, Applicant was
granted seven days to December 8, 2008, to supplement the record.  The Government
was afforded two days to respond.  Within the time permitted, Applicant faxed
endorsements from his chief executive officer (CEO) and facility clearance officer (FSO),
which were, in turn, e-mailed to me. These submissions are admitted as Applicant’s
exhibits B and C. 
3 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged to (a) have an aunt and uncle who are
citizens and residents of Iran, (b) have an aunt who is employed as an accounting
manager for an Iranian government department, ©) have an uncle who is retired from the
same Iranian government department, (d) have five maternal aunts who are citizens and
residents of Iran, (e) to have told an authorized DoD investigator in March 2007 that he
could only be vulnerable to blackmail or coercion by foreign interests if his parents and
/or brothers were in danger while traveling to Iran, and (f) to have told the same DoD
investigator that he has not renounced his dual citizenship with Iran due to possible
threats to his aunts and uncles currently residing in Iran. 
For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted some of the allegations in the SOR
with explanations, and denied others.  He admitted to applying for and holding an Iranian
passport to enable him to travel and visit his family in Iran on the two occasions alleged
in the SOR, and only because Iranian authorities would not permit him to exit Iran
without a valid Iranian passport (his was expired).  He admitted to using his Iranian
passport to enable him to enter and exit Iran, fearing that if he showed his U.S. passport
it could be confiscated, and renewing his expired Iranian passport in 2003 to ensure his
getting out of Iran.  Applicant admitted, too, that his father-in-law and mother-in-law are
citizens and residents of Iran, but claimed that it is unlikely that his in-laws would be
pressured by Iranian authorities, and that if they were, he would resist any pressures and
immediately report the event to his FSO and seek assistance from the proper authorities.
Applicant denied exercising dual citizenship, claiming that neither Iran nor the U.S.
recognize dual citizenship, since they do not have diplomatic relations with one another.
Applicant provided additional background material about his emigration to the U.S., his
educational pursuits in the U.S., his work history and professional reputation he enjoys
within his company, and his maintained familial relationships.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old information technology manager for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings
follow.
Applicant’s background
Applicant was born and raised in Iran and attended private schools there.  He
immigrated to the U.S. in 1978 at the age of 16 to pursue his education (R.T., at 72).  At
the time, Iran was an important ally of the U.S., and Applicant considered U.S.-Iran
relations to be good (R.T., at 73-74).   Shortly after his arrival in the U.S., he began to
notice increasing anti-American demonstrations in Iran in the unfolding revolution in Iran
that would culminate in the toppling of the Shah in 1979 (R.T., at 75-78).  After
completing his high school education in the U.S., Applicant studied in U.S. colleges and
received a bachelor of arts degree in international relations in 1986 (see ex. 1; R.T., at
82-83). 
4 
Applicant applied for and was granted permanent residence status in 1986 (R.T.,
at 81-82).  He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April 1992 (see ex. 1; R.T., at 82).
He obtained a U.S. passport in October 2000, and has continually possessed a valid one
thereafter.  Applicant renewed his expired Iranian passport in August 1997, once he
learned he would need one to travel to Iran (R.T., at 105).  He had permitted his Iranian
passport to expire after obtaining his U.S. passport, and then subsequently renewing it.
See infra. 
Applicant’s  wife (W) was born in Iran in 1979, and was raised by Iranian parents
who are citizens of Iran and still reside in that country.  Applicant met W in 1997 while on
a trip to Turkey to visit relatives (R.T., at 40-41).  Applicant returned to Iran (for the first
time since immigrating to the U.S.) in September 1999 to visit his own parents and meet
W’s parents (R.T., at 45-46, 87-88).  Concerned about possible conscription into the
Iranian Army as a dual national, he paid $1,000.00 to buy out his military obligation
before embarking on his trips to Iran (R.T., at 87).
When traveling to Iran in 1999, Applicant used his Iranian passport out of
perceived necessity:  He was advised that he could not enter and exit the country without
a valid Iranian passport, irrespective of whether he was also a U.S. citizen who
possessed a valid U.S. passport (see response; R.T. at 89-90).  Iran and the U.S. have
no diplomatic relations, and Applicant was impressed that Iran does not recognize an
Iranian’s citizen’s dual citizenship with another country (R.T., at 90).  Nevertheless,
Applicant does not consider himself to be a dual citizen, but rather an exclusive citizen of
the U.S. (R.T., at 91, 95-96)
W immigrated to the U.S. in November 2000 on a fiancé visa (R.T., at 41) that
required she marry within 90 days of her arrival in the U.S. (R.T., at 41-42).  W and
Applicant married within 30 days of her arrival, and W became a naturalized U.S. citizen
in 2005 (R.T., at 43).  Only Applicant’s parents and brother attended this wedding
ceremony (R.T., at 55-56); W’s parents remained in Iran (R.T., at 55).  W has no political
affiliations (R.T., at 47).  Her parents have since applied for immigration to the U.S. and
recently were interviewed at the U.S. Embassy in Dubai (R.T., at 51-52).  W expects her
parents’ visas to be approved soon
Applicant and W returned to Iran in June 2003 to exchange their marriage vows in
a formal wedding (R.T., at 54-55).  They each relied on their Iranian passports for entry
and exit into Iran.  When Applicant showed his Iranian passport to Iranian airport
authorities upon their arrival in Iran, he was told his passport had expired and would
need to be renewed before he could depart from Iran (R.T., at 117-18).  He showed the
authorities his U.S. passport as well and was told it could not be used to facilitate his exit
from the country; even though he was a dual U.S. citizen (R.T.,  at 93-94).  To use his
U.S. passport would require an Iranian visa, which Iranian authorities do not provide to
its Iranian citizens (R.T., at 94, 119-22). So, Applicant  renewed his Iranian passport
while in Iran and used it in his return to the U.S.  Applicant documents the surrender of
his Iranian passport to his FSO in December 2008 (see ex. A; R.T., at 97).   He hedged
some on renouncing his Iranian citizenship. 
5 
Applicant would prefer to keep his Iranian citizenship to make it easier for him to
return to Iran should the need arise (R.T., at 91).  Expressly afforded an opportunity to
consider an affirmative renunciation of his Iranian citizenship after the hearing and
document his intentions, Applicant did not provide any post-hearing documentation.  
 W’s parents are citizens and residents of Iran (R.T., at 49-50).  Her father is a
mechanical engineer for a publicly owned cement company (R.T., at 49).  She does not
know whether it is owned by the Iranian government.  Her mother is a homemaker (R.T.,
at 50).  Besides her parents, W has a brother who lives in the Ukraine.  W’s parents have
recently taken their first steps towards eventually immigrating to the U.S. and recently
were  interviewed at the U.S. Embassy in Dubai (R.T., at 51-52, 111).  Before they can
obtain visas to travel to the U.S., however, they must complete another U.S. interview
(R.T., at 100).   While W expects her parents’ visas to be approved soon, she could
provide  any specific time estimates for an approval date (R.T., at 60).  Applicant and W
love W’s parents and maintain regular contact with them; specifically, W’s talks with her
parents monthly, while Applicant communicates with them only once every three months
on average  (R.T., at 61-62).  Both are committed to protecting W’s parents (R.T., at 63).
They both expect W’s parents to emigrate to the U.S. if and when visas are approved for
them (R.T., at 60-61).  
In 2007, W made a trip to Iran (without Applicant) to visit her parents who had
been pressing her to come see them (R.T., at 58, 98-99).  On this trip, W used her
retained Iranian passport to enter and exit Iran; there were no other viable options
available to her (R.T., at 65, 98).  This passport is scheduled to expire soon, and
Applicant will need to renew the passport should she ever elect to return to Iran (R.T., at
65-66). She made no public vow to surrender her Iranian passport, and retains the option
to renew it should circumstances warrant that she return to Iran.  
Neither Applicant nor W are aware of any potential pressures or coercive
measures that could be applied to bear on any of Applicant/W’s family members residing
in the U.S. (his immediate family), or in Iran (W’s family).  Applicant assures that should
he become aware of any pressures or coercion on any of his family members, he would
resist the same and notify his FSO (R.T., at 101-02).  If called to arms in a hypothetical
war with Iran, Applicant would be willing to bear arms against Iran in behalf of the U.S.
(R.T., at 110). 
Applicant has never served in the Iranian military or voted in an Iranian election.
He has no assets in Iran and considerable real estate (valued near $800,000.00) and
other assets (including shares in his company valued at around $9,000.00 and a
retirement account valued about $30,000.00) in the U.S. (R.T., at 107).  He estimates his
U.S.-based net worth to be around $900,000.00 (R.T., at 108).  Applicant has no vested
educational, medical, or retirement benefits in Iran and no contingency plans to obtain
any.   His parents immigrated to the U.S. a number of years ago and currently reside in
the U.S.   His only sibling is his brother who immigrated to the U.S. with Applicant in
1979 and (like Applicant) became a naturalized citizen of the U.S.  His brother (who is
divorced with no children) continues to reside in the U.S. (R.T., at 109).  Applicant has
had nothing to do with the Iranian government since immigrating to this country and has
never worked for the Iranian government in any capacity.  Applicant does have a living
6 
aunt (contacts unclear) who resides in Iran, and a number of distant cousins “here and
there” (R.T., at 113).  To the best of his knowledge, none of these cousins have any
employment or relationships with the Iranian government (R.T., at 114).
Political and economic background of Iran
According to official U.S. State Department documents, Iran is an Islamic republic
that is constitutionally constructed and has a head of state, an elected president and
counsel of ministers, a legislative body composed of a 290-member Islamic consultative
assembly, and a judiciary (see Background Note on Iran, supra, at 5).  Throughout its
long history, Iran has been ruled by numerous dynasties.  Following a nationalist uprising
against the Shah in 1905, Iran enacted a limited constitution in 1906.  Two years later, oil
was discovered, and Iran began its steady ascension  to a modern, secularized political
system.  Under the reign of Reza Shah Pahlavi (an Iranian officer, who seized control of
the government in 1921), Iran enacted policies of modernization and secularization,
established a central government and reasserted its authority over the tribes and
provinces (see Background Note on Iran, id., at 3).  During the Allied occupation of
western Iran in 1941, the Shah was forced to abdicate and was succeeded by his son,
Mohammad Reza Pahlavi (see Background Note on Iran, id.).
Domestic turmoil swept Iran in 1978 as the result of heated religious and political
opposition to the Shah’s rule and political/economic programs (especially the Shah’s
internal security and intelligence service).  And in February 1979, exiled religious leader
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini returned from France to direct a revolution resulting in a
new, theocratic republic guided by Islamic principles.  Iran’s 1979 constitution allocates
the duties of the chosen religious leaders and governing bodies in such a way that their
duties often overlap.  Legislative issues on which the Majles (Iran’s legislative governing
body) and the Council of Guardians (making up Iran’s religious leadership) fail to agree
are resolved by the Council of Expediency (a body created by Ayatollah Khomeini in
1988).  Following the Ayatollah’s death in June 1989, the Assembly of Experts (an
elected body of senior clerics) chose the outgoing president of the republic (Ali
Khamenei) to be the Ayatollah’s successor as national religious leader (see Background
Note on Iran, id., at 4).
Iran’s post-revolution has been marked by an eight-year war with Iraq, internal
political struggles and unrest, and economic disorder.  Its post-revolution regime has
been associated with human rights violations and political turmoil, including the seizure
of the U.S. Embassy in November 1979 by Iranian militants and the hostage taking of 52
Americans (see Background Note on Iran, supra, at 6).  Succeeding power struggles
have severely eroded the center and left of Iran’s political institutions, leaving only the
clergy.  Both human rights and state sponsored terrorism remain serious problems in
Iran and the Middle East.  According to State Department reports, Iran’s Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps and Ministry of Intelligence and Security Forces have been
directly involved in terrorist acts, and continue to support Palestinian groups with
leadership cadres in Syria and Lebanese Hizballah to use terrorism in pursuit of their
goals (see Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2007, supra, at 1-5; Country
Reports on terrorism , Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, supra, at 1-2).
State Department reports claim Iranian authorities continue to provide military support
7 
and guidance to some Iraqi militant groups that target Coalition and Iraqi security forces
and Iraqi civilians (see Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of
Terrorism Overview, id.).
 Long estranged from the West, Khomeini’s regime charted regional goals that
curtail the presence of the U.S. and other outside powers in the region.  Iran’s Islamic
foreign policy continues to stress (1) vehement anti-U.S. and anti-Israel positions, (2)
elimination of outside influence in the region, (3) support for Muslim political movements
abroad, (4) critical support to non-state terrorist groups, and (5) considerable increase in
diplomatic contacts with developing countries (see U.S. Dept. of State Background Note
on Iran, supra; Iran: Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, supra, at 1-16;
Country Reports on Terrorism 2007, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview,
supra, at 1-2).  In this vein, Iran maintains regular diplomatic and commercial relations
with Russia and the former Soviet republics.  Of special U.S. concern has been Russian
sales of military equipment and technology to Iran (see  U.S. Dept. of State Background
Note on Iran, id., at 8).
Potential obstacles to improved relations between Iran and the U.S. include
Iranian efforts to acquire technology that could be used to develop nuclear weapons and
other weapons of mass destruction; its support for and involvement in international
terrorism; its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and its
dismal human rights record (see Statement of President George W. Bush, Message to
the Congress of the U.S., supra; President of the U.S., Continuation of the National
Emergency with Respect to Iran, supra; National Intelligence Estimate, Iran, Nuclear
Intentions and Capabilities, supra; Annual Threat Assessment of the Director of National
Intelligence for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, supra. 
The U.S. response to Iran’s problematic policies and behavior has been to try to
convince Iran to abandon its nuclear weapons ambitions, cease its support  of terrorist
groups, and begin the process of forging constructive partnerships in the region.
Looking to the future, the U.S. has made it abundantly clear to the Iranian government
that Iran has an historic opportunity to restore the confidence of the international
community in its nuclear intentions and provide its own people important access to
technology, nuclear energy, education, and foreign investment (see Testimony of Under
Secretary William J. Burns, The Strategic Challenges Posed by Iran, supra, at 4-8).  This
dual track strategy of the U.S. is broad based and is designed to build cooperative
relationships with Iran and promote Iran’s relationship with the international community.
The strategy has yet to produce any material results, and remains a work in progress. 
State Department country reports cite significant restrictions on the right of
citizens to change their government, summary executions (minors included),
disappearances, torture and severe punishments (such as amputations and flogging),
violence by vigilante groups with ties to the government, poor prison conditions, arbitrary
arrest and detention (including prolonged solitary confinement), lack of judicial
independence and fair public trials, political prisoners and detainees, excessive
government violence in Kurdish areas and unknown groups in Arab regions of the
country, severe restrictions on civil liberties and freedom of religion, official corruption,
government transparency deficiencies, legal and societal discrimination against women,
8 
ethnic and religious minorities, trafficking in persons, incitement of anti-Semitism, severe
restriction of workers’ rights, and child labor (see Iran, Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices-2007, supra, at 1-24). 
Addressing reports of human rights violations in Iran, the UN General Assembly
adopted a human rights resolution on Iran in December 2005 that expressed serious
concern at the continuing use of torture in Iran and cruel, trafficking in persons, inhuman
and degrading treatment or punishment, such as floggings and amputations, as well as
public executions (see Iran, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, supra,
id., at 3-24). 
Even though Iran’s constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, these
practices remain common. Its regular and paramilitary security forces that share
responsibility with Iranian police for law enforcement and maintaining order are reported
to have committed numerous, serious human rights abuses in recent years (see Iran,
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices-2007, Iran, supra.). Security forces
responsible for arrest and detention often do not inform family members of a prisoner’s
welfare and locations, and often deny visits by family members and counsel.
State Department travel warnings urge U.S. citizens to carefully consider the risks
of travel to Iran (see Travel Warning, Iran, 2008, supra), a country with which the U.S.
does not currently have diplomatic or consular relations.  Citing Iran’s non-recognition of
dual citizenship and general declination to permit the Swiss to provide protective
services for U.S. citizens who are also Iranian nationals, Americans who travel to Iran
are strongly encouraged to register through the State Department’s travel registration
website (see Travel Warning, Iran, 2008, id.).
Dual citizens residing or visiting in Iran are subject to all Iranian laws affecting
U.S. citizens, as well as laws applicable to persons of Iranian nationality that impose
special obligations on citizens of that country (see Travel Warning, Iran, 2008, id.; Iran,
Country Specific Information, supra, at 1-2).  Dual nationals remain subject to Iran’s
military service requirements and can be conscripted into service while on Iranian soil.
While such conscripted service seems unlikely to confront Applicant, given his age,
longstanding U.S. citizenship, and avowed intent not to return to Iran, it remains a
possibility.  Reports indicate, too, that Iranian security personnel may at times place
foreign visitors under surveillance, and even arrest or detain Iranian-Americans
suspected of “acting against national security”  (see Iran, Country Reports on Human
Rights Practices-2007, supra, at 5-6; Iran, Country Specific Information,  id., at 2-3). 
 Because the Iranian government does not recognize dual nationality and will treat
U.S.-Iranian dual nationals as Iranian citizens, regardless of their U.S. naturalization
status, dual nationals who enter Iran only on a U.S. passport risk detention absent
persuasive proof of their formal renunciation or loss of their Iranian citizenship (see Iran,
Country Specific Information, Iran, supra,  at 1-2).  Applicant and W each manifest
considerable awareness of Iran’s historical treatment of dual nationals, and have taken
measures to accommodate Iranian border practices through their use of Iranian
passports to enter and exit the country (see ex. 3; R.T., at 65, 93-94).
9 
Character assessments
Applicant has received excellent endorsements from his company’s management.
His CEO describes Applicant as a dependable manager who has never given him
reason to doubt his trustworthiness (see ex. B; R.T., at 103).  Applicant’s FSO
characterizes Applicant as trustworthy and conscientious and a valued manager since
joining his company in 2003 (see ex. C).  The FSO expressed his familiarity with the oath
of U.S. citizenship that Applicant took at his naturalization ceremony in 2003 (ex. C).
This oath includes a renunciation of allegiance and fidelity to any foreign state or
sovereign and a corresponding commitment to support and defend the Constitution and
laws of the U.S. This recited oath does not include any expressed renunciation of foreign
citizenship as a condition of acceptance of U.S. citizenship (see ex. C).  Both Applicant
and W are in agreement that Iranian recognition of their status as U.S. citizens,
exclusively, requires an express act of renunciation by Applicant.
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
administrative judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in
E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended to
assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
 Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may
be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the
interests of the United States.  See Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), ¶ 9.
                       Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
the individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication under the this
Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign country in
10 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is
associated with a risk of terrorism (see Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6).
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue
an Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis
Born and raised in Iran, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1992.  He
met his wife (a dual citizen with Iran) in 1997, and married her in 1999.  Security
concerns focus on Applicant’s exercise of dual citizenship with Iran through his
possession and use of an Iranian passport.  Security concerns are also directed at the
citizenship and residency status of W’s parents who are Iranian citizens residing in Iran.
Applicant and his wife and family have deep roots in Iran, a country historically known to
practice terrorism, and to exercise repression and human rights abuses against its own
citizens, as well as dual citizens who visit the country.
Foreign preference issues
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite
critical considerations over acts indicating a preference or not for the interests of the
foreign country over the interests of the U.S.  The issues, as such, raise concerns over
Applicant’s  preference for a foreign country over the U.S.
11 
By virtue of his birth to parents of Iranian descent, Applicant was endowed with
Iranian citizenship, which could be renounced by his expressed intention or actions.
This, Applicant  has never done, out of love for his native country (not its government).
Since becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant has taken no actions and exercised
no Iranian privileges that can be fairly characterized as active indicia of dual citizenship,
save for his limited use of his Iranian passport when traveling to Iran to visit his spouse
and her family.  He has not voted in Iranian elections or served in the Iranian military. 
By all accounts, all of Applicant’s assets are located in the U.S., where he has
resided since 1979.  He has accepted no preferential educational, medical or other
benefits from Iran (save for renewing and using his Iranian passport) since becoming a
naturalized U.S. citizen.  Nor has he ever performed or attempted to perform duties, or
otherwise acted so as to serve the interests of Iran in preference to the interests of the
U.S. since becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen.  
Because Applicant possessed and used his Iranian passport on several occasions
before surrendering it to his FSO in 2008, the Government may apply disqualifying
condition (DC) ¶ 10(a), which provides:
exercise of any right, privilege or obligations of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member.  This includes but is not limited to:
 (1) possession of a current foreign passport;
 (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in                 
            another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
(7) voting in a foreign election.  
However, Applicant’s use of his Iranian passport was limited to the three times he
used it to enter and exit Iran in 1999 and 2003.  He never voted in an Iranian election
and never served in the Iranian military.  He has never sought to hold political office in
Iran or used his Iranian citizenship to protect his financial or business interests.  His
demonstrated loyalties and commitments have consistently been directed to the U.S.
and its institutions and core values. 
By relinquishing his Iranian passport, Applicant has complied with the mitigation
requirements of MC ¶ 11 (e), “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the
12 
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated,” of AG ¶ 18. And while his
surrendering his Iranian passport to his assistant FSO does not automatically mitigate
any past use of the passport to enter and exit Iran, his recited limited use of the passport
is insufficient by itself to demonstrate Applicant’s preference for Iran over the U.S.
Failure to satisfy a mitigating condition may be taken into account when
assessing an applicant’s overall claim of extenuation, mitigation, or changed
circumstances, but may not be turned into a disqualifying condition.  See ISCR Case No.
01-02270 (Appeal Bd. Aug. 29, 2003).  That Applicant may wish to keep his Iranian
citizenship out of love for his birth country is not sufficient reason either to preclude him
from mitigating security concerns over his holding dual citizenship, if those rights do not
entail his exacting preferential retirement privileges from Iran.  
Whole person precepts favor Applicant’s preference for the U.S. over Iran.  He is
a U.S. citizen by birth and has always demonstrated his loyalty and commitments to the
U.S.  His principal financial interests are situated in the U.S.  And his time spent in Iran
on his two acknowledged visits were each relatively brief and devoted to visits to W and
her family.   The high praise he is accorded by his program manager and FSO reinforce
his credible assurances that he is a patriotic U.S. citizen dedicated to protecting U.S.
security interests.  
Overall, Applicant persuades that his preference is with the U.S.  He satisfies his
proof burden in several ways: demonstrated lack of any prior exercise of any privileges
associated with his Iranian citizenship, save for his limited use of his Iranian passport.
Applicant absolves himself of foreign preference concerns  and carries his evidentiary
burden on the presented issue of whether his preference lies with his adopted country
(U.S.) or his native country (Iran).  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d of Guideline C.
Foreign influence issues
The Government also urges security concerns over risks associated with
Applicant’s wife (a naturalized U.S. citizen who retains dual citizenship with Iran and an
Iranian passport)  and her parents, who are citizens of Iran and reside there.  Key to the
Government’s foreign influence concerns are W’s possession and use of an Iranian
passport to visit her parents in Iran. This close relationship between Applicant, W and
her parents makes them potentially vulnerable to coercion and non-coercive measures
because of where W’s parents live and her travel access to them.  Because Iranian
government military and intelligence authorities have a history of violating Iranian and
international laws and diplomatic protocols, they are more likely to use improper and/or
illegal means to obtain classified information in Applicant’s possession or control through
W and her parents. 
By virtue of the Iranian citizenship and residency of W’s parents in Iran and W’s
personal access to them through her use and retention of an Iranian passport, they
present potential heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition  (DC) 7(a),
“contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
13 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,”
of the Adjudication Guidelines for foreign influence. The citizenship/residence status of
these family members in Iran pose potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks
of undue foreign influence that could compromise sensitive or classified information
under Applicant's possession and/or control. 
Although none of W’s family have any identified Iranian prior military or
government service, or other demonstrated links to the Iranian government, they remain
vulnerable to potential compromise and coercion for so long as they reside in Iran.  Were
either of these family members to placed in a hostage situation, Applicant could be
subject to conflicts over ensuring his family’s well being and protecting classified
information. For this reason, DC 7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information,” is applicability to
the facts of this case.  True, none of W’s immediate family residing in Iran have any
history to date of being subjected to any coercion or influence.  These historical
antecedents do limit the severity of a conflict situation.  However, the absence of any
past coercive measures taken by Iranian authorities does not absolve Applicant from
coercive risks in the future given Iran’s rich history of hostage taking and abusive
measures taken against its own citizens.
Still, upon fully considering Applicant’s explanations about his wife’s strong
relationships with her parents, W’s own accounts of her visits and regular contacts with
her parents residing in Iran, and W’s continued access to her parents through her
retained Iranian passport, risks of undue foreign influence on Applicant, his wife and her
family members residing in Iran, cannot be safely discounted.  Applicant/W’s contacts
with W’s parents are significant and ongoing (though quite understandable), and are
clearly of the magnitude that could make them subject to a heightened security risk of
pressure or compromise under Guideline B.
The Adjudicative Guidelines governing security clearances do not dictate per se
results or mandate particular outcomes for any chosen set of guidelines covering risks of
foreign influence.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be
weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing.  Personnel
security assessments necessarily embrace similar risk assessments under the new
Directive guidelines for assessing foreign influence risks and concerns associated with
the individual's having family abroad, which include both common sense assessments of
country risks and information available from public sources. 
Unlike the old Adjudicative Guidelines, though, the new ones do take into account
the country’s demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in
gauging whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create
a heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign
regime involved do matter. 
14 
As demonstrated, Iran has long been known to be a repressive country, who has
committed numerous, serious human rights abuses in recent years, and shown little
respect for the rule of law.  The U.S. has no diplomatic relations with Iran.  Iran remains
a country on the State Department ‘s state terrorist list, and one with a known history of
hostage taking and human rights abuses of wide magnitude and scope. Iran is
consistently characterized as a country hostile to American political and security interests
since the 1979 fall of the Shah of Iran and ensuing establishment of an Islamic republic
with close ties and support to non-state terrorist groups.  Based on reported terrorist
activities in the country and in other countries in the region with support links to Iran, Iran
cannot be deemed to provide an acceptable political and security environment for
managing hostage risks. Without such assurances, no reasonable conclusions can be
reached that Applicant’s wife (for so long as she holds for potential use her Iranian
passport) and parents are not in a position to be exploited by Iranian authorities.
Based on Applicant’s case-specific circumstances, MC 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.”  is not available to Applicant.  Neither Applicant nor his wife and parents residing in
Iran can be characterized as sufficiently insulated from potential pressures and influence
from the Iranian government and its military and intelligence officials to warrant
application of this mitigating condition. 
 Of some benefit to Applicant is MC 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group,
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty and
commitment to the U.S. and its institutions and values and the absence of any history of
coercive measures taken against any of W’s family members are well supported in this
administrative record and Applicant’s very limited contacts and ties with these same
aunts and uncles
Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty, patriotism, and professional commitments to
the U.S., while considerable, are not enough to neutralize all potential conflicts that are
implicit in his relationships with his spouse and his wife’s parents.  MC 8(c), “contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” has some
applicability based on Applicant’s own infrequent contacts with his wife’s parents residing
in Iran.  Application of MC 8(c) is necessarily very limited, though, because of the
frequent communications W maintains with her parents residing in Iran. 
One other mitigating condition has mixed application to Applicant’s situation.  MC
8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements regarding
the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or organizations
from a foreign country,” has some prospective value based on Applicant’s assurances of
reporting his travel plans to Iran, and his long absence from the country (no visits since
15 
2003).  But there is really no documented record of Applicant’s prior reporting of his
contacts with members of his wife’s family, respectively, to warrant any more than
minimal consideration at this time.  Historically, our Appeal Board has accorded very little
weight to stated intentions to take corrective steps in a hypothetical set of circumstances,
absent record evidence that an applicant has acted similarly under comparable
circumstances.  See ISCR Case No. 07-00029, at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007); ISCR Case
No. 06-24575, at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).
Given that Iran remains a hostile country with no diplomatic relations with the
U.S., and one that lacks a secure infrastructure and track record for respecting human
rights and the rule of law, the risk of a pressure or influence situation involving an
immediate or extended family member of Applicant’s cannot be safely discounted.  Iran’s
strategic location and political character, W’s retention of her Iranian passport, and the
residency of her parents in Iran, all combine to create security concerns over risks of
direct or indirect pressure or influence of a family member of Applicant’s by Iranian
authorities.
Security concerns over W’s possession of an Iranian passport and strong
Applicant/W concerns over the well being of W’s parents residing in Iran are significant
and promise to remain as long as (a) the parents continue to reside in Iran and (b)  Iran
remains a country hostile to geopolitical U.S. interests. These concerns are not
sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to
withstand risks of exploitation and pressure attributable to his familial relationships and
contacts with his wife’s parents domiciled  in Iran.
Whole person assessment does not permit mitigation of Applicant’s exposure to
potential painful choices over ensuring the safety and well being of W and her parents
and protecting U.S. national security interests.  To his credit, Applicant is a fully
Americanized U.S. citizen with demonstrated strong loyalties and commitments to U.S.
core values.  The trust he has inspired with his manager and FSO and promises to report
any Iranian pressures or contacts to his FSO are encouraging indicators he cannot be
pressured or coerced. 
After carefully considering Applicant’s familial connections in the U.S. and Iran
and the risks of Applicant submission to Iranian pressures should W and/or her parents
be pressured or coerced by Iranian authorities at some time in the foreseeable future,
the weighted risks of a compromise remain too substantial to become manageable ones
at this time under a whole person assessment of all of the critical circumstances
considered in this case.
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's relations with
his wife and their respective family members residing in Iran are insufficiently mitigated
to permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue
influence attributable to his wife’s status with her Iranian passport and familial
relationships with her parents in Iran.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to
the allegations covered by sub-paragraphs 1.a and 1.b of Guideline B. 
16 
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in E2(a) of the Adjudicative Process of
Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE); FOR APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.d: FOR APPLICANT
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a and 1.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusions
 In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security
clearance.   Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
