 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-00967 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on August 31, 2007. On August 15 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 26, 2008, and September 29, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed on October 27, 2008. The case was assigned to me on November 17, 2008. 
On December 3, 2008, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for 
December 17, 2008. The case was heard on that date. Appellant did not receive the 
notice within 15 days as required by the Directive. He waived the 15 day notice 
requirement. (Tr at 10.) The Government offered five exhibits which were admitted as 
 
2 
 
 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5. The Applicant testified and offered nine exhibits which 
were admitted without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - I. The record was held 
open until January 9, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents.  He 
timely submitted a five page document that was admitted as AE J. The transcript was 
received on December 23, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed as a mail carrier with his 
company since October 2006. He has a high school diploma and some college. He is 
married and has four children, ages 20, 17, 15, and 11. (Tr at 5-6, 55, 58-59; Gov 1.)  
 
On August 31, 2007, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) in order to apply for a security clearance. Applicant 
answered “No” in response to question 28(a) “In the last 7 years, have you been over 
180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” He also answered “No” in response to question 
28(b) “Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” (Gov 1.)  
 
A subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant has the following 
delinquent accounts: a $217 account placed for collection in February 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.a: 
Gov 2 at 5; Gov 4 at 8; Gov 5 at 2); a $19 account placed for collection in March 2003 
(SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 2 at 4; Gov 4 at 6); an $851 department store account placed for 
collection in January 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 2 at 4; Gov 4 at 5; Gov 5 at 2); a $4,031 
credit union loan charged off in October 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 3; Gov 4 at 4; Gov 5 
at 2);  a $5,165 balance owed from an automobile repossession that was charged off in 
January 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 2 at 4; Gov 4 at 7; Gov 5 at 2); and a $67 account 
placed for collection in March 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 2 at 3; Gov 4 at 3; Gov 5 at 2). 
 
Additional delinquent accounts consist of a $336 medical account placed for 
collection in February 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 4 at 5; Gov 5 at 1); a $490 account placed 
for collection in February 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 4 at 5; Gov 5 at 1); a $1,825 account 
placed for collection in December 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 2 at 4; Gov 4 at 6); a $493 
medical account placed for collection in May 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.j: Gov 4 at 4; Gov 5 at 1); a 
$615 credit card account placed for collection in October 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.k: Gov 2 at 4; 
Gov 4 at 5; Gov 5 at 1); a $166 utility account placed for collection in October 2007 
(SOR ¶ 1.l: Gov 2 at 4; Gov 5 at 1); and a $665 account placed for collection in 
February 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.m: Gov 5 at 1). 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by several periods of unemployment 
he experienced beginning in 2003.  In December 2003, he was laid off from a job at a 
tire factory. He had worked for the company for 14 ½ years. He was unemployed until 
July 2004. He was hired to be a grass cutter. His pay did not match his income from his 
 
3 
 
 
previous job.  In 2006, he was hired by a defense contractor. On June 8, 2006, he was 
laid off for about a month. He was rehired by the same defense contractor. He worked 
for about three weeks and was laid off again.  He found a job two weeks later with 
another defense contractor.  He was hired by his current employer in October 2006. (Tr 
at 22-26, 39-40, 44-45; Gov 1; AE B.) 
 
Applicant has been married for 10 years. His wife is unable to work due to health 
issues. He occasionally helps out his wife’s aunt financially. She has eight children. One 
of the children is getting fitted for braces on his legs. (Tr at 55-57, 59-61.) 
 
At hearing, Applicant showed that he entered into a debt settlement agreement 
with a company who specializes in settling debts. The agreement began in August 
2008. He has made five monthly payments so far to the plan, including $650 in service 
fees. Included in the agreement are the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.i. 
(Tr at 27-28, 35, 48, 52-53; AE A; AE E.) Of those debts, he provided proof that the 
$851 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was settled for a lesser amount on December 8, 2008. 
(Tr at 27-29, AE C.)  
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and 1.j are medical accounts. Applicant 
believes that these debts were for routine medical checkups incurred by his family when 
he had no health insurance. At hearing, Applicant provided proof that he paid a $115 
medical account. It is unclear if this account is connected to any of the medical accounts 
alleged in the SOR. (Tr at 30, 55-57; AE D.)  
 
He made no payments towards any of the other debts alleged in the SOR. He 
intends to start paying those debts during the first of the year. He intends to apply his 
tax refunds towards the debts. (Tr at 41, 48-49, 54.) He has attended some financial 
counseling. (Tr at 47-48; AE J at 1-2.)  
 
In 2007, Applicant’s home went into foreclosure. He was unable to keep up with 
the mortgage payments due to his periods of unemployment. The home was sold after 
foreclosure and no balance was owed as a result of the sale. (Tr at 23, 50-51; AE B.) 
 
Applicant’s net monthly income from his full-time position is $2,740. His wife 
receives a monthly disability payment of $500. He receives $300 a month from his 
service as a part-time pastor at his church.  His household total monthly income is 
$3,540.  His expenses include rent $710, renter’s insurance $63, school supplies $140, 
electricity $210, gas/heating $100, telephone $162, car insurance $175, life insurance 
$29, groceries $400, car payment $304, gasoline $120; personal loan $40; dental $120, 
medical $14. His monthly expenses total $2,587. He pays a $400 monthly tithe to his 
church. (Tr at 57-58, 67; AE H.)  
 
In his two responses to the SOR, dated August 26, 2008, and September 29, 
2008, Applicant admitted to falsifying his security clearance questionnaire by omitting 
his delinquent accounts that were over 180 days delinquent and debts that were over 90 
days delinquent. He asked for forgiveness. He stated he was stressed at the time he 
 
4 
 
 
filled out the security clearance questionnaire. He needs his job and reacted without 
thinking.  He knew that his inability to satisfy debts and meet financial obligations would 
count against him and he really needed his job in order to support his family. (Answers 
to SOR, dated August 26, 2008, and September 29, 2008.) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant testified that he had difficulty understanding the 
security clearance questionnaire. He was stressed out and apologizes for the mistake. 
He did not intend to omit his delinquent accounts on his security clearance 
questionnaire.  He knew he had delinquent debts at the time he completed the security 
clearance questionnaire but answered “no” without thinking about it. Upon further 
questioning, he admitted that he answered “no” because he was concerned about not 
getting a security clearance and his ability to keep his job without a security clearance. 
He fully disclosed his delinquent accounts when interviewed by an investigator during 
his background investigation. He intends to be fully truthful when completing future 
security clearance questionnaires. (Tr at 22, 42, 62-65.)   
 
Applicant’s pastor wrote a letter on his behalf. In 1998, he was assigned to serve 
as Applicant’s mentor when Applicant became a candidate in ministry. Applicant is 
currently a licensed local pastor in good standing. Applicant is a trustworthy person, a 
person of sound integrity, high morals and good conduct. (AE F.) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor states that he is a loyal and excellent employee. He works 
well with others and has a pleasant attitude. He is an outstanding person. (AE I.) Four of 
Applicant’s co-workers prepared a joint statement. They have worked with Applicant 
over the past year and a half. Applicant is a man of good character and good work 
habits. He is trustworthy and a good family man. (AE G.)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
5 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has encountered financial 
 
6 
 
 
difficulty since 2003. The SOR alleged 13 delinquent accounts, an approximate total 
balance of $14,940. 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005)).  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant has had financial problems for the past five years. He did not begin to resolve 
his delinquent debt until this year. While he entered into a repayment plan to resolve 
four of his accounts, he has taken no action to resolve nine of the accounts. Applicant’s 
financial issues are ongoing.   
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, due to Applicant’s several lay offs 
over the past five years. In December 2003, he was laid off by a company whom he 
worked for 14½ years. He was unemployed for seven months and has not found a job 
that matched his previous salary at this company.  In June 2006, he was laid off for a 
month, rehired and laid off three weeks later. He was unemployed for two weeks until 
he found employment with another defense contractor. He is the sole breadwinner of his 
family. His wife’s health prevents her from working. He was unable to keep up with the 
bills which resulted in several delinquencies including the foreclosure of his home in 
2007 and an automobile repossession.  However, this mitigating condition is given less 
weight because Applicant waited to address his delinquent accounts even though he 
has been continuously employed since the fall of 2006.  There were several debts 
alleged in the SOR that were close to or under $200 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, and 1.l) 
which he should have been able to resolve. For this reason, FC MC ¶ 20(b) is given 
less weight. 
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) applies, in part. Applicant has attended financial counseling and is beginning to 
take steps to resolve his financial situation. However, it will take some time to resolve 
his financial situation.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR 
 
7 
 
 
¶¶ 1.c, 1,d, 1.e, and 1.i.  He entered into an agreement with a debt settlement company 
in August 2008, in order to resolve these debts. He has made payments to the plan over 
the past five months. These were his four largest debts. The debt alleged in ¶ 1.c has 
been resolved. However, nine delinquent debts remain unresolved. While Applicant 
intends to resolve these debts in the coming year using his tax return and his income, 
he has taken no action to resolve these accounts. 
 
While Applicant suffered through several periods of unemployment over the past 
five years and has made some progress in resolving several of his debts, the majority of 
his delinquent accounts remain unresolved. He has not mitigated the concerns raised 
under Guideline F.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list his  
financial delinquencies in response to sections 28(a) and 28(b) on his security 
clearance questionnaire dated August 31, 2007.  
 
  Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) potentially applies in 
Applicant’s case. For PC DC ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission of his judgments and 
delinquent accounts must be done with a deliberate intent to deceive. Applicant 
admitted in his answer to the SOR and during the hearing that he did not list his 
delinquent accounts because he was concerned that his financial situation would effect 
his ability to granted a security clearance and that he might lose his job. He intentionally 
omitted his delinquent accounts on his security clearance questionnaire. 
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing, or (2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country or that is legal in the country but illegal in the United States and 
may serve as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
 
8 
 
 
service or other group) applies with respect to Applicant’s omission of his financial 
problems on his security clearance questionnaire. His deliberate concealment of his 
financial situation created a potential vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. 
 
 The personal conduct concern can be mitigated. The following Personal Conduct 
Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) does not 
apply. Although Applicant states that he discussed his delinquent debts when he was 
interviewed in conjunction with his background investigation, he did not make a prompt 
good-faith effort to correct the falsification prior to the interview. His interview occurred 
two months after he completed the security clearance questionnaire.    
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment) applies.   There is no question that Applicant’s deliberate falsification 
of his security clearance questionnaire was serious. Applicants for security clearances 
are expected to be truthful with the government at all times. In his answer to the SOR 
and at hearing Applicant expressed extreme remorse for his omissions and stated that 
he intends to be completely truthful on future security clearance questionnaires.  He felt 
extreme pressure as the sole breadwinner for his family when completing the security 
clearance questionnaire. While this does not justify his deliberate falsifications, it was 
evident during the hearing that he had learned a lesson from this experience.  His 
supervisor, co-workers, and pastor attest that he is a man of good character and 
trustworthiness.  Applicant’s deliberate omission on his security clearance questionnaire 
appears to be an aberration from his usual character. 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) applies.   Applicant subsequently 
fully disclosed his financial situation during his background investigation.  His honest 
admission that he deliberately omitted his delinquent debts on his security clearance 
questionnaire shows that he has integrity and is willing to admit his mistakes.  
 
 While Applicant’s deliberate omission of his security clearance questionnaire was 
serious, his subsequent honesty and full disclosure of his financial situation mitigate the 
concerns raised under personal conduct. The personal conduct concern is found for 
Applicant.  
    
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
 
9 
 
 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant’s 
financial problems were affected by his several periods of unemployment within the past 
five years. I considered that Applicant has taken steps towards resolving his delinquent 
accounts. However, no steps have been taken to resolve nine of the 13 delinquent 
accounts. It is too soon to conclude that his financial issues have been resolved due to 
the amount of his unresolved delinquent debt. He did not mitigate the concerns raised 
under financial considerations. Personal conduct concerns are mitigated because 
Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance questionnaire, although very serious, 
was a one-time incident which was a departure from his overall character. His 
subsequent honesty admitting to the deliberate omissions, his expressed remorse, and 
the statements from his pastor, supervisor, and co-workers attesting to his character for 
trustworthiness mitigate the concerns raised under personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
