 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04359 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel, 
For Applicant: Lucia E. Casale, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States at age 16, became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2000, and has lived in the United States for 26 years. He invalidated his 
Nigerian passport and mitigated the foreign preference and foreign influence security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on July 17, 2006. On August 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s 
security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence).1  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 15, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 31, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 13, 2008, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on December 10, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 
7, which were received without objection (Tr. 19). GE 7 was not admitted, but 
considered for administrative notice purposes only.2 Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and submitted 16 exhibits, marked AE 1 through 16, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 18, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations (with 
explanations), except for SOR ¶ 1.a, which he denied. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old civil engineer. He was born and raised in Nigeria in 
one of the most stables cities in the country (Tr. 40, 42, 52, GE 1). In 1982, at age 16, 
he entered the United States under a student visa. While attending college, he stayed 
with his uncle, who was a U.S. citizen (Tr. 77). In May 1987, he received a degree in 
civil engineering from a U.S. university (Tr. 53). He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
August 2000 and received his U.S. passport shortly thereafter (Tr. 53-54).  
 
After college, Applicant worked for two private U.S. companies (Tr. 55). In 1989, 
he formed his own engineering design company (Tr. 56). Applicant is the sole owner of 
his company, and is the company’s facility security officer. In 1998, his company 
became a construction-oriented company, building roads, bridges, and other structures. 
Through the years, Applicant has worked in numerous government construction projects 
in the United States and overseas. After working in over 20 overseas construction 
projects for U.S. government agencies, in 2005 Applicant bid on several overseas 
construction projects that required Applicant and his company to have access to 
classified information (Tr. 39-40, 56-60). Two of the construction projects were to be 
performed in Nigeria.  
 
A U.S. government agency sponsored Applicant and his company for a facility 
security clearance at the secret level. He applied for his security clearance in July 2006. 
Applicant was issued an interim security clearance that allowed him access to classified 
information. His interim clearance was revoked as a result of the security concerns 
outlined in the SOR and he was disqualified from one of the construction projects (Tr. 
40). Applicant’s business travel to Nigeria in 2005 and during the following years was in 
2  Department Counsel’s October 23, 2008, motion asked that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts concerning the government of Nigeria. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were considered and included in the record as GE 7 for identification.  
 
 
3 
 
 
preparation for bidding on the contracts, or as a result of his winning the U.S. contracts 
in Nigeria. 
 
In 2005, Applicant renewed his Nigerian passport. It was easier for him to travel 
to Nigeria with it than having to secure a Visa every time he traveled. He only used the 
Nigerian passport to travel to Nigeria, and most of his travel was related to his 
construction projects there. From 1982 to 2005, Applicant traveled twice to Nigeria: in 
2001 to bury his father, and in 2005, to evaluate business opportunities (Tr. 84-85). In 
2006, he travelled three times to Nigeria: in February to bury his uncle, and in June and 
December 2006 for business related matters. During 2007, Applicant traveled twice to 
Nigeria on business related matters. In 2008, Applicant traveled to Nigeria to bury his 
mother, and for business related matters in June 2008. He intends to travel to Nigeria 
frequently in the future to comply with his contractual obligations. Since he invalidated 
his Nigerian passport, Applicant received a long-term visitor’s visa to travel from the 
United States to Nigeria (Tr. 45). 
 
Applicant claimed he did not know his possession and use of the Nigerian 
passport would raise security concerns until after he received the pending SOR. As 
soon as he was made aware of the concerns, he stopped using his Nigerian passport 
(Tr. 45). On September 22, 2008, Applicant attempted to surrender his Nigerian 
passport by mailing it to DOHA (Appellate Exhibit 1). DOHA returned the passport to 
him. At his hearing, Applicant presented his invalidated Nigerian passport (with holes 
punched on it and the picture page cut in half) (AE 16, Tr. 60-61). When asked whether 
he was willing to surrender his Nigerian citizenship, Applicant answered that he had 
renounced it when he swore allegiance to the United States during his naturalization 
ceremony. He strongly averred he is only a U.S. citizen and his loyalty is only to the 
United States.  
 
In November 2006, Applicant opened a bank account in Nigeria and transferred 
$170,000 from the United States into his Nigerian account (Tr. 88). Applicant transferred 
the money to support the day-to-day operations of his construction project for a U.S. 
agency. Applicant’s evidence shows that he had won a bid for a construction project for 
a U.S. agency in Nigeria. As of his hearing, he still had the Nigerian bank account. He 
maintains a monthly balance of approximately $100,000 in the account to cover his 
construction company’s expenses in Nigeria. In 2007-2008, Applicant bid on three 
additional construction contracts offered by a U.S. government agency to be performed 
in South America and Africa (Tr. 59-60). 
 
When Applicant’s father died in 2001, he inherited approximately ¼ of an acre of 
land in Nigeria. Applicant claimed he is not sure where the property is located, or its 
current estimated value. He averred he is not interested in the property and does not 
intend to claim it (Tr. 48).  
 
Applicant married his 35-year-old Nigerian-born wife in 1998 in the United States 
(Tr. 54, 76). She entered the United States under a student visa in 1997. She attended 
a preeminent U.S. university and received a physician’s degree (Tr. 78, 93). They have 
 
4 
 
 
two children born in the United States: a 10-year-old son and a six-year-old daughter. 
She is a permanent resident alien and has applied for U.S. citizenship (Tr. 55). She 
works as a physician at a preeminent U.S. hospital. 
 
Applicant and his wife own a residence in the United States, worth approximately 
$750,000. They also own a U.S. undeveloped track of land, worth approximately 
$750,000 (Tr. 69-71). Additionally, they have U.S. investments worth approximately 
$10,000. Applicant’s receives a yearly salary from his company of $150,000. His current 
U.S. government construction project in Nigeria is worth approximately $22 million. His 
expected profit from this contract is around 5% or $1.1 million (Tr. 91). Applicant and his 
wife have no financial assets, and own no property (other than the ¼ acre of land) or 
investments in Nigeria. 
 
Applicant’s 74-year-old mother-in-law is a citizen and part time resident of Nigeria 
(Tr. 66-67). According to Applicant, she is independently wealthy, and owns numerous 
real estate rental properties in Nigeria. She is the only one of his wife’s immediate 
relatives living in Nigeria (Tr. 90). Applicant testified his mother-in-law lives 
approximately nine to 10 months of the year in the United States and two months in 
Nigeria. She is a U.S. permanent legal resident, and is applying for citizenship (Tr. 66). 
While she is living in Nigeria, Applicant has contact with her approximately once a 
month. He is not aware of the frequency of his wife’s contact with her mother when she 
is in Nigeria. 
 
Applicant claimed that neither he nor his wife or any of their immediate relatives 
ever served in the Nigerian military forces. They have never worked for the Nigerian 
government or for any government affiliated company (Tr. 77).  
 
All of Applicant’s aunts and uncles live in the United States and are either U.S. 
citizens or in the process of applying for citizenship (Tr. 81-82). He has four siblings, two 
sisters and two brothers. One of his sisters is a U.S. naturalized citizen, and one of his 
brothers is a U.S. permanent resident alien. His second brother is a Nigerian citizen and 
currently lives with his family in the United States (Tr. 41). He is working as an engineer 
for a French company, and was assigned to a three-year tour of work with a subsidiary 
of his company in the United States. His second sister is a Nigerian citizen and resident 
(Tr. 51). She owns a clothing business in Nigeria and travels frequently to visit with her 
family living in the United States (Tr. 41, 64). 
 
Applicant strongly averred he is a proud American citizen. He has been in the 
United States for the last 26 years and almost all of his relatives live in the United 
States. He believes there is no way any of his relatives, or foreign government, can 
influence him in a way contrary to his immediate family’s interest or the interest of the 
United States (Tr. 40). 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Nigeria is a federal republic 
composed of 36 states and a capital territory. The government’s human rights record is 
poor, and government officials at all levels commit serious human rights abuses. Areas 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
of the country are marked by serious political instability and outbreaks of armed conflict 
between religious, political, and ethnic factions. The lack of law and order in the country 
poses considerable risks to travelers. 
 
The Nigerian government provides strong diplomatic support to U.S. government 
counter-terrorism efforts. It has condemned terrorist attacks against the United States 
and supported military actions against the Taliban and Al-Qaida. It also has played a 
leading role in forging an anti-terrorism consensus among states in their region. The 
United States provides the people of Nigeria with substantial financial assistance in 
areas such as public health, education, and in their efforts of developing effective 
institutions of democratic governance. Nigeria is an important trading partner of the 
United States. There is no evidence of economic competition with the United States, or 
that Nigeria has or ever had an intelligence gathering program targeting U.S. economic, 
industrial, or military critical technologies.  
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.3 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”4 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
3  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
4  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under Guideline C the government’s concern is “when an individual acts in such 
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he 
or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9. 
 
 Applicant’s 2005 renewal and use of his Nigerian passport, his opening of a 
Nigerian bank account, and his inheritance of a ¼ acre of land in Nigeria raise foreign 
preference security concerns. AG ¶ 10: “(a) exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation 
of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign 
passport,” and “(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country,” apply.  
 
After considering all the foreign preference mitigating condition under AG ¶ 11, I 
find that AG ¶¶ 11(b): “The individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship,” and 11(e): “the passport has been destroyed,” apply.  
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2000 and was issued a U.S. 
passport shortly thereafter. He renewed his Nigerian passport in 2005 and used it, in 
preference to his U.S. passport, to travel to Nigeria numerous times between 2005 and 
2008. He used the Nigerian passport because of convenience, i.e., he did not have to 
 
7 
 
 
go through the process of requesting a visa. He did not know that his renewal of the 
Nigerian passport would raise security concerns. As soon as he was made aware of the 
security concerns raised by his use and possession of his Nigerian passport, Applicant 
attempted to surrender and later destroyed his Nigerian passport. 
 
I considered that Applicant has a Nigerian bank account (with a substantial 
deposit of money) that he opened in 2006 to run the day-to-day operations of his 
construction projects in Nigeria. Considering the totality of the circumstances of his 
case, his foreign bank account does not raise serious security concerns. Applicant has 
established a bona fide record of performing construction projects for U.S. government 
agencies in the United States and abroad. In 2005-2006, Applicant won a bid for a 
construction project for a U.S. agency in Nigeria. The bank account and the money 
were incidental to his performance of the construction project. But for the construction 
project, I conclude Applicant would not have opened the bank account in Nigeria. 
 
I also considered Applicant’s inheritance of a ¼ acre of land in Nigeria. 
Considering the totality of the circumstances of his case, I conclude that the possible 
value of such property is greatly outweighed by Applicant’s long and well rooted 
connections to the United States, his business in the United States, and the net worth 
value of his assets in the United States.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is:  
 
 “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.” AG ¶ 6.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in a foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk or foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.5 Applicant has frequent contacts (at least once a 
month) and a close relationship of affection and/or obligation with his mother-in-law and 
siblings, who are residents and citizens of Nigeria. These contacts create a risk of 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that 
Nigerian agents or criminals may exploit the opportunity to obtain information about the 
United States. His connection to his family members also create a potential conflict of 
interest because his relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about 
his desire to help them by providing sensitive or classified information.  
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. As previously indicated, the burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
 
  Four Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
5  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that mitigating condition AG ¶¶ 8(b) and (f) apply. Applicant has strong 
feelings of affection and a strong sense of obligation to his mother-in-law and siblings. 
The closeness of the relationship is shown by Applicant’s telephone contacts with his 
siblings and wife’s mother, their travels to the United States to visit Applicant and his 
family, and his travels to Nigeria. Notwithstanding, Applicant established it is unlikely he 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his family and 
the interests of the United States. Applicant’s family members in Nigeria live routine 
lives, they are not involved in politics, employed by the Nigerian government or its 
military forces.  
 
Applicant’s contact with his family in Nigeria has been for the most part 
telephonic, with occasional reciprocal visits. From 1982 to 2005, he traveled once on 
family related matters (to bury his father), and from 2005 to 2008 he traveled twice to 
bury his uncle and mother. Applicant’s all other travel to Nigeria has been business 
related and resulted from his winning of construction contracts in the United States for 
work to be performed in Nigeria for a U.S. government agency. I do not believe 
Applicant’s relationship with his family in Nigeria creates a heightened risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Nigeria’s form of government.6 Nigeria is a developing country that, so far, 
possesses no intelligence, economic, or industrial threat to the United States. 
Notwithstanding Nigeria’s poor human rights record, there is no evidence its 
government seeks classified and industrial/economic information from the United 
States. Nor is there evidence of the Nigerian government mistreating relatives of U.S. 
citizens or U.S. citizens to obtain such information. Additionally, given the existing 
relationship between the governments of the United States and Nigeria, it is unlikely 
Nigeria would risk loosing an important trading partner and the financial support of the 
United States. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has developed a sufficient relationship and 
loyalty to the United States, that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States’ interests. He has lived in the United States for over 26 years. 
 6  The focus is not the country or its people, but its rulers and the nature of the government they 
impose. This approach recognizes that it makes sense to treat each country in accordance with the level 
of security concern or threat it presents to the United States.  
 
 
10 
 
 
He came to the United States at age 16 and is now a naturalized U.S. citizen. His wife is 
in the process of becoming a U.S. citizen and their children were born in the United 
States. All of their financial and business interests are in the United States. Applicant 
has established himself as an American citizen. He is a successful entrepreneur with an 
established reputation as a reliable government contractor. He continues this track 
record of diligent labor in his current construction contracts with Government agencies. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies because Applicant’s business is based in the United States, not 
in Nigeria. Applicant has established a bona fide record of performing over 20 
construction projects for U.S. government agencies in the United States and abroad. In 
2006, Applicant won a bid for a $22 million construction project for a U.S. agency in 
Nigeria. The bank account and the money deposited there were incidental to his 
performance of the construction project. But for the construction project, I conclude 
Applicant would not have opened the bank account in Nigeria.  
 
Applicant has continued to bid (in the United States) on additional multimillion 
dollar construction projects for U.S. agencies abroad. Applicant has a substantial 
amount of money in a Nigerian bank ($100,000). Notwithstanding, balancing the value 
of his Nigerian bank account against the value of his current and future U.S. contracts, 
and the expected profits from those contracts, I conclude Applicant’s financial and 
property interests in Nigeria could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or 
pressure him.  
 
 Considering the totality of the circumstances, the evidence shows it is unlikely 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his 
siblings or mother-in-law and the interests of the United States. He has mitigated the 
Guideline B security concerns. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”  
 
 
11 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has been in the United 
States for over 26 years and a naturalized U.S. citizen for around eight years. He 
attended college and received his civil engineering degree in the United States. His wife 
became a physician in the United States and is employed by a well known hospital. She 
is in the process of completing her U.S. naturalization process, and their children were 
born in the United States. His only close relatives living in Nigeria are his mother-in-law 
(who lives most of the year in the United States) and two of his siblings (one of which 
will reside in the United States with his family for the next three years). He and his wife 
own property and have financial interests mainly in the United States (except for the ¼ 
acre land he inherited), and they have embraced the United States way of life. Applicant 
has established himself as a reliable defense contractor and there is no evidence that 
he has failed to comply with rules and regulations concerning the protection of classified 
information. 
 
After carefully considering Applicant’s circumstances, I conclude he is not in a 
position where he may be induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests. He is not vulnerable to pressure or 
coercion by his mother-in-law, siblings, or the government of Nigeria. 
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the concerns arising from 
his foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
