 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-03960 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James H. Shoemaker, Jr., Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct), based on Applicant’s relationship with a woman with a history of drug 
addiction and criminal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 1, 2006. On 
September 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline E. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on October 7, 2008; answered it on October 20, 
2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on October 21, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
30, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on the following day. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on November 17, 2008, scheduling the hearing for December 9, 2008. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted 
in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, presented the 
testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection. The record closed upon adjournment of the hearing. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 18, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations but denied that his 
conduct raised security concerns. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old exercise planner employed by a defense contractor. 
He served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from June 1962 until April 1989, 
when he retired as a master gunnery sergeant (pay grade E-9). During his military 
service, he was awarded the Marine Combat Action Ribbon, the Air Medal, the Navy 
Achievement Medal for valor, and numerous other decorations and awards.  
 
After retiring from the Marine Corps, Applicant completed his undergraduate 
college education and then obtained a master’s degree in adult education. He worked 
as a federal employee from February 1992 to August 2002, when he retired. In April 
1997, he received the Meritorious Civilian Service award for his performance of duty 
while in charge of a counterdrug intelligence program (AX C). From about 1970, while in 
the Marine Corps and as a civilian employee, he had a security clearance and access to 
Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI). He worked in intelligence operations 
throughout his military and civilian service. He has never had a security violation. He 
held two short-term jobs in the private sector, from August to September 2005 and from 
February to April 2006, when he was hired by his current employer. As of the date of his 
response to the SOR, he continued to hold a clearance. 
 
 Applicant was married in March 1969 and has been legally separated since 
November 2005. His spouse is 75 years old (GX 1 at Section 13/15). They have no 
children.  
 
 Applicant currently resides with a 46-year-old woman, a native of Guam. She has 
an adult daughter whose husband is serving in the U.S. Navy. His companion is 
described on his security clearance application as his cohabitant/fiancé. He met her on 
a computer network, and she disclosed that she had a prison record (Tr. 75). After 
about a month of online correspondence, they met in person in May 2005 (Tr. 76). Their 
relationship became romantic around July 2005. They now live together in a home 
Applicant has rented, and they are sexually intimate. When asked by Department 
 
3 
 
 
Counsel if he was in an “adulterous relationship,” he responded, “If you want to call it 
that, yes, sir.” He testified he deeply loves his companion (Tr. 44, 53, 56). 
 
Applicant’s spouse is aware of his relationship with another woman and does not 
desire to terminate the marriage. Applicant likewise does not desire to terminate his 
marriage, because of concerns about his spouse’s financial security and his desire not 
to disturb her “comfort zone.” His spouse has never worked and has no income 
independent of Applicant. She lives in the house they jointly own. Applicant pays for all 
her medical needs, provides her with a vehicle, maintains the property, and gives her 
$400 to $600 per month in spending money (Tr. 53-54).  
 
 Applicant testified he has an amicable relationship with his spouse. He was living 
with his spouse when he met his companion, but the marital relationship had cooled to 
the point they were living as brother and sister (Tr. 71, 75). His spouse has met his 
companion. Applicant and his companion have visited his spouse in her home (Tr. 61). 
 
 Applicant’s immediate supervisor is generally aware of his situation and has 
stated he has no doubt about Applicant’s good judgment, trustworthiness, honesty, or 
integrity (AX A). He rated Applicant as exceeding standards in 10 of 12 performance 
factors, meeting standards in two factors, and described his overall performance as 
outstanding (AX B). 
 
 Applicant’s companion has a long criminal record (GX 2). All her criminal activity 
occurred while she was residing in Guam (Tr. 57-58). She was arrested twice in 
November 1994, the first time for three counts of theft and receiving stolen property and 
two counts of forgery, and the second time for illegal possession of a firearm, having a 
concealed firearm, and possessing a firearm with an obliterated serial number. She was 
arrested in May 1995 for unauthorized use of a motor vehicle, and arrested in June 
1995 for theft of property. In October 1995 she was arrested for burglary and soliciting 
prostitution. In May 1996 she was arrested for burglary and possession of stolen 
property. In January 1997 she was arrested for distribution of methamphetamine, and 
she was sentenced to prison for 34 months.  
 
The records of the Federal Bureau of Investigation reflect that Applicant’s 
companion was a member of a group responsible for passing numerous fraudulent and 
forged payroll checks. In December 1998, she was arrested for distribution of 
methamphetamine and bank fraud. She was sentenced to prison for 13 months for the 
drug offense and 10 months, served concurrently, for the bank fraud. In April 2000, she 
was charged with two counts of bank fraud and violation of her supervised release, and 
was sentenced to prison for a term not reflected in the record.  
 
In July 2001, Applicant’s companion was charged with violation of her supervised 
release and sentenced to 11 months in prison. In June 2002, she was charged with 
possession of drug paraphernalia and being under the influence of a controlled 
substance, but the charges were dismissed. In August 2002, she was again charged 
with possession of drug paraphernalia and being under the influence of a controlled 
 
4 
 
 
substance. She was charged with violation of probation in September 2003 and jailed 
for 14 months. She was again charged with violation of probation in March 2004 and 
jailed for 14 months.  
 
 According to Applicant, his companion’s criminal record was all the result of her 
drug addiction that began when she was about 11 years old (Tr. 45). When he met her 
in May 2005, she was living with her daughter and being treated for drug addiction. In 
August 2005, Applicant’s companion admitted she had relapsed and used crack 
cocaine. Applicant responded to her relapse by purchasing a plane ticket to Guam and 
putting her on the plane. While his companion was at an intermediate stop and waiting 
to connect with the flight to Guam, she and Applicant talked by cell phone, and she told 
him she would not return to Guam because she would be back in the same environment 
that caused her problems. Applicant believed she was suicidal when they talked. 
Applicant told her she needed to go through detoxification and start attending Narcotics 
Anonymous (NA) meetings. She went through detoxification and they attended NA 
meetings together for 90 consecutive days. His companion did not undergo drug 
treatment or counseling because they could not afford it at the time (Tr. 65). Although a 
member of the NA group was designated as his companion’s sponsor, Applicant 
decided he would be her unofficial sponsor (Tr. 60). She did not receive any counseling 
or treatment and did not attend any further NA meetings after the 90 consecutive 
meetings (Tr. 60). 
 
Applicant believes she has not relapsed since August 2005, and that she is a 
changed person (Tr. 47-51, 57-58). He testified he knows his companion well enough 
that he would know if she relapsed, and he also believes she would tell him (Tr. 62-63). 
He testified that he would respond to a relapse by taking his companion to a “psych 
clinic or whatever,” and place her in a rehabilitation program (Tr. 65). 
 
 When his counsel asked him what he would do if his companion asked him to 
compromise sensitive information, he testified:  
 
[L]ook, I’ve been in this business for 40 years, the intelligence business. 
Almost 30 of those years I’ve [had] SCI clearance. I’ve been a special 
security officer, where I handle this stuff all the time. 
 
I ran preliminary inquiries and investigations on people. I’m not stupid. I’m 
not going to compromise. If that happened again, first of all she would 
never be stupid enough to ask me that, she knows better. She knows me. 
 
I really, I know, I’m not supposed to get upset, but I’m telling you, it’s not 
going to happen, it simply will not happen. I will not allow it. I’ve done this 
a long time. 
 
I’ve been in positions similar to [department counsel’s] when I worked in 
counter intelligence and it’s not going to happen. She knows it’s not going 
to happen. It’s as simple as that. I’m sorry, I’m going to tell it like it is. 
 
5 
 
 
 
(Tr. 63-64.) Applicant reacted indignantly to questions about his integrity, honesty, and 
judgment. He testified: “I’m not going to go ahead and compromise [the] United States 
of America for any reason, I don’t care what it is. And by questioning my integrity, my 
honesty, my judgment, to me, I’m sorry, but it’s a slap in the face. Okay, that’s the way I 
see it.” (Tr. 66.) 
 
 A friend of Applicant who retired from the Navy as a senior chief petty officer (pay 
grade E-8) testified he worked with Applicant from 1995 to 2002. He testified he would 
rank Applicant first or second among the hundreds of intelligence professionals he had 
worked with. He described Applicant as “honest to a fault” and a person of sound 
judgment (Tr. 80-81). He testified he has met Applicant’s companion and knows her 
background. He believes Applicant is a very compassionate person who will go out of 
the way for someone who needs help (Tr. 83).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
 
6 
 
 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant maintains a “close relationship” with his 
companion, who has an extensive criminal record, including two incarcerations in a 
federal prison. Applicant admits the relationship and his companion’s criminal record. 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows: “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” The disqualifying conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 16(d), (e), and (g) are relevant. AG ¶ 16(d) is raised by the following: 
[C]redible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations. 
 
7 
 
 
Three aspects of AG ¶ 16(d) are relevant: (1) whether Applicant has exhibited 
“questionable judgment,” (2) whether he has exhibited “unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations,” and (3) whether his adulterous relationship with his companion 
demonstrates a “pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.”  
 Applicant was not employed and did not have access to classified information 
when he began his relationship with his companion. Nevertheless, I conclude Applicant 
exercised questionable judgment when he fostered an online relationship with a person 
with an extensive criminal record and allowed it to become romantic and sexually 
intimate, while he was still married. I would expect that Applicant, with his long public 
service and extensive experience in the intelligence community, would be cautious in 
pursuing a relationship with a recovering drug addict with a long criminal history. 
Instead, he went from initial contact to being deeply in love in the space of three 
months—a whirlwind courtship by any standard. While Applicant has focused on his 
companion’s drug addiction, her past also includes weapons offenses, bank fraud, 
forgery, burglary, theft of property, possession of stolen property, and prostitution.  
I am satisfied that Applicant honestly believes his spouse does not object to his 
relationship, but his spouse did not testify or submit a written statement, leaving open 
the question whether she has agreed to Applicant’s arrangement or has simply 
acquiesced. Given the strong personality exhibited by Applicant during the hearing, 
mere acquiescence cannot be ruled out. 
Applicant has a long record of impeccable public service. He does appear, 
however, to compartmentalize his professional life and his personal life, and he has 
demonstrated that he is unwilling to comply with his marital obligations. Based on his 
long record of public service, however, I believe he would be less likely to disregard job-
related rules. With respect to the issue whether there is a “pattern” of rules violations, I 
note that his adulterous relationship, while continuous and long-standing, is a single 
continuing act rather than multiple independent transgressions. As such, it may not be a 
“pattern” as the term is used in AG ¶ 16(d). Nevertheless, based on Applicant’s exercise 
of questionable judgment, I conclude AG ¶ 16(d) applies. 
 The disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(e) is raised by “personal conduct, or 
concealment of information about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, 
may affect the person's personal, professional, or community standing.” Applicant has 
disclosed his relationship with his spouse, his immediate supervisor, and a long-time 
friend and former co-worker. His personal and professional standing with his supervisor 
and his friend apparently have not been affected by it, although the record does not 
reflect whether he disclosed the full extent of his companion’s criminal record. In the 
broader community, including the military community with whom he must interact, it is 
likely that his personal and professional standing would be adversely affected.  
 
 I am satisfied that Applicant is not vulnerable to direct and overt exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by threats of disclosure, because of his background and 
 
8 
 
 
personality. He expressed no shame or remorse about his relationship and was 
indignant about the suggestion that it might affect his suitability for a clearance. He has 
adopted a “my way or the highway” stance with his companion and made it clear that he 
will not tolerate further criminal conduct. His extensive experience in counter-
intelligence has made him especially sensitive and knowledgeable about efforts to 
gather sensitive information. He testified emphatically that he would never permit his 
companion or anyone else to exploit him.  
 
 On the other hand, Applicant’s extramarital relationship has increased his 
vulnerability to indirect exploitation, manipulation, or duress. He has made himself 
vulnerable to vindictive financial claims, unfounded criminal complaints, acts designed 
to sabotage his credit rating, identity theft, and similar means of coercion or retribution 
initiated by his companion (especially if he should decide to terminate their relationship 
at some time in the future) or his spouse. I conclude AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
 
 Finally, the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(g) is raised by “association with 
persons involved in criminal activity.” This disqualifying condition applies only to persons 
who are presently involved in criminal activity, not those who have engaged in criminal 
activity in the past. Applicant met his companion in May 2005, while she was struggling 
with and being treated for drug addiction. They were romantically involved by July 2005, 
and his companion relapsed and used crack cocaine in August 2005. I conclude AG ¶ 
16(g) is not raised by his companion’s criminal record in Guam and her violations of 
probation before they met, but it is raised by his association with a crack cocaine user in 
August 2005. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 16(a) and (g), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated by showing that 
“the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
Applicant’s conduct is ongoing, did not occur under “unique circumstances,” and casts 
doubt on his good judgment. Accordingly, I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
 
Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual has acknowledged the 
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps 
to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 
17(d). Applicant has acknowledged his behavior, but he has attempted to justify it. He 
was indignant that anyone would question it, and it is likely to continue. This mitigating 
condition is not established. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Security concerns may be mitigated if “the individual has taken positive steps to 
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). 
Applicant receives credit under this mitigating condition for disclosing his relationship to 
his spouse and his employer. 
Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “association 
with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under circumstances that 
do not cast doubt upon the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 17(g). Applicant’s companion 
has not engaged in criminal activity since August 2005, but doubts about his good 
judgment remain.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant had a stellar 40-year career as a Marine and a civilian in public service. 
His relationship with his companion began after his second retirement and when he was 
not contemplating the impact of that relationship on future employment or his eligibility 
for a security clearance. His conduct in searching for companionship and becoming 
deeply involved with his companion despite her history, while he was still married and 
living with his spouse, was a dramatic behavioral change.  
 
 Except for one character witness and a testimonial from his supervisor, Applicant 
was the sole source of evidence regarding the character and background of his 
companion and the reaction of his spouse to the situation. Applicant presented himself 
as sincere and candid. I believe he honestly described his companion and his spouse 
as he perceived them, but he was not testifying as an impartial observer. He believes 
 
10 
 
 
his companion is a changed person, but he has no expertise in prognosis of future drug 
involvement or in determining whether she has overcome the causes of her long 
criminal record. He presented no testimony or written documents from qualified medical 
professionals supporting his conclusions. Similarly, he presented no evidence to 
corroborate his assertion that his spouse did not object to his conduct. His indignation at 
being questioned indicates his lack of appreciation for the security concerns raised by 
his conduct. He is supremely confident in his ability to detect efforts to obtain 
information from him and to thwart them, but he is surprisingly naïve in his lack of 
appreciation of his vulnerability.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
