 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04845 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On August 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 18, 2008, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the government’s written case on October 9, 2008. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
 
2 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on October 15, 2008. As of December 
12, 2008, she had not responded. The case was assigned to another administrative 
judge on December 12, 2008, and reassigned to me on January 8, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old truck driver seeking a security clearance. She attended 
college for a period but does not have a degree. She is married and has no children.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts, totaling $21,887. Applicant admitted to 
owing all the debts with the exception of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.m, and 1.r. 
She stated that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.g; the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a; and 
she denied owing the debt alleged in SOR ¶1.m. After viewing the credit reports, I find 
that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, and 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶1.a.2 
 
 Applicant disputed owing the $2,340 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. She 
indicated that her mother-in-law rented a house and Applicant and her husband stayed 
there for a period, but they never signed anything and were never on the lease. She 
stated they would dispute it and have it removed from their credit report. The judgment 
was reported by Experian on the combined credit report of November 2, 2007, which 
listed a joint judgment of $2,340, filed in December 2002. The judgment is not listed on 
the Equifax credit report of April 16, 2008. Applicant may believe that she has a 
legitimate dispute of this debt. However, the evidence establishes the debt was reduced 
to a judgment by court action. Without something additional from the court, I find that 
she is responsible for this debt.3 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from about 2001 through September 2006. She 
married in 2002. Her husband was also unemployed in 2001. It is unclear how long he 
was unemployed. During their unemployment many debts became delinquent and 
medical bills went unpaid because they did not have medical insurance. Applicant and 
her husband became independent contractors in September 2006. They bought a truck 
through financing in September 2007. They have paid almost $6,500 in repairs to the 
truck. She indicated that now that the truck is in good shape, they would start saving 
money for future repairs. Once they have a sum saved up for future repairs, she stated 
they would start paying their delinquent debts. After expenses, which include an 
average of $587 per month in truck repairs, their combined discretionary income at the 
end of the month is about $70.4 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Items 4, 6-8. 
 
3 Items 4, 7, 8. 
 
4 Items 4, 6. 
 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay her 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both of these 
potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not made payments on any of the debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not applicable. Applicant attributes her debts to her and her husband’s 
unemployment. That is a condition that was largely beyond her control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant did not fully explain all the facts surrounding the 
unemployment or what she did during the years of unemployment, and she has not 
presented a firm plan on addressing her delinquent debts. There is insufficient 
information for a finding that she has acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable.   
 
There is no evidence that Applicant received counseling. There are no clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not 
applicable. She has not made a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. Two of the debts are duplicates. SOR ¶¶ 1.k 
and 1.q are concluded for Applicant. She disputed owing the underlying debt in SOR ¶ 
1.m, but that debt has been reduced to a legal judgment and she did not produce 
documentation to refute the judgment. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.v alleges that Applicant has approximately $722 in discretionary income 
at the end of each month but has made no payments on her delinquent debts. Her 
family’s combined discretionary income at the end of the month is actually about $70. 
SOR ¶ 1.v is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
 
6 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has more than $19,000 in 
delinquent debt. She went through a long period of unemployment and her husband 
was also unemployed. They have purchased a truck and have made a serious 
commitment to that business. However, she has not submitted sufficient information for 
a finding that her financial house is now in order. She has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by her numerous delinquent debts. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.p:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r-1.u:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.v:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
