                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-00727
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
January 16, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire For Investigations Processing
on October 16, 2006.  On August 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on September 16, 2008, and she requested
a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on October 16, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on October 30, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for December 11, 2008.  At the hearing the Government
presented two exhibits, referred to Government Exhibits 1 and 2.  The Applicant
presented six exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through F, and testified on
her own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on December 23, 2008.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
2
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political conditions in Taiwan.  Applicant had no
objection.  (Tr. p. 16).  The request and the attached documents were not admitted into
evidence but were included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out
in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 45 years of age and has a Masters Degree
in Computer Science.  She is employed as a NT Administrator for a defense contractor.
She seeks a security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense
industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Taipei, Taiwan in 1963.  She moved to the United
States in 1988 to pursue higher education.  After obtaining her Masters Degree and
learning that she loved the American culture, she decided to make the United States her
permanent home.  In 1995, she married a United States citizen.  They have two children
who are native born American citizens.  She established friends, neighbors, and assets
in the United States.  In 2000, she became a United States citizen and obtained a
United States passport.  On June 24, 2008, she physically destroyed her Taiwanese
passport in front of her Facility Security Officer.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E).  She does not
consider herself a dual citizen, only a citizen of the United States.  She attends church
and volunteers in her community by visiting the elderly in convalescent homes and
helping the homeless.  She and her husband are currently going through a divorce.
(Government Exhibit 2). 
       
The Applicant’s mother and father were born in and are citizens and residents of
Taiwan.  Her mother is and always has been a homemaker.  Her father is a retired
businessman who was in the import/export business.  Other than her father’s two year
mandatory military service, he has had no other associations with the Government of
Taiwan.  The Applicant communicates with her parents in Taiwan about twice a month
or so.  The Applicant’s parents are financially self-sufficient and the Applicant provides
them with no financial support.  Her parents own a house in Taiwan that upon their
death will be inherited by the Applicant’s brother.
         
The Applicant’s brother, who is 43 years old and self-employed as an interior
designer, is a dual citizen of Taiwan and Canada.  He currently resides in Taiwan.  The
Applicant’s only contact with him is about three times a year.  He is not affiliated with the
Taiwanese Government in any capacity.    
3
In November 1999, November 2003 and March 2004, the Applicant traveled to
Taiwan for a vacation and to visit her parents.  On two of those occasions, she took her
children with her to allow them the opportunity to visit their grandparents.  During her
visit in March 2004, the Applicant’s parents asked her if she wanted to vote and so she
did.  During these visits the Applicant has never been approached by anyone seeking
protected or sensitive information from her.  In the event that she is ever confronted with
this situation, she testified that she will report it to her company’s security department.    
 
The Applicant’s mother purchased two properties in Taiwan and placed them in
the Applicant’s name when she was a child.  One of the properties was an apartment,
the other was a resort room in a resort hotel.  Applicant explained that she has never
seen the properties and this was done simply to avoid taxes in Taiwan.  Applicant has
since transferred these properties back into her mother’s name, since she is the true
owner.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A).
The Applicant has no assets in Taiwan.  Applicant’s financial records indicate that
she owns a house In the United States worth approximately $870,000.00, with
approximately $670,000.00 in equity, several IRA’s, with almost $100,00.00, and a
checking and savings account with approximately $28,000.00.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C).
Applicant has received numerous certificates for her contributions to the work
environment, including Excellence in Action awards with monetary compensation, and
for courses she has successfully completed.  A Performance Review of the Applicant
dated August 26, 2008 reflects “exceptional performance” in the implementation and
successful execution of a system upgrade.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B). 
Letters of recommendation from the Applicant’s Direct Manager, her fourth level
Manager, a coworker, and a friend, attest to her competency, conscientiousness,
professionalism and hard working attitude.  She is considered to be responsible, mature
and trustworthy.  She consistently exhibits good judgment, is well organized, extremely
efficient and willing to do whatever task is needed to get the job done.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit D). 
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning the Taiwan.  Taiwan
is a multi-party democracy with a population of about 23 million. It is one of the most
active collectors of sensitive United States information and technology.  Numerous
individuals and companies have been subjected to civil penalties and or prosecuted for
illegally exporting, or attempting to illegally export, sensitive United States technology to
Taiwan.  One United States official was recently convicted of crimes relating to his
improper relationship with a Taiwanese intelligence official.
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
4
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8.  (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.;
8.  (c) Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
5
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and her ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign influence and has foreign connections
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign passport raises legitimate
questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the interests of the
United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government must be able to
place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security
rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
6
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  However,
Mitigating Conditions 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S, and 8(c) Contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation also apply.
Although the Applicant’s parents and brother are residents and citizens of
Taiwan, the Applicant has limited contact with them.  There is no evidence of a close
bond or strong evidence of affection.  She may speak with her parents twice a month
but the conversation is casual.  She only communicates with her brother three times a
year.  Clearly, the Applicant’s deep and abiding ties are here in the United States.  She
has lived in the United States for the past twenty years.  Although she is going currently
going through a divorce, she has two young children that she is responsible for.  She
has worked hard to establish herself as a responsible, educated, productive United
States citizen.  Her employment with the DOD and her significant assets, that include
her home, a checking and saving account and retirement account, are all in the United
States.  The Applicant essentially cut all ties from Taiwan when she moved to the
United States in 1988, and made it her permanent home.  
It is noted that the current political situation in Taiwan elevates the cause for
concern in this case.  However, the evidence shows that the Applicant has no bond and
affection with her foreign family members or to any foreign individual or to Taiwan in any
way that could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Therefore, there is no possibility of
foreign influence that exists that could create the potential for conduct resulting in the
compromise of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is not vulnerable to
foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence).
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subpara. 1.a.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.b.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.c.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.d.: For the Applicant
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
