DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )         ISCR Case No. 08-04488
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: 
Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 05 August 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines B and C.  Applicant answered the SOR 19 August 2008, and requested a1
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 2 October 2008, and I convened a hearing 28
October 2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 6 November 2008.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the allegations of the SOR. She is a 38-year-old engineer
employed by a defense contractor since July 2002. She has not previously held a
clearance. 
Applicant was born in the Republic of China (Taiwan) in April 1970. She grew up
there and was educated there through high school. After graduation, she worked
several part-time jobs. She immigrated to the U.S. in December 1990, where she lived
with her aunt and uncle—both U.S. citizens. When she first arrived in the U.S., her
English was not very good, so she enrolled in English as second language (ESL)
classes. When her English was good enough, she enrolled in college classes. She
obtained her associate’s degree in science from a local community college in May 1997.
She obtained her bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering from a nationally-
prestigious university in August 2001, and later obtained her master’s degree in
telecommunications from another university in May 2007.
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 1997. She obtained her
U.S. passport in July 1998. She previously had a Taiwanese passport that she obtained
before immigrating to the U.S. Under U.S. immigration law, she was required to
maintain that passport while she remained a legally-resident alien in the U.S. She used
that passport to travel to Taiwan in December 1999, January 2000, May 2001, and
October 2001, not aware of any reason for her to not use her Taiwanese passport. She
renewed her Taiwanese passport in July 2002, again not aware of any reason not to.
That passport remains valid until 2012, but Applicant has surrendered it to her corporate
and site facility security officers (FSO), both of whom have acknowledged and accepted
their obligation to report to the government if Applicant asks for the passport back.
Applicant is aware of the possible consequences for her clearance if she does so (A.E.
A).
Applicant’s mother is a resident citizen of Taiwan, retired for 10 years from her
job as an insurance agent for a private insurer. Applicant’s step-father is also a resident
citizen of Taiwan. He has been retired for 11 years from his job as a ticket seller in a
small-town bus station, referred to by Applicant in her answer to DOHA interrogatories
(G.E. 2) as “department of 8transportations (sic).” The record does not reflect whether
this employment was with the Taiwanese government or a local government.
Applicant’s brother is a resident citizen of Taiwan, employed as a junior high math
teacher in a private school. She talks to her brother and mother two or three times per
month by telephone. She also has some high-school friends in Taiwan, who she speaks
to by telephone three or four times per year. One is a housewife. Two others work in a
commercial electronics company. She also visits these friends when she travels to
Taiwan.
Since December 1999, when she became able to afford it, Applicant has traveled
to Taiwan once per year on average. On one of her trips in 2000, she opened some
bank accounts so she would have automated teller access to cash. She deposited her
Applicant estimates her net worth in the U.S. at $30,000.2
3
travelers checks in her accounts and withdrew cash as necessary during her visit.
Typically, she would leave about $200 in the accounts when she left, but for her last trip
in April 2008 (for her mother’s birthday) she took extra money but had not spent as
much as she thought she might, so the accounts now have approximately $3,000 in
them.  She derives no income from the accounts. It does not appear from the record2
that Applicant requires Taiwanese citizenship to retain these accounts. Because she
maintains the accounts only for her travel convenience, she has expressed a
willingness to close the accounts as necessary. She has also expressed her willingness
to renounce her Taiwanese citizenship.
Taiwan is a multiparty democracy, whose authorities generally respect the
human rights of its citizens. While Taiwan is an active collector of industrial information
and engages in industrial espionage, the record does not demonstrate that the
government of Taiwan targets U.S. intelligence information. Further, the record does not
demonstrate that it seeks to exert pressure on U.S. citizens to collect information from
family members residing in country or abroad.
Applicant’s current supervisor—the person who hired her—testified that she had
proven herself to be open, honest, trustworthy, and reliable in the six years he has
known her. He was aware of her family background, but was aware of no reason she
should not have a clearance.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines list factors to be considered in evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative Judges must
assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each adjudicative issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in Section 6.3. of the
Directive. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative for or against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should
be followed whenever a case can be measured against them, as they represent policy
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering
the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative
guidelines are Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6.4
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(a).5
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(e).6
4
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
Analysis
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and
interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign
financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign influence adjudications can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is known
to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information4
requires careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target
protected information, and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that
information, and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive.
More specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  In5
addition, security concerns may be raised by a substantial business, financial, or
property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated
business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or
exploitation.6
In this case, the government did not establish that Applicant’s contacts with her
family and friends in Taiwan created a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. The government also did not establish that
Applicant’s bank accounts in Taiwan were sufficient to create a heightened risk of
influence or exploitation.
Taiwan and the U.S. enjoy excellent foreign relations. Although Taiwan is an
active collector of commercial information, it has not been demonstrated to target
protected U.S. information, nor has it been demonstrated to target U.S. citizens to
Indeed, the government’s closing argument focused not on Applicant’s contacts in Taiwan vis-a-vis the7
Taiwanese government, but on perceived risks posed by the fact that Taiwan is infiltrated with agents from
the People’s Republic of Chine (PRC). Presumably, Applicant would not be able to distinguish these agents
from any other ethnic Chinese on Taiwan. Assuming this is so, the government has still failed to establish how
Applicant might be influenced to provide protected information to the Taiwanese government—or to the PRC
acting under cover.
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 8.(a).8
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 8.(f).9
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 10.(a) exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship10
after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This included but is not
limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport; (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial . .
interests in another country;
5
obtain protected information. Given that Taiwan generally respects the human rights of
its citizens, the risk that it might seek protected information—or succeed in obtaining
such information—from Applicant is low, if not non-existent.
Examining Applicant’s circumstances, the government produced no evidence
that there was a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion because of Applicant’s contacts with family and friends in Taiwan.
Applicant has resided in the U.S. nearly half her life, and most of her adult life. Her most
significant financial interests are all in the U.S. Her contacts with her parents, sibling,
and friends are normal. There is nothing in the circumstances of their being in Taiwan,
or in Applicant’s contacts with them, to heighten the risk that she could be impelled or
compelled to provide protected information to Taiwan. Similarly, her bank accounts in
Taiwan amount to about 10 per cent of her net worth, an amount I consider insubstantial
under the circumstances of this case.
Even if I were to assume that the government had established security concerns
based on her contacts with Taiwanese nationals and her bank accounts, I conclude that
she has mitigated the security concerns.  Her contacts in Taiwan are routine, Taiwan7
generally respects the rights of its citizens, and none of her contacts in Taiwan are, or
have been, involved in activities that would make it likely that Applicant would have to
choose between their interests or those of the U.S.  Similarly, both the value and nature8
of her bank accounts are such that they are unlikely to be used effectively to influence
her.  The balances are not significant, and the fact that Applicant left the money in her9
accounts after her last visit suggest that those sums are not necessary for her routine
financial transactions in the U.S. I resolve Guideline B for Applicant.
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline C by
showing that Applicant obtained a Taiwanese passport in February 1996 and has
opened and retained bank accounts in Taiwan, despite becoming a naturalized U.S.
citizen in October 1987.  However, Applicant mitigated the Guideline C security10
concerns. Although she has been a dual citizen of Taiwan and the United States since
her birth, her Taiwanese citizenship has little security significance under the
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 11.(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in11
a foreign country;
¶ 11.(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;12
¶ 11.(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise13
invalidated; 
6
circumstances of this case. It is largely based on her parents’ citizenship.   Further, her11
Taiwanese citizenship does not appear to be required for her to maintain her bank
accounts there.
For Applicant’s conduct to fall within the security concerns of Guideline C, she
must have acted in a way to indicate a preference for a foreign nation over the United
States. However, inimical intent or detrimental impact on the interests of the United
States is not required before the government can seek to deny access under Guideline
C. The government has a compelling interest in ensuring those entrusted with this
nation's secrets will make decisions free of concerns for the foreign country of which
they may also be a citizen.
 
Applicant’s active exercise of dual citizenship after becoming a naturalized U.S.
citizen was done deliberately, but unwittingly. She opened her Taiwanese bank
accounts for her convenience traveling to Taiwan, not to indicate any preference for
Taiwan. She has expressed her willingness to close her accounts and renounce her
Taiwanese citizenship.  She was not aware of any prohibition on holding a foreign12
passport. Indeed, there is no such proscription except in the context of clearance
adjudications. She has surrendered her passport to her security office and understands
the potential consequences to her clearance should she regain possession of it.13
Further, given her work performance since 2002, she demonstrated that she can be
counted on to always act in preference to the United States. I resolve Guideline C for
Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Subparagraph e: For Applicant
Subparagraph f: For Applicant
Subparagraph g: For Applicant
Subparagraph h: For Applicant
7
Paragraph 2. Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
 
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
