                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-03026
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
January 27, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On August 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 28, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 22, 2008. Applicant filed a
response to the FORM on November 4, 2008. The case was assigned to me on
November 18, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46 year old employee of a defense contractor.
Applicant is indebted to RADIO/SAMDC in the approximate amount of $2,244.00.
This debt was charged off. In his response to the SOR, applicant stated he spoke with a
customer service representative who told him to call them back when he could repay
the entire debt. In his response to the FORM, he stated the debt has been transferred to
IGT Collection and despite several attempts, he has not been able to speak with anyone
at IGT.
Applicant was indebted to CingularPR on an account that had been charged off
in the amount of $50.00. He satisfied the debt in August 2008.
Applicant was indebted to PALISADES on a collection account that originated
with Wells Fargo in the approximate amount of $6,033.00. In his response to the SOR,
applicant stated he reached an agreement with the creditor in August 2008 to make “a
down payment of $450.00 and to pay $150.00 monthly until the bill is satisfied.” He
attached documents to his response to the FORM that indicate he made an initial
$400.00 payment in August 2008, and then made $150.00 payments in September and
October 2008.
Applicant was indebted to LVNV FUNDING on an account that had been turned
over for collection in the approximate amount of $378.00. He satisfied the debt in
August 2008.
Applicant is indebted to BCO Bilbao in the approximate amount of $9,310.00. In
his response to the SOR, applicant stated he had “a vehicle from BCO Bilbao”  and
when he lost his job he notified them and voluntarily surrendered the car. He further
stated to his knowledge, “the vehicle was supposed to be auctioned off to satisfy his
debt.” In his response to the FORM, he stated he spoke with the repossession
department of the company that actually picked up his vehicle and was told the vehicle
had been sold, the amount owed was no longer correct, and that the company could not
give him any further information over the phone. He further stated that he has started
the process of acquiring the information through the mail.
Applicant is indebted to M. Berrios in the approximate amount of $999.00. This
debt has been charged off. In his responses to the SOR and FORM, applicant stated he
spoke to the creditor and was told they will only accept payment in full. He then added,
“I am already making arrangements to comply with [the creditor’s] payment policies.”
Applicant was indebted to International Home Products in the approximate
amount of $1,025.00. The account was delinquent. Applicant satisfied the debt in
August 2008.
Applicant is indebted to MOVISTAR on an account that has been turned over for
collection in the approximate amount of $481.00.
Although applicant attached to his SOR response what appears to be a social security statement showing
1
no income in 2004 and 2005, this information conflicts with his employment history he reported on his
security questionnaire in May 2007 (Exhibit 1). In Exhibit 1, he stated he was employed as a vice-
president of an auto-related company from 1994 to approximately March 2005, and was self employed as
the owner of a café from approximately March 2005 to 2007.
3
Applicant was indebted to AT&T on an account that had been turned over for
collection to Palisades in the approximate amount of $257.00. This debt was satisfied in
October 2008. 
Applicant was indebted to Sprint in the approximate amount of $635.00. This
debt had been turned over for collection. Applicant satisfied the debt in October 2008.
Applicant is indebted to Discover Financial in the approximate amount of
$3,886.00. In response to the SOR, he stated he called the creditor and was “notified
that this account was deleted from their file system.” He attached a note from either
Discover or their collection agency to his response to the FORM confirming that
applicant authorized $50.00 to be taken out of his checking account on October 23,
2008  and applied to his Discover debt.
In his response to the SOR, applicant stated, among other things, that his
financial problems started when he was injured on the job and began receiving workers
compensation benefits in 2003. He added that he was also unemployed in 2004 and
2005, although he didn’t make clear if his unemployment was related to his injury.  1
In April 2008, applicant provided DOHA with a March 2008 bank statement
indicating he has a total of about $25,000.00 in three separate accounts with one bank.
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
4
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to Financial Considerations is set forth in
Paragraph 18 of the new AG, and is as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one*s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual*s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The AG note several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
Paragraph 19.a., an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 19.c., “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may
raise security concerns. The evidence shows applicant has a history of conduct
indicating an inability or unwillingness to pay his debts.  Accordingly, these disqualifying
conditions are applicable.
The guidelines also set out mitigating conditions. Paragraph 20.a. may apply
where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual*s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s financial difficulties are
recent and ongoing. The evidence he offered is insufficient to establish he is not likely to
experience further financial delinquencies. This mitigation condition is not applicable.
Under Paragraph 20.b., it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person*s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant
states his financial problems were caused by a work-related injury and a subsequent
5
lengthy period of unemployment. The injury was beyond his control. However, even if
he were considered unemployed in 2004 and 2005 notwithstanding the contrary
evidence in his security questionnaire, because he provided no explanation for the
unemployment, I cannot conclude his unemployment was beyond his control. And,
given his failure to address his delinquent debts until August 2008, the evidence does
not support a finding he acted responsibly. This mitigating condition is not applicable.
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”
is potentially mitigating under Paragraph 20.c. The problem is not under control. This
mitigating condition is not applicable.
Paragraph d. applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Applicant has
satisfied some of his smaller debts, and appears to have begun to repay his large
PALISADES debt. This is a factor in his favor. However, he did not take any action to
address these delinquent debts until he received the SOR, and many of them remain
unpaid even though, according to the bank statement he sent to DOHA, applicant
appears to have the funds to satisfy them. This does not constitute a good faith effort to
repay his debts. This mitigating condition is not applicable.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man who fell
behind on numerous debts many years ago. Although some of his financial problems
may have been caused by his work injury, he has had years since the injury to address
these debts, but chose not to do so. Only after he received the SOR did he begin to
address his delinquencies. Although he has made some debt payments, most of his
indebtedness remains outstanding, even though he appears to have the funds to repay
all of the debts for which he remains legally liable. Applicant failed to mitigate the
security concerns arising from Guideline F.
6
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
