 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6, Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-05798
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, the government’s exhibits (Gx.),
Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.), and Applicant’s testimony, her request for a security
clearance is granted.
On January 30, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for her job with
a defense contractor, where she works as a fiber optics assembler. (Gx. 1) On May 27,
2008, after reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent to Applicant
interrogatories to obtain clarification of and/or additional information about adverse
information in his background.  After reviewing the results of the background1
investigation, including her response to the interrogatories (Gx. 2), DOHA adjudicators
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with2
the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. On July 25,
2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which
raise security concerns addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under3
Guideline F (financial considerations).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on September 9, 2008, and I convened a hearing on October 22, 2008.
The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented four exhibits (Gx. 1 - 4).
Applicant testified, presented one witness, and submitted four exhibits (Ax. A - D). I also
left the record open after the hearing to receive additional relevant information. On
October 30, 2008, I received a post-hearing submission, which is included in the record
without objection as Ax. E. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on November
6, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes approximately $24,675
for 12 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.l). Applicant admitted with explanation all of the
SOR allegations except for SOR ¶ 1.l, about which she claimed to have no knowledge.
Applicant also asserted in response to the SOR that some of the debts alleged were
duplicate entries resulting from transfer of accounts among collection agencies. I have
also made the following findings of relevant fact. 
Applicant is 51 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor since
January 2006. She and her husband have been married since February 1994. He is a
veteran of the United States Air Force who served in Vietnam in 1965. Since 2003, he
has been 100% disabled from the effects of Agent Orange. He is confined to a wheel
chair after two partial amputations of one foot and he is legally blind.
For 20 years after he left the military, Applicant’s husband worked in law
enforcement, but usually held additional jobs in the television and electronics repair
jobs. His medical problems started with diabetes and he has received medical treatment
at various civilian and Veterans Administration (VA) facilities over the past eight years.
In 1997, Applicant and her husband opened their own television and electronics repair
company. Records indicate the company had several employees, a modest fleet of
trucks, and service contracts with several businesses in their area. They used a
combination of business credit accounts (for supplies, gas, etc.) and personal credit for
purchases not covered by their business credit. Applicant was employed by the
business as a bookkeeper and office manager. Her husband ran the business and
3
much of his efforts were aimed at creating new business and servicing existing
accounts and customers. 
In 2003, Applicant’s husband’s health took a turn for the worse in the form of
diabetes. After a partial amputation of his left foot, complications set in causing
extensive hospitalization and a six-month recuperation period. Her husband was unable
to tend to their business, employees left and the business ultimately failed. Between
about 2000 and 2003, Applicant and her husband were able to realize about $70,000 in
annual personal income from the business.
Applicant’s husband was evaluated in 2003 by the VA and it was determined that
his medical problems resulted from exposure to Agent Orange while he was in Vietnam.
He was certified as 100% disabled and has not worked since. However, it took the VA
almost 18 months to begin his disability payments. In the meantime, Applicant found
work as a corrections officer with the local police department. Because her $1,560
monthly take home pay was the only household income until sometime in 2005, much of
their personal and business credit accounts went unpaid. By the time the VA sent them
nearly $40,000 in past due benefits, the mortgage on their house was nine months past
due and in foreclosure. They used the money to bring their mortgage current and to pay
off their business creditors and some personal creditors.
When Applicant submitted her e-QIP, she disclosed the existence of several
delinquent debts and stated they resulted from the loss of their business. (Gx. 1) Credit
reports obtained during Applicant’s background investigation (Gx. 3 and 4) attribute to
her approximately $24,675 in delinquent debt for the 12 accounts as listed in the SOR.
Of the debts alleged, Applicant asserted the $1,125 hospital debt listed in SOR 1.a is
the subject of an insurance dispute. She claimed the medical care provided was for her
husband in 2001 and that the hospital should have submitted TriCare paperwork to
receive payment. Applicant spoke with the hospital but has not submitted any claims to
TriCare or generated any correspondence regarding this dispute. (Answer to SOR; Tr.
75 - 78)
The debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.e - 1.g were for debts left to Applicant and her
husband by his late mother’s estate. Applicant is working with the creditors to have
these items removed from her credit history. (Answer; Gx. 2; Ax. D; Tr. 81 - 82) Also,
the debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.I are the same debt reported by the original
creditor and a collection agency. Applicant also claimed the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b
and 1.c are the same account; however, a review of the credit reports in the record
shows they have different account numbers and were opened at different times. Finally,
in response to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt at SOR ¶ 1.l was hers; however, in
response to financial interrogatories in June 2008, she acknowledged that debt as one
of those that went unpaid when their business failed. The creditor is a collection agency
for an unknown account. (Gx. 2 - 4)
Applicant went to work for her current employer in August 2007. She now brings
home $2,230 each month. Her husband’s disability payments total about $3,166 each
month. The house they bought in 1999 is worth about $175,000, and the balance on
their mortgage is about $117,000. Applicant and her husband would like to sell their
 Directive. 6.3.4
4
house but the real estate market is not currently in their favor. They would use the
proceeds for debt repayment, to move closer to her work site, and to lower their living
expenses. A personal financial statement Applicant submitted (Gx. 2) in June 2008,
reflects a net monthly cashflow of about $156. After their regular expense, and their
monthly mortgage and two monthly car loan payments totaling more than $700, the only
credit card they are paying is a Sears account at $20 per month. Applicant and her
husband have not obtained any credit counseling or other help to either resolve their
debts or to improve their money management skills. They were told by legal advisors at
a nearby Air Force base that they should not pay debt consultation companies to
negotiate with their creditors. They were also advised to consider filing bankruptcy to
resolve their debts. Applicant and her husband do not intend to file bankruptcy, stating
they intend to pay their debts. They have not yet reached any repayment or other
settlement agreements with their creditors. (Tr. 77 - 84)
Applicant and her husband are active in the Civil Air Patrol as volunteer
communications officers. They have been trained in search and rescue procedures, and
are qualified under the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) first
responder training program. References from Applicant’s friends and former police
department co-workers show she enjoys a positive reputation in the community for
integrity and reliability. (Ax. A)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
5
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The government presented sufficient information to support all but one of the
allegations in SOR ¶ 1. Because SOR 1.I is a duplicate of SOR 1.d, SOR 1.I is
concluded for the Applicant. Available information shows approximately $23,537 in
delinquent debt for 11 accounts attributable to Applicant since as far back as 2001.
Available information shows Applicant has not paid or otherwise resolved any of the
debts in her credit history. A review of her current monthly cashflow after expenses
suggests she is unable to pay her debts outright. Accordingly, the record in this case
requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
6
unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations).
Available information shows that the actual amount of debt attributable to
Applicant is actually about $21,803. The debt at SOR ¶ 1.a resulted from an insurance
error. The debt at SOR ¶ 1.I, as noted above, is a duplicate, and the debts in SOR ¶¶
1.e - 1.g are from her mother-in-law’s estate. Additionally, the credit card debt at ¶ 1.k is
currently about $12,149, but started as a $4,000 account that grew with interest and
collection fees over time. (Tr. 61) That debt constitutes more than half Applicant’s total
debt. The remaining six debts average about $1,600 each.
In response, Applicant has demonstrated that her debts became delinquent
primarily through the 2003 failure of the small business she and her husband had
owned since about 1997. That business failure was precipitated by her husband’s health
problems that rendered him 100% disabled. Also contributing to their financial problems
was an 18-month delay in receipt of VA benefits. Once they received nearly $40,000
from the VA in 2005, they brought their mortgage out of foreclosure and paid off
business and personal accounts. Since then, Applicant has taken little or no action to
resolve her remaining debts. She claimed at hearing that she has contacted some of
her creditors and that she has relied on legal advice to avoid debt consulting
companies. However, she also did not heed legal advice to file bankruptcy and there is
no corroborative information showing she has entered into any substantive negotiations
with any of her creditors or that she has sought other help in resolving her debts. Nor is
there any documentation of payments made, despite being allowed time for post-
hearing submissions. Ax. E consisted solely of past tax records related to their small
business, but did not shed any additional light on efforts to repay the debts alleged in
the SOR.
Of the Guideline F mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20, Applicant benefits from
the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment).
Applicant and her husband have incurred no new delinquencies since they received
their VA benefits. Their current finances are sound and they live well within their means.
The record also supports application of AG ¶ 20(b)(the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances), which
directly addresses Applicant’s experience with a failed business and her husband’s
illness. The second prong of this adjudicative factor is supported by the fact Applicant
and her husband used the money they received from the VA to settle what debts they
could. As already noted, their current finances are sound and they have not incurred
new delinquencies since 2005. On balance, I conclude Applicant’s financial difficulties
and the ongoing presence of unpaid debt are not likely to cause her to act illegally or in
any way contrary to the national interest to generate funds to resolve her debts. The
Guideline F security concerns are resolved for the Applicant.
7
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). There has been no misconduct
here. Applicant is a mature adult who had to assume the role of primary income earner
when her husband became disabled. She attempted unsuccessfully to salvage their
business in 2003, but found work as soon as she could to support them both. While she
has been unable to resolve their debts, she and her husband have not spent more than
they have; nor have they resorted to excessive use of their personal credit. The
circumstances that gave rise to her financial problems are not likely to recur or cause
further delinquencies. 
Positive information about Applicant’s character and reliability is sufficient to
show that the adverse information about her finances cannot be used as a means to
pressure or coerce her into acting contrary to the national interest. A fair and
commonsense evaluation of this record shows that the security concerns about
Applicant’s finances have been satisfied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
 Subparagraph 1.a - 1.l: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
