 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-04023
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, the government’s exhibits (Gx.),
Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.), and Applicant’s testimony, his request for a security clearance
is denied.
On August 22, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified information. On August 21,
2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
raise security concerns addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under2
Guideline F (financial considerations).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on November 13, 2008, and I convened a hearing on December 16,
2008. The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented three exhibits
(Gx. 1 - 3). Applicant testified and submitted one exhibit (Ax. A). DOHA received the
transcript of hearing (Tr.) on December 29, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
The government alleged in the SOR that Applicant owes approximately $25,079
for 24 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.x). Applicant admitted all of the SOR
allegations, except for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.x. In addition to the facts entered
through Applicant’s admissions, I have made the following findings of relevant fact. 
Applicant is 29 years old and has been employed by a large defense contractor
since June 2005. He and his fiancee live together and are the parents of a six-year-old
child. Since July 2007, he has been enrolled in his employer’s leadership development
program, designed to expose employees with potential for future technical and
management expertise to different aspects of the company’s business operations.
Applicant graduated from college in December 2002 with a degree in transportation
logistics. He received a masters degree in the same field from the same university in
May 2005. From October 2001 until May 2005, he worked as a collections analyst for a
large national bank. (Gx. 1)
In response to e-QIP questions about his finances, Applicant disclosed multiple
delinquent debts for personal credit accounts. He also disclosed that his car was briefly
repossessed by the bank until he was able to pay the amount past due. (Gx. 1) In
response to interrogatories sent to him by DOHA adjudicators, Applicant confirmed the
debts attributed to him that were reported in a credit bureau report obtained during his
background investigation. (Gx. 2 and 3) However, some of the debts have been
reported twice. The credit card debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d (Citi Financial for $5,678) is the
same account listed in SOR ¶ 1.g (LVNV Funding/Citi Financial for $6,048). The unpaid
medical debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.I (Gulf Coast Collections for $80) is the same account
listed in SOR ¶ 1.h. The unpaid telephone bills listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.r ($886 each
to AFNI/AT&T (Bellsouth) and CBCS/Bellsouth, respectively) represent the same
account listed in SOR ¶ 1.x. Accordingly, the total amount Applicant actually owes is
$11,501 for 20 accounts. (Ax. A; Tr. 27 - 29)
Applicant has been steadily employed since 2001. His fiancee, however,
experienced job layoffs between April and July 2006, between June and September
2007, and between May and July 2008. (Ax. A) Applicant has been trying to reduce
 Directive. 6.3.3
3
expenses of late. He and his fiancee moved to a new residence in August 2008, which
has lowered their rent by about $200 (Tr. 27), and they have reduced spending on
things like internet service, cable television, and other monthly accounts. Applicant’s
daughter, who has been attending private school, will be moving to a public school in
the next school year. (Tr. 55 - 56) A review of Applicant’s current finances showed he
and his fiancee have about $786 left each month after expenses. (Tr. 36 - 41)
When Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories in June 2008, he provided
information showing he was aware of his debts and their current status (e.g, balance,
which collection firm holds the account, etc.). He also presented information showing he
had made minimal payments of $5 each to most of his creditors, ostensibly to show he
had contacted them and would be establishing payment plans. However, his response
to interrogatories also included information showing that as recently as June 2008, he
was overdrawn on his checking account on multiple occasions. (Gx. 2) At hearing,
Applicant presented information showing that in June 2008 he paid off a delinquent
retail store account not listed in the SOR, and that in October and November he paid
about $2,000 to satisfy another credit card account not listed in the SOR. (Ax. A)
Applicant intends to begin paying off his debts in a systematic way in 2009. He
also asserted he has repayment agreements with 10 of his 20 creditors. However, he
presented no information to corroborate his claims or to show that he has made any
payments to any of the creditors listed in the SOR since June 2008. (Ax. A; Tr. 41 - 54)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,3
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).6
4
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  5
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.6
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The government presented sufficient information to support all of the allegations
in SOR ¶ 1. Even after omitting the duplicate accounts listed in the SOR, he still owes at
least $11,000 for 20 debts, some of which have been delinquent for more than three
years. Available information also shows Applicant has not paid or resolved any of the
debts listed alleged. He has demonstrated a command of the information about and
status of his debts. However, he has not shown why, in light of a positive monthly
cashflow in excess of $700 for the second half of the 2008 calendar year, he has not
 See footnote 7, supra. 7
5
paid even his most modest debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.h. 1.I, 1.k, 1.t and 1.w allege debts less
than $100 each). Accordingly, the record requires application of the disqualifying
conditions listed at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶
19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
In response, Applicant has not presented any information that would support
application of any of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20. His financial problems are
recent, in that they remain unresolved. Despite his obvious understanding of where he
stands regarding most of his debts, he has not explained how he came to accrue so
much debt. The fact his wife experienced three brief periods of unemployment does not,
without more, explain his current circumstances or overall failure to be more proactive in
resolving his delinquencies. Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has failed to present
information sufficient to mitigate the government’s adverse information about his
finances.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 29 years old and
appears to be a mature, responsible adult. He has the potential for continued
professional advancement through his participation in his company’s leadership
development program. However, while it bodes well for him that he is well-organized
and knows what he has to do to resolve his finances, he has not demonstrated that he
will actually do so or that the way he and his fiancee manage their finances will preclude
a recurrence of his financial problems. In summary, there is insufficient information for
me to conclude that Applicant has satisfied the doubts about his suitability for a
clearance raised by his debts. Because protection of the national interest is paramount
in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.7
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d, 1.l, 1.r: For Applicant
 Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.e - 1.k, 
     1.m - 1.q, 1.s - 1.x: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
