 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
 
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06582 
                                                            )                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Glendon,  Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.   Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on 
June 24, 2004. She recertified the SF 86 on January 10, 2005. On November 28, 2007, 
she completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP). On October 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
 
2 
 
 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On November 14, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
December 2, 2008. I convened a hearing on January 7, 2009, to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced seven exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 7 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant 
testified on her own behalf and called no witnesses. She introduced two exhibits, which 
were marked as Ex. A and Ex. B and admitted to the record without objection. 
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business on 
January 14, 2009, so that Applicant could, if she wished, provide additional information 
for the record. Applicant timely filed one additional exhibit. Department Counsel did not 
object to Applicant’s post-hearing submission. I marked the post-hearing submission as   
Ex. C, and it was admitted to the record. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the 
hearing on January 26, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains ten allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.j.) In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
all ten allegations. Applicant’s admissions are included herein as findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and never married. She has attended evening college 
classes for several years, and she hopes to receive a degree in electrical engineering in 
2009.  She is also pursuing a degree in computer science.  Since September 2007, she 
has been employed as an operations specialist by a federal contractor. Her annual 
salary is $58,000. She currently holds a security clearance and seeks a higher level of 
clearance. (Ex. 1; Tr. 36-40, 47, 76.) 
 
 From May 2004 to March 2007, Applicant worked for employer A. She was 
terminated by employer A because she had improperly obtained and released 
confidential information about a coworker. In September 2006, prior to her termination, 
Applicant was counseled by employer A for aggressive behavior toward her coworkers. 
Applicant was unemployed for two months between March and May 2007. From May 
2007 until August 2007, Applicant worked for employer B.  When employer B moved its 
operations to another location in the same general area, Applicant refused to travel to 
the new location because she claimed she did not have access to adequate 
transportation. She was terminated by employer B, and she was unemployed from 
August to September 2007, when she acquired the position she now holds.  (Tr. 42-48; 
73-75.)    
  
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 In February 2004, Applicant purchased the home in which she and her family had 
been living as tenants since 1991. She purchased the house for $350,000. She 
obtained a first mortgage on the property for $297,000. She also obtained a second 
mortgage of $40,000 on the property.  The seller of the property reduced the purchase 
price of the house by $12,000.  Applicant put $3,000 of her money toward the purchase 
price of the home and paid closing costs. Applicant’s mother, sister, and the sister’s two 
children live with her in the home. Together, the mother and sister pay Applicant $2,000 
a month in rent. The mother and sister also pay all utilities on the home and purchase 
all groceries.  (Tr. 38-40, 63-65, 78.) 
 
 Applicant used credit cards to finance repairs and renovations to her house. 
Between 2004 and 2007, she accumulated approximately $80,000 in credit card debt.  
When she lost her job with Employer B, she stopped paying her credit card debt. In 
September 2007, when she began to work for her present employer, Applicant’s 
mortgage went into default, and she failed to pay her credit card delinquencies.  (Tr. 72-
75.)   
 
 Applicant admitted the following delinquent credit card debts: a debt of $9,804 on 
an account that was opened in February, 2004 and which was charged off in January 
2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a.); a debt of approximately $20,0001 on an account that was opened in 
2004 and which had not been paid since June 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.b.); a debt of $2,778 on 
an account opened in 2004 and which had not been paid since June 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.c.); 
a debt of $10,248 on an account opened in March 2004 and which had not been paid as 
of September 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.d.); a debt of $27,865 on an account opened in March 
2004 and which had not been paid since February 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.e.); a debt of $11,255 
on an account which had not been paid since October 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.f.); a debt of 
$5,641 on an account which had not been paid since August 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.g.); and a 
debt of approximately $2,000 on a credit card account (SOR ¶.1.j.). (Ex. 5; Tr. 48-56, 
88-89.) 
 
 Applicant sought credit counseling in September 2007. She made no further 
payments on her delinquent credit card debts until she contracted with a debt 
repayment service in September 2008. According to her agreement with the debt 
repayment service, Applicant will pay the service $824 a month for 60 months. For the 
first eight months, the debt repayment service will charge Applicant a service fee of 
$760 a month, leaving only $63 each month for payment to her creditors.  From months 
nine to 24, the debt repayment service will charge Applicant a service fee of $332, 
leaving $491 each month for payment to her creditors. (Ex. B; Tr. 81-88.) 
 
 Applicant’s agreement with the debt repayment service makes clear that the 
service does not provide funds for settlement offers from creditors, and it cautions 
customers that they must save additional money to respond to settlement offers. 
Applicant failed to provide documentation to corroborate payment to the debt repayment 
service. (Ex. B at 1; Tr. 96-97.) 
 
1 Applicant’s Ex. B identified the amount of this debt as $15,948. (Ex. B.) 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant also owes a debt of $1,041 to her state employment commission. (SOR 
¶ 1.h.) The debt was incurred in 2007, and Applicant has known of the debt since 
September 2007. She has a verbal agreement to pay the debt in five installments of 
$200, beginning in January 2009. As of the date of her hearing, Applicant had made no 
payments.  (Ex. 5; Tr. 56-60.) 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant was notified that her primary home mortgage, an 
adjustable rate mortgage, was in default and would be subject to foreclosure.2 As of 
September 2008, the $293,000 account had not been paid and was placed for 
collection. (SOR ¶ 1.i.) To cure the default, Applicant entered into a forebearance 
agreement and payment plan. On November 1, 2008, she remitted two payments 
totaling $9,000 to the mortgage servicing company. Half of the money came from her 
savings and half came from her mother and sister. She then committed to 23 increased 
monthly mortgage payments of $3,354 from November 2008 to September 30, 2010.  At 
her hearing, she provided documentation showing she had made the required payments 
in November and December 2008. In a post-hearing submission, she provided 
documentation showing she had also made three payments on her delinquent mortgage 
in March, May, and June 2008. (Ex. A; Ex. C; Tr. 78-81, 92.) 
 
 Applicant’s monthly take-home pay is $3,249. In addition, she receives $2,000 in 
rent from her family members. The monthly payment on her primary mortgage is 
$3,354. The monthly payment on her second mortgage is $415. Each month she pays 
$824 to the debt repayment service on her credit card debt. She has a verbal payment 
plan to pay her state unemployment commission $200 for five months, beginning in 
January 2009. Her remainder after these payments is $456.3  She reports $600 in 
savings.  (Tr. 81, 92-95.) 
 
 Since Applicant purchased her house for $350,000 in 2004, it has increased in 
value. It now has an assessed value of $534,000. She intends to refinance her 
mortgage at some time in the future and to use the proceeds to pay her debts. (Tr. 100-
102.)  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
 
2 At the time of her hearing, Applicant was current on her second mortgage payments. (Tr. 66.) 
  
3 Applicant provided a Personal Financial Statement, dated August 1, 2008, showing a net remainder of 
$132.37 after subtractions for monthly fixed expenses and financial obligations. (Ex. C.) 
 
5 
 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
6 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable to 
pay her creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, such as loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might be 
applicable include evidence the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control (AG ¶ 20(c) or the individual has initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. (AG ¶ 20 (d))  
 
Most of Applicant=s financial delinquencies arose between 2004 and 2007, after 
she purchased a home and used credit cards to pay for substantial home repairs. Her 
financial stability was affected when her actions caused her to be terminated from two 
jobs in 2007. These circumstances have resulted in overwhelming debt which continues 
to the present day, a situation which raises concerns about Applicant’s good judgment.   
 
Applicant sought consumer credit counseling and has recently made good faith 
efforts to pay or settle her financial delinquencies. She provided financial records to 
show she took action to forestall foreclosure on her home by paying a lump sum of 
$9,000 and committing to an increased first mortgage payment for 23 months. Her 
current plans to pay her two mortgages, her credit card debt, and her debt to her state’s 
employment commission leave her with very little remainder to save for settlement 
offers under the terms of her debt repayment plan. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 
20(d) apply in part in mitigation, but that AG ¶ 20(a) and AG ¶ 20(b) do not apply in 
mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems began 
when she was a mature adult. Her own actions led to her being terminated from two 
positions in 2007, and her subsequent unemployment made it difficult for her to honor 
her financial commitments. However, she failed to address her delinquent debts for a 
significant period of time, a decision that raises concerns about her judgment and 
reliability. 
 
To her credit, Applicant has taken action in the past several months to address 
her delinquencies. At her hearing, she provided documentation showing good faith 
efforts to revitalize her first mortgage and to pay her credit card debt. However, these 
actions are recent and do not demonstrate a track record of satisfaction of debt 
consistently over time.  
 
Applicant’s financial situation arises from unusual circumstances, and she may 
find it beneficial to seek additional professional financial counseling and legal advice 
about resolving her debts and acquiring financial stability in the near term.  Applicant 
can reapply for a security clearance one year after the date that this decision becomes 
final.  If she wishes, she can produce new evidence that addresses the Government’s 
current security concerns.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her 
financial delinquencies.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.j.: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
