  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition to the Executive
Order and Directive, this case is adjudicated under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December
29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1,
2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.
The Directive is pending revision or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is
dated after the effective date.  
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 08-02260
SSN: -------------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esq.  
                             
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order,
DoD Directive, and Revised Guidelines,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals1
(DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on July 3, 2008. The SOR is
2
equivalent to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action.
The issues in this case fall under Guideline C for foreign preference and Guideline B for
foreign influence. 
Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by DOHA on August 11, 2008,
and he requested a hearing. It took place as scheduled pursuant to written notice on
November 20, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received November 26, 2008. For the
reasons discussed below, this case is decided for Applicant. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged that Applicant may have acted in a way to indicate a
preference for Nigeria over the United States by exercising dual citizenship. Also, the
SOR alleged Applicant may be subject to foreign influence due to his family ties or
connections to Nigeria. In his Answer, Applicant admitted, with explanations, the factual
allegations in SOR. In addition, the following facts are established by substantial
evidence. 
Applicant is a 42-year-old engineer employed by a federal contractor. He has
worked for this company since January 2006. This is the first time he has applied for a
security clearance. 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen. He was born to Nigerian parents who
were then in the U.S. because his father was a university student. The family departed
the U.S. about two years later and lived in the United Kingdom for a short period. The
family then returned to Nigeria where Applicant was raised and educated until 1988
when he decided to leave Nigeria. Applicant explained his decision to come to the U.S.
as follows:
I went to the U.S. embassy to ask them questions about coming to the
United States. And they told me at that time that I could, and within a few
months, I got a passport, and to be honest with you, I wanted to leave
Nigeria anyway, so I bought a one-way ticket and came to American and
never planned to go back (Tr. 91). 
Applicant traveled to the U.S. in 1988 using a U.S. passport, and he has since used a
U.S. passport for all foreign travel. 
He had been a university student in Nigeria during 1986–1988. He resumed his
studies in the U.S. and was a student during 1988–1994. He holds a bachelor’s degree
in electronics engineering technology (BSEET) from an institute of technology. He has
since worked in his profession for a series of companies. His current job title is principal
systems engineer working in the area of future combat systems (FCS). His annual
salary is about $85,000. With a performance bonus and award fees, his total annual
income could be up to $100,000. He is a productive, successful, and valued employee
who has a good reputation in his company (See Exhibits B and C and relevant witness
3
testimony). His on-the-job training includes the completion of security courses in the
subjects of OPSEC in 2007 and COMSEC in 2008 (Exhibit B, parts 6 and 7). Applicant’s
employment history does not include military service, but he did register with the U.S.
Selective Service (Exhibit 1).
Applicant met his future wife, who is a native-born U.S. citizen, in 1993 at church.
They married in 1994, and they have two school-aged children. His wife has a college
degree in business management, and she is currently working as a night auditor in the
IT department of a financial firm. She has had limited contact and interaction with
Applicant’s family members in Nigeria. None of Applicant’s family from Nigeria attended
the wedding in 1994, and she did not meet any of them until 2004 when she, along with
Applicant and the children, traveled to Nigeria. 
Applicant’s December 2004 trip to Nigeria is the first and only time he has
returned to Nigeria since departing there in 1988. For the trip, he used a U.S. passport
after he obtained a visa from the Nigerian Embassy in the U.S. He made the trip for two
reasons: (1) he had recently learned that his grandfather was dying; and (2) he wanted
his wife and children to visit his family in Nigeria as they had never met (Tr. 94). The trip
was for about two weeks and spilled over into January 2005. While there, he decided to
obtain a Nigerian passport, as he had never had one before. He obtained the passport
for two reasons: (1) he thought future travel would be easier (no visa requirement)
should he need to travel for a family emergency; and (2) he thought it would facilitate
inheritance should his father pass away. The Nigeria passport was issued to him on
January 4, 2005, but he used his U.S. passport to depart Nigeria and enter the U.S. on
the return trip. 
Applicant was not working for his current employer when he traveled to Nigeria
and obtained the passport in 2004. Since applying for a security clearance in 2007
(Exhibit 1), and being made aware of the security significance of dual citizenship and a
foreign passport, Applicant took action to address the concerns. He first delivered his
Nigerian passport to DOHA, but the agency returned it to him (Exhibit A, part 3). Then in
November 2008, Applicant completed and submitted the necessary paperwork to
renounce his Nigerian citizenship (Exhibit A, parts 1, 2, and 5). Along with the
renunciation application, he submitted his Nigerian passport, which he had defaced (Tr.
121–122; Exhibit A, part 4). Renouncing his Nigerian citizenship was not a difficult
decision for Applicant (Tr. 113). 
Applicant has multiple family members who are citizens of and residents in
Nigeria. Applicant has three siblings, an older sister and two younger brothers. His three
siblings were born in Nigeria where they reside today. None of his siblings have been
employed by the Nigerian government or served in the military. None of his siblings
work in a capacity related to the U.S. defense industry. As the eldest son, Applicant
understood that he stood to inherit his father’s estate, which he estimated its value at
less than U.S. $50,000 (Tr. 97). Since applying to renounce his citizenship, Applicant
now understands he will no longer inherit his father’s estate (Tr. 122–123), and he has
notified the next oldest brother.  
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a2
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.3
4
Applicant’s mother, who divorced his father some years ago, recently immigrated
to the U.S. Applicant served as her sponsor for immigration purposes. She moved into
Applicant’s household in 2008 and she has permanent resident alien status (Exhibit A,
part 6). She is now attending school to become a medical assistant so she can become
self-sufficient (Tr. 87–88). Applicant’s father worked in the brewery industry for many
years, he is self-supporting, and he is now essentially retired (Tr. 88).
After the divorce, Applicant’s father married a series of five women. The multiple
marriages produced multiple children (Tr. 84). Applicant has had little contact with his
half-siblings and the contact, aside from the 2004 trip, is limited to e-mail (Tr. 85). The
most frequent e-mail contact is about once every two to three months with one of the
half-siblings.  
Applicant’s mother remarried after the divorce and had three more sons, two of
whom passed away. The third is a citizen and resident of Nigeria. He is 31 years old
and Applicant has limited contact with him (Tr. 84). Their relationship is strained as
Applicant has declined to help him financially. 
Applicant has no business, financial, or property interests in Nigeria. Other than a
bank account he established during the 2004 trip, his financial affairs are all in the U.S.
He opened the bank account for the benefit of his mother to pay expenses associated
with immigrating to the U.S. Applicant believes the account now has a balance of about
$20.
Administrative notice is taken of certain facts about Nigeria as described in the
government’s written request (Appellant Exhibit I). In summary, the government of
Nigeria has been relatively unstable since gaining independence from Britain in 1960 as
reflected by military rule for approximately 28 years since independence, although
Nigeria returned to civilian rule in 1999. The Nigerian government’s human-rights record
is poor and it continues to commit serious abuses. The U.S. State Department has
warned U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel in Nigeria and of the difficult security
situation in the oil rich Niger Delta region of the country. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.2
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an3
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).6
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 10
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).11
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.12
5
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any4
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order5
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting6
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An7
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate8
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme9
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.10
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.11
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination12
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
 Revised Guidelines at 7–8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating13
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 7. 14
 Revised Guidelines at 7. 15
 Revised Guidelines at 7–8. 16
 MC 2 is “the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.”17
 MC 5 is “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise18
invalidated.”
 Revised Guidelines at 5–6 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating19
conditions). 
6
Analysis
Under Guideline C for foreign preference,  a security concern may arise “[w]hen13
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”14
The most pertinent disqualifying condition here is DC 1, which provides that a
security concern may exist and be disqualifying based on the “exercise of any right,
privilege, or obligation or foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through
foreign citizenship of a family member.”  DC 1 applies to Applicant based on his active15
exercise of Nigerian citizenship by obtaining a Nigerian passport in 2004 and
possessing it until 2008. The fact that he did not use the passport for travel is irrelevant,
as the actions of obtaining and possessing it raise security concerns within the meaning
of the guideline.  
The guideline also contains conditions that may mitigate the security concern.  I16
reviewed the MC under the guideline and conclude that two apply in Applicant’s favor.
First, MC 2 applies because Applicant completed and submitted the necessary
paperwork to renounce his Nigerian citizenship.  Although he has not yet received a17
response to his renunciation application, Applicant went beyond what is required by MC
2, which only requires an expression of willingness to renounce. In doing so, Applicant
has likely negated any right to inherit property from his father, which is a circumstance
full of possibilities (for example, there may be nothing to inherit or Applicant may
predecease his father or some other contingency). Second, MC 5 applies because
Applicant defaced his Nigerian passport and returned it to the Nigerian government.18
Taken together, his actions reflect his true intent and preference  and are more than
sufficient to overcome the security concerns under Guideline C. 
Under Guideline B for foreign influence,  security concerns may arise due to19
foreign contacts and interests “if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial
 Revised Guidelines at  5. 20
 Revised Guidelines at 5. 21
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8,22
2001).
 Revised Guidelines at 6. 23
7
interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization,
or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or
coercion by any foreign interest.”  There are two disqualifying conditions  that could20 21
raise security concerns and may be disqualifying in this case:
DC 1. [C]ontact with a foreign family member, business, or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
DC 2. [C]onnections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information. 
Of course, the mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is
not—as a matter of law—disqualifying under Guideline B. But if only one relative resides
in a foreign country and an applicant has contact with that relative, this factor alone is
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the
compromise of classified information.22
Here, the two disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant has contacts with
and connections to his family members in Nigeria. He comes from a large family, most
of whom live in Nigeria. He has ties of affection or emotion to his father, sister, and two
brothers. As the eldest son, he probably feels a sense of obligation to these people.
These circumstances create the potential for a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of his ties to immediate family
members in Nigeria. His ties to extended family members (the half-siblings) are not
nearly so strong and any security concerns stemming from these ties are minimal or
marginal or both.  
Three of the six mitigating conditions  under the guideline may apply to the facts23
and circumstances of this case:
MC 1.  [T]he nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
 Revised Guidelines at 1–2. 24
 Revised Guidelines at 5.25
8
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.;
MC 2.  [T]here is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
MC 3.  [C]ontact or communications with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation. 
The first and third MC do not apply because Applicant’s relationships with his
nuclear-family members in Nigeria are of sufficient magnitude or strength to negate
these two MCs. In the post-9/11 world, there is at least a remote or slight possibility that
dangerous elements within Nigeria could attempt to use his family members to coerce
or pressure Applicant.
But the second MC applies in Applicant’s favor. The record evidence supports a
conclusion that Applicant has a depth of loyalty to the U.S., so that he can be expected
to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. interest. Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen
by virtue of his parents’ temporary residence in the U.S.; however, he demonstrated his
loyalty to the U.S. by leaving Nigeria and his family in 1988 with a one-way ticket. Since
then, he has completed his education and worked in his profession as a systems
engineer for U.S. companies. In addition, he is married to a native-born U.S. citizen and
they have two children who were born here. And, not to be overlooked, is Applicant’s
mother with whom he has strong ties of affection and obligation. She is now living with
him because he sponsored her immigration to the U.S. Taken together, these
circumstances show that Applicant’s strongest family ties are to the U.S. and also
demonstrate the depth of his commitment to the U.S.
 
To sum up under the whole-person concept,  this is not a case of “divided24
loyalties”  with an applicant who has one foot in the U.S. and one foot in his native25
country. On the contrary, the evidence shows Applicant has both feet firmly rooted in
the U.S. and that he has significant contacts and ties to the U.S. Applicant, a dual
citizen by birth, has made the U.S. his home by choice. Looking forward, it is highly
unlikely that Applicant will change course. Taken together, these circumstances, along
with the highly favorable character evidence (See Exhibit C and relevant witness
testimony), support a conclusion that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential
9
foreign influence or pressure by either coercive or non-coercive means in favor of the
U.S. interest. 
After weighing the record evidence as a whole, Applicant did present sufficient
evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant met his
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is
decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.   
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
