KEYWORD: Financial; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant has had a history of overdue debts that have not been resolved.  Additionally,
Applicant’s credibility is suspect since she knew or should have known that the information that she
provided to the Government in a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (QPTP) on September 9,
2004, regarding her indebtedness, was materially incorrect and incomplete. Mitigation has not been
shown. Applicant’s eligibility for assignment to a sensitive position is denied.
CASENO: 06-11376.h1
DATE: 2/07/2007
DATE: February 7, 2007
In Re:
--------------------------
SSN: ------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-11376
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MARTIN H. MOGUL
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Candace Le’i, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
  Applicant has had a history of overdue debts that have not been resolved.  Additionally,
2
Applicant’s credibility is suspect since she knew or should have known that the information that she
provided to the Government in a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (QPTP) on September 9,
2004, regarding her indebtedness, was materially incorrect and incomplete. Mitigation has not been
shown. Applicant’s eligibility for assignment to a sensitive position is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On July 6, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 (as amended) and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated
January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that Applicant is
eligible for assignment to a sensitive position and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge
to make a determination on this issue.
In a signed and sworn statement, dated August 16, 2006, Applicant responded to the SOR
allegations (RSOR). She requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.
On October 13, 2006, Department Counsel prepared the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, and she was
given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.
A response was due by December 8, 2006, but Applicant filed no response to the FORM. The case
was assigned to this Administrative Judge on December 27, 2006.
Department Counsel offered nine documentary items (Exhibits 1-9), which have been
admitted without objection. Applicant offered no documentary evidence into the record. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
In the SOR, the Government alleges concern under Adjudicative Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Directive. The SOR contains 12
allegations, 1.a., through 1.l., under Guideline F, and one allegation, 2.a., under Guideline E. In her
RSOR, Applicant has admitted SOR allegations 1.a., through 1.l., and denied 2.a. (Exhibit 3). The
admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
Since this matter is being decided without a hearing, my evaluation is necessarily limited to
the contents of the various documents that are found in the case file. After a complete and thorough
review of the evidence in the record, including Applicant's RSOR, the FORM, and the admitted
documents, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following additional findings
of fact: 
According to the information furnished in Applicant’s QPTP, executed on September 9,
2004, (Exhibit 4), Applicant is 30 years old, and she is unmarried. Applicant is an employee of a
defense contractor, and she seeks assignment to sensitive duties.
3
.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)
The SOR lists 12 allegations of overdue debts, 1.a. through 1.1, under Adjudicative Guideline
F totaling approximately $13,406. As stated above, Applicant’s has admitted each allegation under
Guideline F (Exhibit 3). No independent evidence has been introduced to indicate that any of these
debts has been resolved or even reduced. The debts will be listed in the same order as they were in
the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt to Creditor 1 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $102.09.
1.b. This overdue debt to Creditor 2 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $260.23.
1.c. This overdue debt to Creditor 3 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $843.
1.d. This overdue debt to Creditor 4 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,910.
1.e. This overdue debt to Creditor 5 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,862.02.
1.f. This overdue debt to Creditor 6 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,022.96.
1.g. This overdue debt to Creditor 7 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $61,067.
1.h. This overdue debt to Creditor 8 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $919.
1.i. This overdue debt to Creditor 9 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $524.
1.j. This overdue debt to Creditor 10 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $788.
1.k. This overdue debt to Creditor 11 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,938.
1.l. This overdue debt to Creditor 12 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $170.
In a signed, sworn affidavit made by Applicant on June 10, 2005, she contended that she had
consolidated all of her credit card accounts, established a payment plan agreed to by all parties, and
that all of her debts were to have been paid in three years. Yet she conceded that she continued to
receive indications that these bill were not resolved (Exhibit 5).  Not only was no evidence offered
which could establish that any of these overdue debts were satisfactorily resolved, but Applicant’s
admissions of all of her overdue debts in her RSOR (Exhibit 3) completely contradicts her contention
that the debts were paid. I therefore conclude that all of the overdue debts listed on the SOR are still
4
due and owing. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance because
when she completed a signed, sworn QPTP on September 9, 2004,  she furnished untruthful
information to the Government (Exhibit 4). 
Question #20 asks,  “Are you now over 180 days delinquent on any loan or financial
obligation? (Include loans or obligations funded or guaranteed by the Federal Government.)”
Applicant answered “No” to this question. In her RSOR (Exhibit 3), Applicant claimed that she was
honest in information that she furnished to the investigator when she was questioned, but she
provided no information as to the reason that she answered  “No” to question  #20.
At the time she completed the QPTP, Applicant had been over 180 days delinquent on all of
the debts listed above as 1.a. through 1.h. She should have answered “Yes” to this question and
included all of these debts that were more than 180 days overdue.
POLICIES
The President has "the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . .
that will give that person access to such information." Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 527 (1988). In Executive Order 12968, Access to Classified Information, § 3.1(b) (August 4,
1995), the President provided that eligibility for access to classified information shall be granted only
to United States citizens "whose personal and professional history affirmatively indicates loyalty to
the United States, strength of character, trustworthiness, honesty, reliability, discretion, and sound
judgment, as well as freedom from conflicting allegiances and potential for coercion, and willingness
and ability to abide by regulations governing the use, handling, and protection of classified
information." 
To be eligible for assignment to sensitive duties, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in DoD 5200.2-R. "The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to
sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person's loyalty, reliability, and
trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with
the interests of national security." DoD 5200.2-R, ¶ C6.1.1.1. Appendix 8 of the Regulation sets forth
personnel security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions under
each guideline.
As set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, "In evaluating the relevance of
an individual's conduct, the [Administrative Judge] should consider the following factors [General
Factors]:
a. The nature, extent and seriousness of the conduct
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation
c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct
5
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior changes
g. The motivation for the conduct
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The eligibility guidelines established in the DoD Directive identify personal characteristics
and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question of whether it is "clearly consistent
with the national interest" to grant an Applicant's request for access to classified information.
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to civilian
workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours a day.
The Government is therefore appropriately concerned where available information indicates that an
Applicant for clearance may be involved in acts of alcohol abuse and criminal conduct that
demonstrates poor judgement, untrustworthiness or unreliability on the Applicant's part.
The DoD Directive states, "Each adjudication is to be an overall common sense
determination based upon consideration and assessment of all available information, both favorable
and unfavorable, with particular emphasis placed on the seriousness, recency, frequency, and
motivation for the individual's conduct; the extent to which conduct was negligent, willful,
voluntary, or undertaken with the knowledge of the circumstances or consequences involved; and,
to the extent that it can be estimated, the probability that conduct will or will not continue in the
future." 
The Administrative Judge can only draw those inferences or conclusions that have a
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record. The Judge cannot draw inferences or
conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature. Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, "Any determination under this order...shall be
a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant concerned."
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal precepts and
factors, I conclude the following with respect to Guidelines F and E: 
(Guideline F - Financial Considerations)
The Government has established its case under Guideline F. The record evidence clearly
establishes Applicant's long history of indebtedness, and there is no evidence that Applicant has
resolved these overdue debts.
Applicant's overall conduct pertaining to her financial obligations falls within Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Condition (DC) (E2.A6.1.2.1.), and DC (E2.A6.1.2.3.), a history of
not meeting financial obligations, and an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. I find that no
6
Mitigating Condition (MC) is applicable to this case. 
Until Applicant makes a good-faith effort to resolve her debts, and she can establish a record
of financial responsibility and stability, concerns will continue to exist under Guideline F. I resolve
Guideline F against Applicant.
(Guideline E -Personal Conduct) 
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant knew or should have
known that she provided false material information to the Government in response to a question  on
the QPTP that she signed on September 9, 2004.  She should have answered “Yes” to question #20,
and included all of the debts listed in the SOR that had been more than 180 days overdue, which
were 1.a. through 1.h.
In reviewing the DCs under Guideline E,  I conclude that DC E2.A5.1.2.2. applies because
the information that Applicant provided in her QPTP was known or should have been known by her
to be omissions and concealment of relevant and material facts.  No MCs apply.
In this case, Applicant failed to offer any independent evidence indicating that she has
reformed and is now reliable and trustworthy. This precludes a finding that it is now clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant her access to classified information. I resolve Guideline
E against Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against   Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
7
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for assignment to sensitive
duties.
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
