 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 15-00895 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
12/02/2016 
______________ 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC 
eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing criminal or dishonest conduct eligibility concerns. 
The DOD was unable to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. The action was taken under 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12); the Adjudicative Standards 
found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014; and the procedures set out 
in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 1, 2015, and requested a review based 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on June 29, 
2016. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
 
2 
November 5, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on November 17, 2015. Applicant 
submitted a timely response to the FORM.  
 
Applicant’s CAC eligibility was denied on July 25, 2016. Applicant appealed. On 
November 16, 2016, the Appeal Board remanded the case to me to address certain 
matters, including whether Applicant’s delinquent taxes raised questions about conduct 
that included a specific intent to deceive or defraud, and whether the conduct posed an 
unacceptable risk.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. She has worked for her current employer since May 
2014. She enlisted in the U.S. military from February 1983, until she received a General 
Discharge in April 1983. She has some college education and currently takes courses 
online. She is married. Applicant completed a questionnaire for non-sensitive positions 
on June 4, 2014. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, which she attributed to unforeseen 
mortgage and tax increases. She and her husband filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 
2007. She was unable to make the payments to the trustee. (Item 1) She noted that the 
stability of her family was the priority at the time. 
 
 Applicant disclosed her delinquent federal taxes for tax years 2005 to 2011 that 
total approximately $9,200 when she completed her Declaration for Federal 
Employment. (Item 3) She noted in her answer to the SOR that she had a repayment 
plan with the IRS for $75 a month to repay the delinquent taxes. (Item 3) The Offer in 
Compromise consists of payments for 24 months and settles 20% of the total debt.   
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant submitted a letter from the IRS establishing 
an installment agreement. Applicant was to begin monthly payments of $203 in January 
2016.There was no evidence of any payments made to the IRS. However, I am not 
convinced that Applicant’s conduct constituted a crime under 26 U.S.C. Section 7201, 
which requires that a defendant “acted willfully and knowingly with specific intent to 
evade her income tax obligation.” U.S. v. Daniels, 617 F. 2d 146 at 148 (5th Cir. 1980) 
 
      Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
3 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1) In all 
adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(4) Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee 
Theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing deceptive 
Loan statements, or other intentional financial breaches of trust; and 
 
(6) Financial irresponsibility may raise questions about the individual’s 
honesty and put people, property or information systems at risk, although 
financial debt should not in and of itself be cause for denial. 
 
 Applicant has a significant amount of delinquent debt from six years of taxes not 
fully paid. She has not provided evidence to establish that she has actually entered into 
the agreement and that she has made any payments. Applicant filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in 2007, but due to increases in mortgage payments and tax increases, had 
 
4 
to stop the plan. Disqualifying condition ¶ 2.b(6) states that “financial debt should not in 
and of itself be cause for denial.” There is no indication of fraud. She owes the IRS and 
has disclosed the information. I am not convinced that she had the specific intent to 
evade income tax obligations under U.S.C. Section 7201.  
 
 Applicant owes the IRS for tax years 2005-2011. The amount of delinquent tax is 
in the amount of $9,200. Applicant’s debts do not establish a disqualifying condition 
because there is no evidence she intended to defraud her creditor, and her actions do 
not reflect dishonesty. 
 
      Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility does not pose an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
