                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
[NAME REDACTED] ) CAC Case No. 15-00899
)
)
)
Applicant for CAC Eligibility )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Statement of the Case
On May 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access
Credential eligibility pursuant to  Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-
12).  DOD was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant Common Access Credential (CAC) eligibility. The action is based on the
Adjudicative Standards found in DoD Instruction 5200.46, DOD Investigative and
Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the Common Access Card, dated September 9,
2014, and made pursuant to the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive).  The concerns raised under the Adjudicative Standards
of DoDI 5200.46 are:  
1. Misconduct or negligence in employment (Supplemental Adjudicative
Standards, Paragraph 1.a);
2. Criminal or dishonest conduct (Supplemental Adjudicative Standards,
Paragraph 2.a); and
3, Material intentional false statement, deception, or fraud (Supplemental
Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 3.a).
1
On June 1, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without
a hearing. On February 11, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of1
the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on February 25, 2016, and timely submitted
information in response to the FORM. The record closed on March 26, 2016. The case
was assigned to me on June 6, 2016. Based on the record evidence as a whole, and
testimony presented in this case, CAC eligibility is denied. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 40 years old. Since May 2014, she has been employed in a position
that requires CAC eligibility to access sensitive systems and facilities as part of her
assigned duties. On June 16, 2014, she submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to initiate a background investigation to determine her
CAC eligibility. Applicant had previously submitted an OPM Form 306 application for
federal employment. (FORM, Items 3 and 4).
During Applicant’s background investigation, former employers were contacted
and asked to complete an OMB Form 3206-0165, Investigative Request for
Employment Data and Supervisor Information. Two former employers provided
information that is the basis for the allegations at SOR 1.a and 1.b. As to SOR 1.a, her
former employer, a doctor, stated that Applicant resigned in 2010 when she was told
she would be fired for forging the doctor’s name on a medical excuse for Applicant’s
daughter. As to SOR 1.b, the former employer, a chiropractor, stated that Applicant left
her job in 2010 voluntarily, but later tried to get unemployment benefits by claiming she
had been laid off due to a workforce reduction. Neither employer would recommend
Applicant for federal employment or for a security clearance. (FORM, Items 5 and 6)
Also during Applicant’s background investigation, her arrest record was obtained
from an FBI database. It showed, as alleged in the SOR, that she was arrested for
criminal offenses in October 2009 (SOR 2.a), in April 2007 (SOR 2.b), and in March
2003 (SOR 2.c). Available information shows that she committed the offenses for which
she was charged, but that she was never incarcerated. (FORM, Items 2 and 6)
When Applicant submitted her application for federal employment, she was
required to list any arrests that had occurred in the preceding seven years. As alleged in
SOR 3.a., she did not list her October 2009 arrest. Available information shows she
omitted that information deliberately. Applicant was also required to disclose if, in the
previous five years, she had left any job under adverse circumstances; that is, if she
had been fired, resigned after being informed she would be fired, or left a job by mutual
agreement because of specific problems in the workplace. Applicant did not disclose
that she had resigned from the job referred to in SOR 1.a after being told she would be
fired. As alleged in SOR 3.b, available information shows she omitted that information
deliberately. (FORM, Items 2 and 4)
In response to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR 1.a, claiming she left solely
because of medical issues that were causing her to miss a lot of work. She provided a
medical record documenting treatment for injuries sustained in a car accident, but she
did not establish how that information refutes the Government’s allegation. Applicant
denied the allegation at SOR 1.b and provided documents purporting to show she
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven  exhibits (Items 1 - 7) proffered in1
support of the Government’s case.
2
worked for all of 2010 and did not receive unemployment compensation. The
documents submitted do not conclusively support her claim.
As to the SOR 2.a - 2.c allegations of criminal conduct, Applicant admitted SOR
2.b, but denied SOR 2.a and 2.c. However, the explanations she provided with her
responses actually support those allegations.
As to SOR 3.a and 3.b, Applicant denied she intended to falsify her application
for federal employment. However, her explanations do not adequately explain why she
did not list her 2009 arrest or the fact that she left a job in 2010 after being told she
would be fired. 
Applicant’s SOR response and her response to the FORM present a lengthy and
compelling account of hardships she endured growing up and in her earlier adult life.
Applicant claims she is now married and has a stable lifestyle. Applicant did not provide
any current references or other information regarding her current judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness.
Policies
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific
issues raised are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the
national interest.  
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits,
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment,
mature thinking, and careful analysis. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility. 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) The
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct;
(3) The recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) The individual’s age and maturity at
the time of the conduct; (5) Contributing external conditions; and (6) The absence or
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration. 
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should
be resolved in favor of the national interest. 
Analysis
The Government’s information supports the SOR allegations and they are
established as facts. Those facts raise CAC eligibility concerns addressed in DoD
Instruction 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2. Those concerns are addressed in the 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 1 as follows:
3
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is reason to believe, based on the
individual’s misconduct or negligence in employment, that issuance of a CAC poses
an unacceptable risk.
a. An individual’s employment misconduct or negligence may put people,
property, or information systems at risk.
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:
(1) A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, disruptive, violent, or
other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to people, property, or information
systems; and 
(2) A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations in the workplace which put people,
property, or information at risk.
c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk include:
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was so minor, or happened under such
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current trustworthiness or good judgment relating to the safety of
people and proper safeguarding of property and information systems;
(2) The individual was not adequately warned that the conduct was unacceptable
and could not reasonably be expected to know that the conduct was wrong; and 
(3) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the behavior.
All of the paragraph 1.a and 1.b factors apply here. Applicant left one job in 2010
because she forged her employer’s name on a medical excuse for her child. She knew
she would be fired if she did not resign. Applicant knew or should have known this
conduct was unacceptable. She also knew or should have known that applying for
unemployment benefits after leaving a prior job of her own volition was both illegal and
unacceptable. Applicant did not present information that supports application of any of
the paragraph 1.c factors.
Eligibility concerns arising from the facts of this case are also addressed in the 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 2 as follows:
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is reason to believe, based on the
individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that issuance of a CAC poses an
unacceptable risk.
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about his or her reliability and trustworthiness and may put people,
property, or infomation systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or dishonest
conduct may put people, property, or information systems at risk.
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:
(3) Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, perjury, forgery,
or attempting to obtain identity documentation without proper authorization).
4
c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk include:
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was so minor, or happened under such
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur;
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did not
commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her innocence; and 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation including but not
limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement, or passage of time
without recurrence.
The paragraph 2.b factors apply. All of Applicant’s criminal conduct involved theft
or deceptive conduct or both. Although the conduct occurred seven or more years ago,
without information establishing other aspects of rehabilitation, which Applicant did not
provide, none of the paragraph 2.c factors apply.
Finally, eligibility concerns arising from the facts of this case are also addressed
in the  Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 3 as follows:
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is reason to believe, based on the
individual’s material intentional false statement, deception, or fraud in connection
with federal or contract employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable
risk.
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about his or her reliability and trustworthiness and put people,
property, or information systems at risk. 
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material intentional
false statement, deception, or fraud related to answers or information provided
during the employment process for the current or a prior federal or contract
employment (e.g., on the employment application or other employment,
appointment or investigative documents, or during interviews.)
c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk include:
(1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor, or
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; and 
(2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent and was
followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation.
Paragraph 3.b applies. Applicant deliberately omitted from her application for
federal employment the fact that she was arrested in 2009. She also deliberately
omitted from the same document the fact that she resigned from her job in 2010 after
being told she would be fired for forging her employer’s name on a letter. These
omissions were recent and the  information was relevant and material to an assessment
of her suitability for federal employment. Her false statements in this regard were not
minor. Nor did she establish that her omissions were unintentional or that she made any
prompt effort to correct her answers. The paragraph 3.c factors do not apply.
5
 
Based on all of the foregoing, I conclude Applicant’s request for Common Access
Credentialing eligibility should be denied.   
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1: Misconduct or Negligence in Employment: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: Against Applicant 
Paragraph 2: Criminal or Dishonest Conduct: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c: Against Applicant 
Paragraph 3: Material Intentional False Statement, 
Deception or Fraud: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.b: Against Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC
eligibility is denied.
                                              
Matthew E. Malone
Administrative Judge
6
