KEYWORD: CAC
DIGEST: In a CAC adjudication, “the overriding factor . . .  is unacceptable risk.”.  The
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, which apply in this case, are designed to ensure that the
issuance of a CAC does not pose such a risk.  The Judge specifically found that, while Applicant
did not act responsibly in handling her finances, her delinquent taxes created no indication of
fraud.  The gravamen of Paragraph 2 of the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards is criminal or
dishonest conduct.  As stated in Instruction,“financial debt should not in and of itself be cause
for denial” of a CAC.  To be a basis for a CAC denial, the financial irresponsibility should raise
the questions or risks identified in that standard.  In this case, the Judge erred by failing to
explain how Applicant’s delinquent taxes raised questions about her honesty or put people,
property, or information systems at risk.  As a result of this error, the Judge failed to consider an
important aspect of the case and failed to articulate a satisfactory explanation for her conclusion.  
Adverse decision remanded.   
CASENO: 15-00895.a1
DATE: 11/16/2016
DATE: November 16, 2016
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
CAC Case No. 15-00895
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant eligibility for Common
Access Card (CAC) credentialing.  On May 22, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–criminal and dishonest conduct concerns raised
under the adjudicative standards in the appendices of DoD Instruction 5200.46 (Sep. 9, 2014)
(Instruction).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On July 25, 2016, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶ 6.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we remand.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is 61 years old and has worked for her current employer since May 2014.  She
served in the U.S. military for about two months in 1983 and received a general discharge.  She is
married and has a history of financial problems that she attributed to unforeseen mortgage and tax
increases.  She and her husband filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2007, but she was unable to make
the payments to the bankruptcy trustee.  
When she completed a Declaration for Federal Employment, Applicant disclosed that she
had delinquent Federal taxes totaling about $9,200 for 2005 to 2011.  In her Answer to the SOR, she
noted that she had a repayment plan with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to pay $75 a month
toward the delinquent taxes.  The Offer in Compromise consists of payments for 24 months and
amounts to 20% of the total debt. 
In her Response to Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), Applicant
provided a letter from the IRS responding to her inquiry concerning her total delinquent tax debt. 
The IRS proposal established a monthly payment of $203 beginning in January 2016, but the
voucher for  making those payments appeared only to address the taxes for 2010.  No evidence was
presented of any payments to the IRS.
The Judge’s Analysis
2
The Judge concluded that Applicant has a significant amount of delinquent taxes for multiple
years.  Despite her promise to initiate a repayment plan with the IRS, Applicant has not established
that she entered into such an agreement or made any payments.  While there is no indication of
fraud, Applicant has not presented sufficient evidence that she has been responsible in handling her
finances.  Mitigating circumstances were not established.
Discussion
Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶ 6 provides that appeals to DOHA of CAC cases are accorded the
established administrative procedures set out in DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Since its inception, the
Appeal Board has been issuing decisions that interpret and analyze the administrative procedures
set forth in the Directive.  Because those same administrative procedures are used in appeals of CAC
revocations, our decisions interpreting and analyzing those procedures apply equally here for
reviewing a judge’s actions, rulings, findings, and conclusions in CAC cases.1 
In her appeal, Applicant contends that her conduct does not involve questionable judgment,
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  She points out
that she has never attempted to hide or be untruthful about her financial situation.   
In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
Judge’s decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate
a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts
found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment;
it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
In her decision, the Judge cites to the applicable Supplemental Adjudicative Standards that
state:
2. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe,
based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that issuance of a CAC
poses an unacceptable risk.
    a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put people, property, or
information systems at risk.  An individual’s past criminal conduct or dishonesty
may put people, property, or information systems at risk.
1 Decisions of the Appeal Board are available to the public at DOHA’s website: http://www.dod.mil/
dodgc/doha/. 
3
     b.  Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:
*  *  *
         (6) Financial irresponsibility may raise questions about the individual’s honesty
and put people, property, or information systems at risk, although financial debt
should not in and of itself be cause for denial.2 
In a CAC adjudication, “the overriding factor . . .  is unacceptable risk.”  Instruction,
Enclosure 4 ¶ 1(b).  The Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, which apply in this case, are
designed to ensure that the issuance of a CAC does not pose such a risk.
 
The Judge specifically found that, while Applicant did not act responsibly in handling her
finances, her delinquent taxes created no indication of fraud.  The gravamen of Paragraph 2 of the
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards is criminal or dishonest conduct.  As stated in Instruction,
Enclosure 4, Appendix 2 ¶ 2b(6), “financial debt should not in and of itself be cause for denial” of
a CAC.  To be a basis for a CAC denial, the financial irresponsibility should raise the questions or
risks identified in that standard.  In this case, the Judge erred by failing to explain how Applicant’s
delinquent taxes raised questions about her honesty or put people, property, or information systems
at risk.  As a result of this error, the Judge failed to consider an important aspect of the case and
failed to articulate a satisfactory explanation for her conclusion.      
Pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.33.2, the Board remands the case to the Administrative Judge
to correct this error and issue an new decision consistent with the requirements of Directive ¶
E3.1.35.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
2 Instruction, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2.
4
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
