 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 15-06064 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the alcohol abuse supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing alcohol abuse eligibility concerns. The DOD was 
unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
CAC eligibility. The action was taken under Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 
12 (HSPD-12); the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, 
DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 
2014; and the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive).  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 30, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 6, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on January 13, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 4, 2016. The hearing was 
 
2 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 12, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1976 
until he retired in 1996. He has worked as a driver of a passenger van on a military 
installation since 2009. He has an associate’s degree. He has been married for more 
than 35 years. He has four adult children.1  
 
 Applicant was involved in alcohol-related incidents while in the military. There 
was no disciplinary action taken, but he received a mental health evaluation from a 
medical doctor in September 1988. He was diagnosed with alcohol abuse, episodic, and 
narcissistic and paranoid traits. He was determined to be fit for duty. He received 
another evaluation in September 1989 from a staff psychologist. He was diagnosed with 
alcohol abuse, in remission, and narcissistic and paranoid traits. The psychologist 
concluded that Applicant had stopped drinking and that he did “not suffer from major 
mental illness, and [was] fit for duty.” Applicant’s security clearance was revoked in 
1989.2 
 
 Applicant did not have any additional alcohol problems during his military career. 
He was promoted and retired as a senior noncommissioned officer. He did not drink 
between about 1988 and 2002.3 
 
 Applicant was arrested in July 2008 and December 2011 after domestic incidents 
with his oldest son. He had been drinking before both incidents. In 2008, he was 
charged with appearing in an intoxicated condition. He pleaded guilty, paid a fine, and 
completed six months of unsupervised probation. In 2011, he was charged with 
domestic abuse battery. He pleaded guilty through a pretrial diversion program. He 
received probation for a year and community service, and he was required to attend 
anger management classes and complete a substance abuse evaluation. He completed 
all the terms of the diversion program, and the charge was dismissed.4 
 
 Applicant stated that he still drinks responsibly and in moderation. His 
relationship with his son is better. His son is 26 years old and a college graduate 
working as an engineer. There has been no additional police involvement.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr.at 14-21; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
2 Tr. at 14, 16-18, 27, 32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 14-17, 27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6. 
 
4 Tr. at 18-28, 32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3, 7, 8. 
 
5 Tr. at 20, 27-29, 34; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
3 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1) In all 
adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Abuse 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 4 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the nature or duration of the individual’s alcohol abuse 
without evidence of substantial rehabilitation, that issuance of a CAC 
poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s abuse of alcohol may put people, property, or 
information systems at risk. Alcohol abuse can lead to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or failure to control impulses, and may put people, 
property, or information systems at risk, regardless of whether he or she is 
 
4 
diagnosed as an abuser of alcohol or alcohol dependent.  A person’s long-
term abuse of alcohol without evidence of substantial rehabilitation may 
indicate that granting a CAC poses an unacceptable safety risk in a U.S. 
Government facility. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying. The 
following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
4.b.(1) A pattern of alcohol-related arrests. 
 
Applicant had alcohol-related incidents in the 1980s, in 2008, and in 2011. The 
above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis 
to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be relevant:  
 
4.c.(1) The individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an abuser of alcohol). 
 
Applicant has not had an alcohol-related incident in more than four years. He 
drinks responsibly and in moderation. The above mitigating circumstance is established. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Alcohol Abuse:    For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
