 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )  CAC Case No. 15-07604 
  ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing 
concerns raised under the misconduct in employment and the criminal or dishonest 
conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility. The 
DOD was unable to find that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an 
unacceptable risk. This action was taken under Homeland Security Presidential 
Directive – 12 (HSPD-12); the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 
5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, dated 
September 9, 2014; and the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive). In the present case, the CAC eligibility concerns raised under the 
Adjudicative Standards of DODI 5200.46 are: misconduct or negligence in employment; 
criminal or dishonest conduct or financial responsibility; and material, intentional false 
statement, deception, or fraud.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 14, 2015, and she requested a 
decision based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 9, 2016, the 
Government submitted its file of relevant material (FORM) and provided a complete 
copy to Applicant. She received the FORM on March 14, 2016. Applicant was afforded 
an opportunity to respond to the FORM within 30 days of its receipt and to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
She did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 15, 
2016. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel references FORM Items 1-5. FORM Items 3-
5 are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 3-5, respectively, without 
objection.1 In the FORM, Department Counsel withdrew the allegation under SOR ¶ 3, 
regarding material, intentional false statement, deception, or fraud. Accordingly, I will 
not address that matter. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. Between January 2012 and October 2014, she 
attended undergraduate-level classes at three different institutions. Since April 2015, 
she has been employed by a DOD contractor.2 
 
 From July 2014 to March 2015, Applicant worked for a private company. In 
March 2015, Applicant was fired for dishonesty. Specifically, she used the corporate 
credit card for personal purchases, and she improperly recorded her time for payroll 
purposes. On her April 2015 Declaration for Federal Employment, she listed that she 
had been fired for using the company credit card for personal use, but she did not list 
the timesheet issues.3  
 
 In her SOR response, Applicant admitted the misuse of the company credit card 
and the discrepancies on her timesheet. She admitted the misconduct and the resulting 
termination, but she did not acknowledge that she knowingly violated company policy 
with her misuse of the company credit card. Her work duties at times required her to 
respond to customers after-hours or off-site. Her misunderstanding of recording these 
situations on her timesheet was reasonable; however, she knowingly permitted her 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 14-06781 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2016) (By not responding to the Government’s 
FORM, “Applicant waived any objection he might have had to this document.”). FORM Items 1 and 2, 
consisting of the SOR and Applicant’s response to the SOR, are the pleadings and are included in the 
record. 
 
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 4; GE 5. 
 
 
3 
 
timesheet to be submitted reflecting bereavement pay, for which she knew she was 
ineligible.4 Her willful failure to correct this error reflects dishonesty. 
   
 Applicant did not submit any documentation demonstrating that she had 
remedied the credit card misuse and timesheet discrepancies with her former employer. 
  
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Response to SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Misconduct in Employment 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 1 articulates the concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in 
employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s employment misconduct or negligence may put 
people,property, or information systems at risk. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 1.b. lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(1) A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, disruptive, 
violent, or other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to people, 
property, or information systems; and 
 
(2) A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations in the workplace which put 
people, property or information at risk. 
 
 Applicant knowingly used the company credit card for personal use, and she 
willfully failed to correct the timesheet discrepancies concerning the bereavement pay. 
While she did not explicitly state that she knowingly violated company policy about the 
use of the company credit card, she stated, “Again, I was not made aware of the 
severity of this until I was fired.”5 In the context of her SOR response, she appears to be 
admitting that she knowingly violated company policies concerning both the credit card 
and the timesheets. Moreover, she never claimed that she was unaware that she was 
prohibited from using her corporate credit card for personal use. The Government 
established Applicant’s intentional wrongdoing and pattern of dishonesty in the 
workplace. I conclude that ¶¶ 1.b.(1) and (2) apply. 
 
 The Government established its case for disqualification, thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of 
disproving it never shifts to the Government.6 DODI 5220.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 
4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, ¶ 1.c. lists circumstances relevant to the 
determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable 
risk.  The following mitigating circumstance is potentially relevant: 
                                                          
5 Response to SOR. 
 
6 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
5 
 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current trustworthiness or good judgment relating 
to the safety of people and proper safeguarding of property and 
information systems. 
 
 Applicant’s termination for misconduct occurred in March 2015, following a 
pattern of dishonesty and rule violations. This misconduct was recent, significant, and 
did not occur under unusual circumstances. She willfully failed to correct the improperly 
recorded timesheet to her financial benefit. She has not provided any documentation to 
demonstrate changed circumstances or successful rehabilitation. As a result, her 
misconduct continues to cast doubt on her trustworthiness and judgment. I conclude 
that ¶ 1.c.(1) does not apply. Absent evidence of changed circumstances or successful 
rehabilitation, an unacceptable risk remains due to Applicant’s misconduct in 
employment. 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.a. articulates the concern: 
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information at 
risk. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b. lists one potentially applicable disqualifying condition: 
 
(3) Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, perjury, 
forgery, or attempting to obtain documentation without proper 
authorization). 
 
 Applicant was terminated for dishonesty based on her misuse of the company 
credit card and her timesheet discrepancies. Although she violated company policies 
with her misuse of the company credit card for her own financial benefit, this conduct 
does not fall within the dishonest conduct or acts outlined by the Supplemental 
Adjudicative Standards ¶ 2.b.(3).7 Applicant’s falsified timesheets do establish ¶ 2.b.(3).  
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c. lists two potentially applicable mitigating conditions or circumstances: 
 
                                                          
7 See CAC Case No. 15-02333 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 16, 2016) (DODI Enclosure 4, Appendix 2 ¶ 2 requires 
criminal or dishonest conduct). 
 
6 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 As discussed above, Applicant’s dishonest acts were significant, recent, and did 
not occur under unusual circumstances.  Furthermore, she has supplied no evidence of 
successful rehabilitation or restitution. Beyond admitting the termination, she has not 
provided any evidence to show that such misconduct or dishonest acts are unlikely to 
recur. Because Applicant’s credit card misuse and timesheet discrepancies had 
financial consequences for her employer, I conclude that an unacceptable risk remains 
as to her ability to adequately safeguard people, property, or information systems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Misconduct in Employment: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a.:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraph 2.a.:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Material, False Statement  WITHDRAWN 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a.:     Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility poses an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
