 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 15-00895 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
07/25/2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns 
raised under the criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. 
CAC eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing criminal or dishonest conduct eligibility concerns. 
The DOD was unable to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. The action was taken under 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12); the Adjudicative Standards 
found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014; and the procedures set out 
in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 1, 2015, and requested a review based 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on June 29, 
2016. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
 
2 
November 5, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on November 17, 2015. Applicant 
submitted a timely response to the FORM.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. She has worked for her current employer since May 
2014. She enlisted in the U.S. military from February 1983, until she received a General 
Discharge in April 1983. She has some college education and currently takes courses 
online. She is married. Applicant completed a questionnaire for non-sensitive positions 
on June 4, 2014. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, which she attributed to unforeseen 
mortgage increases and tax increases. She and her husband filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in 2007. She was unable to make the payments to the trustee. (Item 1) She 
noted that the stability of her family was the priority at the time. 
 
 Applicant disclosed her delinquent federal taxes for tax years 2005 to 2011 that 
total approximately $9,200 when she completed her Declaration for Federal 
Employment. (Item 3) She noted in her answer to the SOR that she had a repayment 
plan with the IRS for $75 a month to repay the delinquent taxes. (Item 3)  The Offer in 
Compromise consists of payments for 24 months and settles 20% of the total debt.   
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant submitted a letter from the IRS that replied 
to her inquiry of November 2015 to resolve the account balance for the tax periods in 
question. The proposal for the installment agreement established a monthly payment of 
$203 beginning on January 15, 2016. A voucher for payments was included, but 
appeared to be for tax year 2010 only. There was no evidence of any payments made 
to the IRS. 
 
      Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
 
3 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1) In all 
adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(6) Financial irresponsibility may raise questions about the individual’s 
honesty and put people, property or information systems at risk, although 
financial debt should not in and of itself be cause for denial. 
 
 Applicant has a significant amount of delinquent debt from six years of unpaid 
taxes and despite her promise to engage in a repayment plan with the IRS, she has not 
provided evidence to establish that she has actually entered into the agreement and 
that she has made any payments. Applicant filed for bankruptcy in 2007, but due to 
increases in mortgage payments and tax increases, had to stop the plan. Disqualifying 
condition ¶ 2.b.(6) states that “financial debt should not in and of itself be cause for 
denial.” There is no indication of fraud, but Applicant has not presented sufficient 
evidence that she has been responsible about her finances. 
 
 Applicant owes the IRS for tax years 2005-2011. The amount of delinquent tax is 
in the amount of $9,200. The above disqualifying condition has been established. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
 
4 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
Applicant has not established that she has begun the installment plan with the 
IRS. She has unpaid federal taxes for years 2005-2011. She recently contacted the IRS 
for an installment agreement but there is no evidence of any payments made. The 
above mitigating circumstances are not established. I also considered the factors in 
DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
