 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
    )  CAC Case No. 15-06228 
    ) 
 Applicant for CAC Eligibility         ) 
 
    
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns 
raised under criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC 
eligibility is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant DoD Directive, on November 17, 2015, the DoD issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access Card 
eligibility pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). DOD was 
unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC 
eligibility.  
 
The action is based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards (SAS) found in 
DoD Instruction 5200.46, DoD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the 
Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The concerns raised under 
 
2 
the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards of DoDI 5200.46 are “criminal or dishonest 
conduct.”  
On November 27, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM), dated January 19, 2016. The FORM contained six attachments (Items 
1-6).  
On January 27, 2016, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice 
of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the potentially disqualifying conditions. The FORM specifically stated he had failed to 
adequately mitigate the security concern raised in the SOR. Applicant was afforded a 
period of 30 days to file objections and submit material. No additional information was 
received from Applicant within the 30-day period. On May 24, 2016, the case was 
assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted, without explanation, to the 
allegation that he had been arrested on March 7, 2014, and charged with felony 
embezzlement and misdemeanor theft. And he admitted that in August 2014, he was 
convicted of misdemeanor larceny and sentenced to probation and a fine. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admission as fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 22-year-old contractor employee, who seeks CAC eligibility. The 
record is silent as to his current job. From July 2014 to October 2014, he worked for a 
fast food restaurant. (Item 3) In June 2012, he graduated from high school. 
 
 In Applicant’s Declaration for Federal Employment (Item 4), he responded “yes” 
to question 9, which asked him if during the last seven years he had been convicted, 
been imprisoned, been on probation, or been on parole. He indicated he was placed on 
probation in August 2014 for larceny from his employer, a large chain-store. (Item 4) He 
had been charged with felony embezzlement from his employer, but pleaded guilty to a 
misdemeanor larceny. (Item 5)  
 
Applicant was required to make restitution, was fined $599, and required to serve 
12 months-supervised probation. The cost of supervision fees would be remitted after 
three months if he had paid restitution in full and had no probation violations. (Item 5) 
Additionally, if the terms were met, the probation could be transferred to unsupervised 
probation. (Items 5, 6) The record is silent as to Applicant making restitution or 
completing probation.  
 
Applicant provided no information about the embezzlement or his actions after 
sentencing. He provided no information as to his motivation for the conduct, the 
 
3 
presence of rehabilitation, positive changes in behavior, or any information as to the 
likelihood that the conduct would recur in the future.  
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor for 
all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by applying the 
standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the national interest.  
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, taking 
into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature 
thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the nature 
and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; (3) the 
recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of 
the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or presence of efforts 
towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In all adjudications, the 
protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration. Therefore, any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor of the 
national interest.  
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct  
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
Paragraphs 2.a., 2.b.(1) and (2) articulate the CAC concern:  
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put people, 
property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or 
dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information systems at risk.  
 
DODI Instruction 5200.46, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards lists 
four conditions that raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying:  
 
 
4 
2.b.(1) – A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put 
the safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or 
information. A person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a 
CAC poses an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets 
and to employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
 
2.b.(2) – Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the 
safety of people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted; 
  
2.b.(3) Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying 
claims, perjury, forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation 
without proper authorization); and 
 
2.b.(4) Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as 
embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense 
account fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, or other intentional 
financial breaches of trust. 
 
The Government established these four disqualifying conditions through 
Applicant’s admission and evidence presented as a result of his 2014 arrest and 
conviction for larceny.  
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant: 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur;  
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence;  
 
(3) Improper or inadequate advice from authorized personnel or legal 
counsel significantly contributed to the individual’s omission of information. 
When confronted, the individual provided an accurate explanation and 
made prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation; and  
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence.  
 
 
5 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I find none of the mitigating factors 
are applicable. Applicant was 20 years old when arrested. The record is silent as to 
when the larceny occurred, but obviously occurred prior to his arrest. It has been two-
and-a-half years since his arrest.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the criminal or dishonest CAC concerns. By failing to 
provide such information, and by only admitting the SOR allegation, insufficient 
information concerning the facts and circumstance surrounding his conduct, arrest, and 
actions he has taken since his conviction has been provided. There is no evidence in 
the record that he successfully completed his probation.  
 
To Applicant’s credit, he reported his arrest and conviction on his Declaration for 
Federal Employment. The Government has an interest in examining all relevant and 
material adverse information about an applicant before granting CAC eligibility. The 
Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a 
timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or convenient. Further, an 
applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about himself provides some 
indication of his willingness to report inadvertent concerns in the future.. As stated, 
Applicant revealed his arrest and conviction. His age, the reporting of the arrest and 
conviction, and the time since his arrest are favorable factors, but they are insufficient to 
meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant his CAC eligibility. 
 
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept, I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the criminal or dishonest conduct 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant  
 
 
 
  
 
 
6 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
