 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 15-05881 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [Applicant’s husband], Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant refuted Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the intentional false statement, deception, or fraud Adjudicative Standards, and 
she mitigated the concerns raised under the misconduct or negligence in employment 
Adjudicative Standards. CAC eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility 
pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). The DOD was 
unable to find that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk. 
The action was taken under the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction 
(DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, 
dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive). The concerns raised under the Adjudicative Standards 
of DODI 5200.46 are fraudulent information concerning identity; intentional false 
statement, deception, or fraud; and misconduct or negligence in employment.  
 
 
2 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 7, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On February 26, 2016, she 
changed her request to a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on May 5, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on June 10, 2016, scheduling the hearing for July 19, 2016. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
July 27, 2016.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
The objection to GE 3 was sustained. GE 4 was admitted in evidence over Applicant’s 
objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through F, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. She submitted documents that were marked 
AE G and H and admitted without objection.  
 
SOR Amendment  
 
Department Counsel amended the SOR by withdrawing the fraudulent 
information concerning identity allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. She has worked for her current employer since October 
2014. She was born in another country and became a U.S. citizen in 2014. She is a 
high school graduate, and she attended a trade school in her native country. She is 
married for the second time. She does not have children.1  
 
 Applicant worked as a part-time personal trainer at a fitness center from about 
October 2013 to September 2014. In September 2014, Applicant was upset that another 
employee received a promotion instead of her. Applicant’s supervisor discussed the 
matter with her. Another employee complained that Applicant violated the company’s 
gossip policy, created a hostile-work environment, and discussed confidential 
information with other employees. The complaint included that Applicant asked the 
employee about her compensation; Applicant told the employee that a third employee 
“will be the next to leave, she has another job with [another fitness center]”; and that 
Applicant stated that she did not like another employee. The supervisor asked Applicant 
to sign a letter of resignation. Applicant refused. The supervisor told her that she was 
being released from employment. Applicant had an angry reaction to the news.2 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 27, 39-41, 62-63; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 25-32, 41-45, 60-62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4; AE B, E. 
 
3 
 Applicant described a personality conflict with her supervisor. She stated that she 
did not believe she was fired. English is her second language, and there may have been 
a language barrier. Applicant verified that she received unemployment compensation 
through her state, which cannot be awarded when an employee is fired or quits. The 
exceptions to those limitations do not apply in Applicant’s case.3 The state provides in 
its website: 
 
 Types of Job Separation 
 
To be eligible for benefits based on your job separation, you must be 
either unemployed or working reduced hours through no fault of your own. 
Examples include layoff, reduction in hours or wages not related to 
misconduct, being fired for reasons other than misconduct, or quitting with 
good cause related to work.  
 
Laid Off 
 
Layoffs are due to lack of work, not your work performance, so you may 
be eligible for benefits. For example, the employer has no more work 
available, has eliminated your position, or has closed the business. 
 
Fired 
 
If the employer ended your employment but you were not laid off as 
defined above, then you were fired. If the employer demanded your 
resignation, you were fired. 
 
You may be eligible for benefits if you were fired for reasons other than 
misconduct. Examples of misconduct that could make you ineligible 
include violation of company policy, violation of law, neglect or 
mismanagement of your position, or failure to perform your work 
adequately if you are capable of doing so. 
 
 The state noted in its determination of unemployment benefits that Applicant’s 
employer “did not object to the payments of benefits on [Applicant’s claim].” Applicant’s 
former manager later offered her another position in a different fitness center operated 
by the same chain. In accordance with state law and the state’s determination of 
unemployment benefits, I conclude that Applicant was not fired; she did not quit; and 
she did not leave the job by mutual agreement (she did not agree to leave). Applicant 
was in essence laid off.4 
 
 Applicant submitted a Declaration for Federal Employment in November 2014. 
Section 12 asked: “During the last 5 years, have you been fired from any job for any 
reason, did you quit after being told that you would be fired, did you leave any job by 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 27-32, 35, 44-460; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE ; AE E, F . 
 
4 Applicant’s response to SOR; AE G. 
 
4 
mutual agreement because of specific problems . . . ?” Applicant was not fired; she did 
not quit; and she did not leave by mutual agreement. She correctly answered “No” to 
the question. I further conclude that Applicant did not have any intent to deceive when 
she answered the question.5   
 
Applicant submitted letters from clients that she trained at the fitness center, the 
assistant manager at the fitness center for most of her time there, and workers at her 
current job. She is praised for her excellent job performance, efficiency, dedication, 
professionalism, work ethic, leadership, reliability, dependability, positive attitude, and 
honesty.6 
  
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1) In all 
adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 33-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
6 AE C, D, H. 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Misconduct or Negligence in Employment 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 1 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s employment misconduct or negligence 
in employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s employment misconduct or negligence may put people, 
property, or information systems at risk.  
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying. The 
following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
1.b.(1) A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, disruptive, 
violent, or other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to people, 
property, or information systems; 
 
1.b.(2) A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations in the workplace which put 
people, property or information at risk; 
 
1.f.(4) Violation of written or recorded commitments to protect information 
made to an employer, such as breach(es) of confidentiality or the release 
of proprietary or other information; and 
 
1.b.(5) Failure to comply with rules or regulations for the safeguarding of 
classified, sensitive, or other protected information. 
 
 Applicant’s employment issues at the fitness center are sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis 
to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be relevant: 
  
1.c.(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current trustworthiness or good judgment 
relating to the safety of people and proper safeguarding of property and 
information systems; 
 
 
6 
1.c.(2) The individual was not adequately warned that the conduct was 
unacceptable and could not reasonably be expected to know that the 
conduct was wrong; 
 
1.c.(3) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
behavior; and 
 
1.c.(4) The individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial 
training and has since demonstrated a positive attitude toward the 
discharge of information-handling or security responsibilities. 
 
Applicant had favorable comments from the assistant manager at the fitness 
center for most of her time there and from her clients. The issues were at least partially 
attributable to a personality conflict and a language barrier. She is highly regarded at 
her current job. The above mitigating circumstances are established. 
 
Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 3 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, 
deception or fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.  
 
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material, 
intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or 
information provided during the employment process for the current or a 
prior federal or contract employment (e.g., on the employment application 
or other employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during 
interviews.) 
 
Applicant did not intentionally falsify the Declaration for Federal Employment. 
There are no applicable disqualifying conditions. Intentional false statement, deception, 
or fraud credentialing concerns are concluded for Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Fraudulent Information Concerning Identity:   Withdrawn  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 2, Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud:  For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Misconduct or Negligence in Employment:   For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
