 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 15-05769 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC 
eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing criminal or dishonest conduct eligibility 
concerns. The DOD was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. The action was taken under Homeland 
Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12); the Adjudicative Standards found in 
DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014; and the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 
of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 29, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 6, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
 
2 
on January 12, 2016, scheduling the hearing for February 3, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, 
which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
February 10, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He has worked for his current employer since January 
2015. He is a high school graduate. He is a widow with a child and six stepchildren.1  
 
 Applicant grew up in a heavy-crime area. He was involved in drugs, alcohol, and 
criminal activity. From 1990 to 1997, he was arrested on multiple occasions for crimes 
including robbery, burglary, battery on a police officer, and being under the influence of 
a controlled substance. A number of the charges resulted in convictions. He was 
sentenced to probation, but he never had to serve time in jail.2 
 
 Applicant has not used any illegal drugs in 20 years. He credits the Salvation 
Army with turning his life around. He completed the Salvation Army rehabilitation 
program in 1999, and continued his involvement with the organization for many years.  
He stopped drinking in 2012 when his wife died from cancer.3 
 
 Applicant wrote a check to a supermarket in 2013 that was returned for 
nonsufficient funds. He thought he had enough money in the bank to cover the check. 
He was cited for issuing a worthless check. He paid the supermarket, and the charge 
was dismissed.4 
 
 Applicant became involved in a somewhat unhealthy relationship after his wife 
passed away. His girlfriend was possessive and would look in his cell phone to see who 
he was talking to. In June 2014, they were arguing, and she threw his cell phone. He 
then threw her cell phone and broke it. She called the police. He was arrested and 
charged with simple criminal damage to property. He bought her a new phone, and the 
charge was dismissed. He is no longer with that girlfriend.5 
 
 Applicant has had steady employment since he completed rehabilitation in 1999. 
His employer from 1999 to 2005 wrote that Applicant received several promotions and 
that he was an assistant manager before he left their employment. Three supervisors 
from his 2007 to 2012 employment wrote that he was a valued employee who exhibited 
reliability, competence, dependability, dedication, and integrity. Applicant submitted 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17, 20, 29-30; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 14-16, 22; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 14-18, 24-25; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 19-20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
5 Tr. at 18, 34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
3 
letters from family members who praised his personal growth and that he is not the 
same person who was involved in drugs and criminal activity in his youth. I was 
favorably impressed with Applicant’s honesty and demeanor and with how he is 
attempting to be a role model for his child and stepchildren.6 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1) In all 
adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 16, 20-28, 31, 34-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. 
 
 
4 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted; 
 
(3) Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, perjury, 
forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation without proper 
authorization); 
 
(4) Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, or other intentional financial breaches of 
trust; and 
 
(5) Actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that 
poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled 
facilities and federally-controlled information systems. For example, 
convictions for sexual assault may indicate that granting a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk to the life and safety of persons on U.S. Government 
facilities. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history is sufficient to establish all of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
 
5 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
Applicant fell prey to his environment and was heavily involved as a youth in 
drugs, alcohol, and criminal activity. He credits the Salvation Army with turning his life 
around. He completed the Salvation Army rehabilitation program in 1999, and was 
involved with the organization for years. He has had steady employment at jobs where 
he was recognized as a valued employee. I am convinced Applicant is rehabilitated and 
that his two recent brushes with the law for bouncing a check and breaking his 
girlfriend’s cell phone are not indicative of his current state of rehabilitation. The above 
mitigating circumstances are established. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
