 
1 
                                      
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  CAC Case No. 15-06091 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brandy Pierre Anderson, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns 
raised under the criminal or dishonest conduct or financial irresponsibility, as well as the 
illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or other controlled substances supplemental adjudicative 
standards. CAC eligibility is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 2, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On September 10, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive – 12, Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal 
Employees and Contractors, dated August 27, 2004 (HSPD-12); DOD Instruction 
5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidance for Issuing the Common Access 
Card, dated September 9, 2014 (DODI); Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program, dated January 1987, as amended and modified (Regulation); and DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
                                                          
 
1 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated June 2, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive). The SOR alleged concerns 
pertaining to “criminal or dishonest conduct or financial irresponsibility” under ¶ 2.a., 
Appendix 2, Enclosure 4, and “illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or other controlled 
substances” under ¶ 5.a., Appendix 2, Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to make an 
affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s CAC eligibility. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether such eligibility should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated October 21, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On January 14, 2016, 
Department Counsel indicated the government was prepared to proceed. The case was 
assigned to me on January 15, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued on January 20, 
2016. I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on February 3, 2016.  
 
 During the hearing, two government exhibits (GE 1 and GE 2), ten Applicant 
exhibits (AE A through AE J), and one administrative exhibit were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant and one witness testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received 
on February 11, 2016. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. 
Applicant took advantage of that opportunity. He timely submitted a number of additional 
documents, which were marked as AE K through AE P that were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The record closed on February 22, 2016. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, two of the factual 
allegations pertaining to criminal conduct (¶¶ 1.l. and 1.m.) of the SOR. During the 
hearing, after discussing certain allegations, Applicant changed his answers to “admit,” 
and he also admitted the one factual allegation pertaining to drug involvement (¶ 2.a.). 
Applicant’s admissions, as well as his explanations and comments related to those 
allegations which he denied, are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a 
mechanic for his employer since February 2014. He had previously been a mechanic or 
auto technician for other employers from at least December 2004 until February 2014.2 
He was unemployed from January 2010 until February 2011.3 He is seeking to retain his 
CAC eligibility which was initially granted to him in 2006.4 Applicant attended high school 
                                                          
2 GE 1, supra note 1, at 7-11. 
 
3 GE 1, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
4 Tr. at 8. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
and completed the tenth grade in 1985 or 1986.5 He has never served in the U.S. military.6 
Applicant was married in March 1991 and divorced in 1999.7 He has five children: two 27-
year-old sons, a 26-year-old-daughter, a 21-year-old daughter, and a 14-year-old 
daughter.8  
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct or Financial Irresponsibility and Illegal Use of 
Narcotics, Drugs, or other Controlled Substances9 
 
 Applicant has a lengthy history, from 1991 until 2012, of being a justice-involved 
individual with a variety of incidents pertaining to variations of assault and domestic 
violence charges; illegal substance charges; contempt of court charges, and a theft 
charge. He was in a very dysfunctional relationship with his wife, a person who was 
afflicted with manic schizophrenia and subject to violent outbursts. She periodically struck 
him or attacked him with knives and other objects, and he attempted to fend her off to 
defend himself.10 She routinely called the police, but also refused to sign complaints or 
testify against him.11 Most of the charges were dismissed or nolle prossed, while other 
charges were reduced. He was convicted for a rather small number of charges. Because 
of the time period during which many of the incidents occurred, Applicant was unable to 
recall the specifics of many of the events alleged. 
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.): On July 28, 1991, when he was 20 years old, Applicant was arrested 
and charged with one count of trespassing and two counts of simple assault. He spent 
one night in jail. He was convicted of trespassing and sentenced to time served, and the 
simple assault counts were dismissed.12 
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.b.): On September 17, 1991, sometime after a fight between Applicant 
and another individual, that individual was shot by some unidentified person. Although 
Applicant was not involved in the shooting, he was in the area of the shooting, so he was 
arrested and charged with assault and battery with intent to kill. On June 21, 1993, after 
spending eight months in jail without a trial, the charge was dismissed, nolle prossed or 
Applicant was found not guilty. The record was expunged.13 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 8, 92. 
 
6 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12. 
 
7 Tr. at 92. 
 
8 Tr. at 93. 
 
9 General source information pertaining to the alleged incidents of criminal or dishonest conduct or financial 
irresponsibility, as well as the illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or other controlled substances, discussed below can be 
found in the following exhibits:  GE 2 (Criminal History Record, dated July 14, 2014); Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, 
dated October 21, 2015. More recent information can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
 
10 Tr. at 56, 58-59. 
 
11 Tr. at 59. 
 
12 GE 2, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.c.): On August 5, 1992, while preparing to leave for work, Applicant’s 
wife struck him in the head with a coffee mug, starting an altercation in which Applicant 
pushed her away, causing her to fall onto the bed. She came back swinging. The police 
were called and they arrested and charged Applicant with simple assault. On August 7, 
1992, the charge was dismissed, nolle prossed or Applicant was found not guilty. The 
record was expunged.14 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): On July 28, 1993, Applicant and his wife engaged in an altercation. 
The police were called and they arrested and charged Applicant with criminal domestic 
violence. The charge was subsequently dismissed, nolle prossed or Applicant was found 
not guilty.15 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): On August 22, 1993, Applicant and his wife engaged in an 
altercation. The police were called and they arrested and charged Applicant with domestic 
violence. The charge was apparently subsequently dismissed, nolle prossed or Applicant 
was found not guilty.16 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.): On August 25, 1993, Applicant and his wife engaged in an altercation. 
The police were called and they arrested and charged Applicant with criminal domestic 
violence and disorderly conduct. The charges were subsequently dismissed, nolle 
prossed or Applicant was found not guilty.17 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.): On August 27, 1994, Applicant and his wife engaged in an 
altercation. The police were called and they arrested and charged Applicant with 
aggravated assault, later modified to assault of a high and aggravated nature and criminal 
domestic violence. All of the charges were subsequently dismissed, nolle prossed or 
Applicant was found not guilty. The record was expunged.18 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.): On June 16, 1995, Applicant was arrested and charged with theft of 
electric current. Following an argument with his wife, Applicant attached an electric meter 
to their trailer located in the trailer park he was staying in for the night. A police officer 
saw him place the meter in the trailer. Applicant was convicted of the charge and given 
the option of a $304 fine or 30 days in jail.19 
 
                                                          
13 GE 2, supra note 9, at 3; AE H (Order for Destruction of Arrest Records, dated August 14, 2015); Tr. at 42-
49, 51-53, 97. 
 
14 GE 2, supra note 9, at 3. 
 
15 GE 2, supra note 9, at 3. 
 
16 GE 2, supra note 9, at 3, does not indicate any disposition of the charge, but Applicant contended it was 
dismissed. Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
17 GE 2, supra note 9, at 3-4. 
 
18 GE 2, supra note 9, at 4-5; AE I (Order for Destruction of Arrest Records, dated August 14, 2015). 
 
19 GE 2, supra note 9, at 5; Tr. at 82-83. 
 
5 
                                      
 
(Not alleged in the SOR): On July 28, 1995, while speaking with a friend in the 
trailer park, the friend and a police officer got into an argument. One police officer, the 
same one who had arrested him the month earlier, decided Applicant no longer belonged 
in the trailer park. As a result, Applicant was arrested and charged with congregating for 
unlawful purpose. Notwithstanding the absence of information pertaining to what the 
illegal purpose might be, he was convicted of the charge and given the option of a $764 
fine or 30 days in jail.20 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.i. and 2.a.): On October 25, 1996, Applicant was “hanging out” with 
some friends. An individual walked up to one of people in the group and gave that person 
a $20 bill. Applicant borrowed the money to eat. After the individual departed, the police 
came and raided the bar where they were located. The individual joined the police and 
although no drugs were found on anyone, the $20 bill turned out to be marked money. 
Applicant was arrested and charged with one count of distribution of crack and one count 
of distribution of crack in proximity of school. On June 23, 1998, following the advice of 
the public defender to plead guilty, Applicant was convicted of a reduced charge of 
possession of less than one gram ice/crack cocaine 1st degree, a felony, fined $5,000, 
and sentenced to five years confinement, suspended, with 14 days credit for time served. 
The charges for distribution of crack and distribution of crack in proximity of school were 
dismissed, nolle prossed or Applicant was found not guilty.21 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.j. and 2.a.): On December 15, 1996, Applicant was receiving a ride to 
his mother’s home. The driver was pulled over by the police who spotted a beer in his 
hand. The vehicle was searched and drugs were found under the driver’s seat. Applicant 
was unaware of the drugs. When the police were unhappy with Applicant’s claimed lack 
of knowledge with respect to the drugs, he was arrested and charged with one count of 
possession of crack with intent to distribute, one count of possession of crack with intent 
to distribute within proximity of school, possession of cocaine with intent to distribute, and 
false police report. Under that state’s law, the three drug charges apply if the activity takes 
place on, or within a one-half mile radius of the grounds of a public or private elementary, 
middle, or secondary school; a public playground or park; a public vocational or trade 
school or technical educational center; or a public or private college or university. 
distribution of crack and one count of distribution of crack in proximity of school. On June 
23, 1998, all of the charges were dismissed, nolle prossed or Applicant was found not 
guilty.22 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.k.): Applicant became involved with a woman and moved in with her, 
taking his furniture with him into her house. Upon their breakup, she wanted him out of 
the house, but she refused to permit him to remove his property. The lock on the door 
was changed. Applicant and the woman got into a dispute which became mutually violent 
and she destroyed a piece of his furniture. He left the house.23 On November 29, 2011, 
                                                          
20 GE 2, supra note 9, at 5; Tr. at 85-86. 
 
21 GE 2, supra note 9, at 5-6; Tr. at 77-80. 
 
22 GE 2, supra note 9, at 6-7; Tr. at 81-82. 
 
23 Tr. at 60-62. 
 
6 
                                      
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with one count of assault and battery 3rd degree, a 
misdemeanor. On March 20, 2012, following a bench trial, Applicant was convicted and 
sentenced to time served.24 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.l.): Applicant had been making regular child support payments that were 
automatically taken from his paycheck. The payments ceased when he left his job. On 
January 2, 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with civil contempt of family court 
by adult, a misdemeanor, for having failed to make timely child support payments totaling 
$11,607.11. He was found to be in civil contempt and ordered to report for confinement 
unless he purged himself of contempt by making certain payments. Applicant explained 
his financial circumstances, including his earlier extensive period of unemployment, and 
upon investigation, the court determined that the arrearage had increased because the 
child support payments had erroneously continued although the child had previously 
become emancipated. The arrearage was recalculated down to $6,765.56, and ongoing 
support was cancelled. Applicant was ordered to pay $210, and he was released.25 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.m.): Following his earlier appearance in the family court, Applicant 
received a payment plan and before it could be implemented, he had been making regular 
child support payments. He was unaware that he had to sign paperwork to start the 
automatic payroll deduction. He fell $50 short one time. On September 12, 2012, 
Applicant was again arrested and charged with civil contempt of family court by adult, a 
misdemeanor, for having failed to make timely child support payments on the arrearage 
now totaling $6,425.56. He was found to be in civil contempt and ordered to report for 
confinement unless he purged himself of contempt by making certain payments. Applicant 
was ordered to pay $340 in court costs and $250 for arrearage, and he was released.26 
On January 31, 2014, the child support arrearage was determined by the court to be paid 
off, and the Income Withholding Order/Notice for Support (IWO) was terminated.27 
 
 Applicant and his twin brother were raised by their mother while their father chose 
to reside in another state. He grew up longing for a relationship with his father but there 
was none. Instead, without any type of guidance, he turned to the streets and got into a 
lot of trouble. He consumed alcohol, smoked marijuana, and stopped going to school. As 
a young African-American, there were times when he felt that some of his police-related 
incidents were actually pretext for something else. The trespassing and loitering generally 
occurred where there were no signs prohibiting his presence. Anger filled him, and without 
                                                          
24 AE J (Case History, dated November 30, 2015). Under the state law, there is no requirement that a battery 
be committed. The evidence merely requires that the accused unlawfully injured another person, or offers or attempts 
to injure another person with the present ability to do so. 
25 GE 2, supra note 9, at 7; AE M (Civil Contempt Order, dated January 4, 2012); Tr. at 71-73. 
 
26 GE 2, supra note 9, at 7; AE N (Civil Contempt Order, dated September 13, 2012); Tr. at 76-77. 
 
27 AE O (Income Holding for Support Termination, dated January 31, 2013). The IWO is confusing in that the 
judge signed the order on January 31, 2014, but the cover page of the order is dated January 31, 2013. 
 
7 
                                      
 
thinking, he became indifferent to the requirements of society. He did not care if he lived 
or died.28  
 
 There was a seismic shift in his attitude and outlook when Applicant met his current 
girlfriend. She inspired him to better himself. He attends church regularly and has spoken 
at length with his pastor as well as his girlfriend. She has been a “very inspiring light” to 
him. As God-fearing individuals, she and her family have helped guide him. He no longer 
drinks, smokes, or parties. His days of foolishness are behind him. He has now learned 
to turn the other cheek and walk away from confrontation. He is now hard-working, and 
he fills his spare time working on vehicles for family and friends. He has accepted 
responsibility for all that has gone before, and he acknowledges that when he was 
younger, he wasn’t thinking at all. As a dramatically changed person, he considers himself 
to be a productive citizen, paying his taxes and living like a decent human being.29 
 
Character References 
 
 Applicant’s team leader characterized him in extremely positive terms, referring to 
his excellent quality performance, promptness, trustworthiness, integrity, and dedication. 
He is respectful to others and always volunteers to assist his coworkers.30 His landlady 
has known Applicant since 2012, and she considers him to be both a “wonderful tenant” 
and a great neighbor and friend.31 Applicant’s pastor has concluded that he is a very loyal 
and honest person who is very considerate of others, and that he is a self-motivated hard-
worker.32 Applicant’s sister witnessed incidents when Applicant was hassled by police 
officers, and she related the difficulties he experienced as a youth. She noted his life-
changing progression as he removed himself from his old way of life and adjusted into a 
respectable role model for others, including her son. She attested to the “tremendous 
growth in his character and his life.”33 Friends and coworkers consider Applicant to be an 
excellent mechanic and model employee.34 
 
Applicant’s girlfriend, who considers him as her “soul mate and companion,” has 
known him since June 2012, and since that time she has witnessed a continuous growth 
in his beliefs, standards, and goals. He is honest about his past encounters and admitted 
his past wrongs. He has separated himself from his past environment, friends, and 
activities – those things related to illegal or inappropriate matters. He has not displayed 
                                                          
 
28 Tr. at 86-88, 96. 
 
29 Tr. at 89-91. 
 
30 AE P (Character Reference, dated February 6, 2016). 
 
31 AE G (Character Reference, dated October 16, 2015). 
 
32 AE B (Character Reference, undated). 
 
33 AE L (Character Reference, dated February 3, 2016). 
 
34 AE A (Character Reference, dated September 17, 2015); AE F (Character Reference, dated February 1, 
2016). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
any hostility or aggressiveness or possessed or used any controlled substances since 
she has known him. Applicant is considered a selfless person who puts everyone’s needs 
before his own. He is reliable and trustworthy.35 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall common sense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by applying 
the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the national interest. 
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded common sense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, taking 
into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature 
thinking, and careful analysis. An administrative judge need not view the standards as 
inflexible, ironclad rules of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human 
behavior, these standards are applied in conjunction with the factors listed below in the 
adjudicative process.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If there is evidence sufficient to present a 
reasonable basis to conclude that a disqualifying factor in accordance with the basic CAC 
credentialing standards is substantiated, or when there is a reasonable basis to conclude 
that derogatory information or conduct relating to the supplemental CAC credentialing 
standards presents an unacceptable risk for the U.S. Government, under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15, the applicant has the burden of persuasion to present witnesses and other 
evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the 
doubts raised by the Government’s case. The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility. 
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the nature 
and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; (3) the 
recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of 
the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or presence of 
efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1) In all adjudications, the 
protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration. Therefore, any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor of 
the national interest. 
 
A person who seeks CAC eligibility enters into a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends normal 
duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is because of this special 
                                                          
35 AE K (Character Reference, dated February 3, 2016); Tr. at 27-33. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and 
confidence in those individuals to whom it grants CAC eligibility for access to information 
systems and installation access. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, unacceptable risk. In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 2 articulates the CAC concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that issuance of a 
CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put people, 
property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or 
dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 2.b. lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying. 
The following conditions are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of people 
and proper protection of property or information systems, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or 
convicted; 
 
(3) Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, perjury, 
forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation without proper 
authorization); 
 
(5) Actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that 
poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled 
facilities and federally-controlled information systems. For example, 
convictions for sexual assault may indicate that granting a CAC poses an 
 
10 
                                      
 
unacceptable risk to the life and safety of persons on U.S. Government 
facilities; 
 
(6) Financial irresponsibility may raise questions about the individual’s 
honesty and put people, property or information systems at risk, although 
financial debt should not in and of itself be cause for denial. 
 
Applicant’s extensive history of criminal or dishonest conduct and limited history of 
financial irresponsibility is sufficient to establish all of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 2.c. lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable 
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following mitigating conditions may be 
relevant: 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
It is clear that without any type of guidance from an absentee father, Applicant fell 
prey to his environment, and he turned to the streets where he got into trouble. He 
consumed alcohol, smoked marijuana, and stopped going to school. He entered into a 
dysfunctional relationship with his wife. As a young African-American, there were times 
when he felt that some of his police-related incidents were actually pretext for something 
else. Time, maturity, a change in environment, a divorce, and a caring girlfriend, brought 
substantial changes in his life. He learned to control his anger and avoid negative 
influences and situations. The criminal conduct for which Applicant was arrested and 
charged during the period 1991 through 1996 occurred when he was between the ages 
of 20 and 25 – over 20 years ago.  
 
The variations of assault and domestic violence incidents during that period were 
largely the result of his wife’s aggressions because of her manic schizophrenia when she 
was subject to violent outbursts. All of the charges involving his spouse were eventually 
dismissed, nolle prossed or Applicant was found not guilty. He was convicted of both 
incidents involving the minor charges of trespassing and congregating for unlawful 
purposes. At the age of 24, Applicant exercised poor judgment when he stole electric 
current. The two drug-related incidents when he was 25 years old resulted from Applicant 
being in the wrong place at the wrong time. He was a passenger in a car receiving a ride 
to his mother’s home when the driver had drugs under the driver’s seat. Applicant took 
 
11 
                                      
 
the public defender’s advice and pled guilty to one reduced charge. The remaining charge 
was dismissed. The other drug-related incident arose because Applicant borrowed money 
from a friend who apparently was in a police drug-sting. All of those charges were 
eventually dismissed, nolle prossed or Applicant was found not guilty. 
 
The remaining assault charge occurred when Applicant was 40 years old. It, too, 
involved very unusual circumstances when a former girlfriend managed to steal 
Applicant’s property and destroy some of it. She physically attacked him, but he was 
arrested, charged, and convicted of misdemeanor assault, although no battery took place. 
The two civil contempt incidents in 2012 were in part, a combination of 
miscommunication, misinformation, and a period of unemployment. All child support 
arrearage was eventually paid off and the matter has been resolved.  
 
With the exception of the one lengthy period of unemployment, Applicant has been 
a hard-working mechanic or auto technician for various employers since at least 
December 2004. He has held steady employment since February 2011, and he has been 
recognized as a valued employee. Based on the extremely positive information presented 
by his various character references, as well as Applicant’s own description of his spiritual, 
psychological, and social transformation and maturity, I am convinced Applicant is 
rehabilitated. His history of criminal or dishonest conduct or his financial irresponsibility 
from the past is not indicative of his current state of rehabilitation, and it does not pose an 
unacceptable risk. The above mitigating circumstances are established. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 5 articulates the CAC concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the nature or duration of the individual’s illegal use of narcotics, 
drugs, or other controlled substances without evidence of substantial 
rehabilitation, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s abuse of drugs may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk.  Illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or other controlled 
substances, to include abuse of prescription or over-the-counter drugs, can 
raise questions about his or her trustworthiness, or ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. For example, a person’s long-term 
illegal use of narcotics without evidence of substantial rehabilitation may 
indicate that granting a CAC poses an unacceptable safety risk in a U.S. 
Government facility. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 5.b. lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying. 
The following conditions are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(1) Current or recent illegal drug use, serious narcotic, or other controlled 
substance offense. 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
(2) A pattern of drug-related arrests or problems in employment. 
   
(3) Illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, or possession of drug 
paraphernalia.  
 
There is no SOR allegation that Applicant used any illegal substances, although 
he admitted using marijuana as a youth. The SOR merely alleged that Applicant was 
arrested on two occasions in 1996 for variations of drug-related criminal offenses 
pertaining to distribution and possession of cocaine and crack cocaine. As noted above, 
the two drug-related incidents occurred two decades ago when he was 25 years old. 
Applicant pled guilty to one reduced charge. The remaining charge was dismissed. The 
other drug-related incident eventually resulted in all of the charges being eventually 
dismissed, nolle prossed or with Applicant being found not guilty. Nevertheless, 
Applicant’s limited involvement with controlled substances is sufficient to partially 
establish two of the above disqualifying conditions. The condition raised in ¶ 5.b.(1) has 
not been established. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 5.c. lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable 
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following mitigating conditions may be 
relevant: 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur (e.g., clear, lengthy 
break since last use; strong evidence the use will not occur again). 
  
(2) A demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(a) Abstaining from drug use. 
  
(b) Disassociating from drug-using associates and contacts.  
 
(c) Changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used.  
 
Applicant’s limited relationship with controlled substances, arising out of his two 
drug-related arrests two decades ago when he was 25 years old, has faded into the past 
with no recurrence. Applicant changed the environment of his youth and has 
disassociated himself from any drug-using individuals. Based on the extremely positive 
information presented that reflects Applicant’s spiritual, psychological, and social 
transformation and maturity, I am convinced Applicant is rehabilitated. His history of drug-
related involvement from the past is not indicative of his current state of rehabilitation, 
and it does not pose an unacceptable risk. The above mitigating circumstances are 
established. 
 
  
 
13 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest 
  Conduct or Financial Irresponsibility:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.m.:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Illegal Use of Narcotics, 
  or other Controlled Substances:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:      For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
  
