                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:  )
 )
 )
---------------------------                            )     CAC Case No. 15-08595
 )
 )
Applicant for CAC Eligibility  )
Appearances
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
failed to mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised under the
supplemental adjudicative standards for criminal and dishonest conduct and the illegal
use of narcotics, drugs, or other controlled substances without evidence of substantial
rehabilitation. Eligibility for CAC access is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On January 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing eligibility concerns for CAC eligibility pursuant to Homeland
Security Presidential Directive - 12 (HSPD-12), Policy for a Common Identification
Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors, dated August 27, 2004. DOD
adjudicators were unable to make the affirmative determination that granting Applicant
CAC eligibility posed no unacceptable risk. The action was based on the Supplemental
Adjudicative Standards (SAS) found in DODI Instruction 5200.46, DOD Investigative
and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the Common Access Card, dated September 9,
2014, and the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
2
amended (Directive), and Regulation 5200.2-R (Reference (q)). The concerns raised
under the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards of DOD 5200.46 are: an individual’s
“past criminal or dishonest conduct” and “an individual’s conduct involving questionable
judgment“Individual use of narcotics, drugs or other controlled substances without
evidence of substantial rehabilitation.” 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 18, 2015, and elected to have a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on June 17, 2016, and scheduled for hearing on
August 3, 2016. A hearing was held on the scheduled date for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s CAC eligibility.  
At the hearing, the Government’s case consisted of nine exhibits. (GEs 1-9)
Applicant relied on two witnesses (including himself) and one exhibit (AE A) The
transcript (Tr.) was received on August 12, 2016.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing , Applicant requested the record be keep open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with a substance abuse report from
2010 covering Applicant’s alcohol rehabilitation program that he entered in 2010 and
completed in 2012. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to
supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded two days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant furnished citations to ISCR cases, but no
2012 substance abuse report. Applicant’s submission was admitted as AE B.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Supplemental Adjudicative Standards-Paragraph 2.a - Criminal or
Dishonest Conduct . . . ,  Applicant allegedly incurred multiple arrests and charges
covering drugs and alcohol-related conduct between 2008 and 2011. And under
Adjudicative Standards-Paragraph 5.a - Illegal Use of Narcotics, Drugs, or Other
Controlled Substances, Applicant allegedly used or possessed marijuana between
January 2008 and January 2011; illegally possessed Darvon (a prescription drug) and
drug paraphernalia in 2011; committed larceny of private property (prescription for
Darvon); and received a general discharge under honorable conditions from the U.S.
Army for the commission of a serious offense.
Under Adjudicative Standards-Paragraph 5.a - Illegal Use of Narcotics, drugs, or
Other Controlled Substances, Applicant allegedly used marijuana and Darvon (a
prescriptive drug) as incorporated under ¶ Standards-Paragraph 2.a - Criminal or
Dishonest Conduct , 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. He
furnished no explanations.  
3
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 29-year-old medical record associate for a defense contractor who
seeks CAC eligibility. The allegations covered in the SOR, and admitted by Applicant
are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant met his wife in December 2011 and married her in May 2012. (Tr. 46)
He has one daughter (age two) from this marriage. (Tr. 25-26, 73-74) 
Applicant claimed no post-high school education credits. (GE 1) He enlisted in
the United States (U.S.) Army in June 2005 and served six years of active duty
(including several deployments before receiving a general discharge under honorable
conditions in June 2011. (GE 2; Tr.  57-58)
Alcohol and drug-related offenses 
In January 2008, Applicant tested positive on a urinalysis test for use of
marijuana while home from active-duty deployment in the Army. (Tr. 30-31) He received
a field grade Article 15 non-judicial punishment (NJP), and was awarded a reduction in
rank from E-4 to E-2 and was assigned extra duty and restricted conditions for 45 days.
(GEs 8-9; Tr. 31-32) Applicant described himself as a “functioning addict” who abused
alcohol and illegal drugs in the Army. (Tr. 32-34) In Applicant’s opinion, his active drug
use contributed to his 2011 general discharge under honorable conditions. (Tr. 58) 
Details of Applicant’s failed 2008 urinalysis test were noted in the military police
report covering Applicant’s urinalysis test. (GE 9) Notes in the report confirmed that
Applicant relinquished a urine sample during a routine directed urinalysis, which
subsequently tested positive for marijuana metabolites. (GE 9) Applicant, in turn, was
advised of his legal rights before being released. (GE 9) The commander’s report
covering the test confirmed the urinalysis findings and the ensuing award of NJP to
Applicant. (GE 8) As a result of his positive drug test, Applicant enrolled in a 30-day
Army substance abuse program (ASAP), which he completed sometime in 2008 with a
cannabis dependency diagnosis.  (Tr. 52-53) His ASAP counselors did not recommend
any period of cannabis abstinence.  (Tr. 53)
In May 2010, Applicant was arrested by state police in his state of residence and
charged with driving while intoxicated (Misdemeanor Class B) and Obstructing Highway
Passageway (Misdemeanor Class B). When he appeared in court to answer the
charges, he pled no contest to the Obstructing Highway Passageway and received a
12-month deferred probation from the court. (GE 3; Tr. 34-36, 40) 
Applicant tested positive on a urinalysis test in January 2011 for marijuana while
on active-duty military service. (GEs 2-3 and 6-7) Records from his command confirm
4
that he was awarded Article 15 NJP and reduced in rank to E-1, ordered to forfeit $733
pay per month, given extra duty, and restricted for 45 days. (GE 8)  
In June 2011, Applicant was arrested by military police and charged with
wrongful possession of Darvon (a prescription drug), drug paraphernalia, and larceny of
private property (a prescription for Darvon). His 2011 general discharge from the Army
under honorable conditions was formally attributed to the commission of a serious
offense. (GE 8) Applicant attributed his general discharge to drug use. (Tr. 40-44)
Applicant’s drug and alcohol abuse history
Applicant was introduced to marijuana in 2007, five to six months before he
tested positive for marijuana in January 2008. (Tr. 30-31, 50) Between 2007 and
December 2011, Applicant used marijuana bi-daily for the most part, often with other
soldiers in his command who supplied the marijuana. (Tr. 47-48, 54-56) Sometimes, he
would avoid marijuana altogether for weeks at a time while on deployment and in other
situations. (Tr. 54-56, 58-59) Following his marriage in December 2011, he reduced his
marijuana in-take to every two to three days out of respect to his wife. (Tr. 58-59)  And
since February 2015, he assured he has abstained from marijuana altogether. (Tr. 46-
47)
Prior to his 2010 arrest, he abused alcohol, consuming a half-pint of alcohol (Tr.
34) He attended an alcohol rehabilitation program following his 2010 DUI arrest and
received an alcohol and cannabis dependence diagnosis before completing the
program in 2012. (Tr. 36-37) Since 2012, he has attended counseling sessions on an
on and off basis and takes prescribed medications. (Tr. 37-39) Because Applicant
provided no medical records detailing his cannabis and alcohol dependence diagnoses
and recommendations (if any), no firm alcohol assessment can be made on the facts
presented.
Applicant assured he last used marijuana and ceased associating with
individuals who used drugs in February 2015. (Tr. 46-48) He attributed his decision to
cease all use of illegal drugs to his parental concerns over his child and issues with his
wife over his drug use. (Tr. 48) Further, he assured he stopped consuming alcohol in
early 2012, and has maintained his abstinence from alcohol since February 2012. (Tr.
58)
Asked to verify his commitment to abstinence for both drug and alcohol use, his
wife provided some background to better assess Applicant’s childhood development and
his lack of role models in his life. (Tr. 63-67, 73) She contrasted his earlier childhood
development with his current progress and family support, which she believes has
served him well and helped to steer himself away from alcohol and drug abuse. (Tr. 63-
67)
Applicant considers himself a changed man since he met his wife in June 2012.
(Tr. 44-45) He has added lifestyle changes to his daily routine, to include physical
activity and church-based community service to keep himself motivated and resistant to
5
urges to return to substance abuse. (Tr. 49) Since he stopped using drugs in February
2015, Applicant no longer associates with the individuals who supplied him the
marijuana he used. (Tr. 47) 
Without the benefit of an updated substance abuse report, however, a full and
reliable assessment of Applicant’s drug and alcohol use condition and prognosis cannot
be made at this time.  More documented details of Applicant’s drug and alcohol abuse
history are needed before a more definitive risk assessment can be made about
Applicant’s risks of recurrence of drug and alcohol can be properly made.
 Character references
Applicant’s wife (a second grade school teacher with a concentration in reading
and language) traced Applicant’s adjustment problems to his early upbringing without a
father or role models in his life. (Tr. 62-65) Raised by his mother, he encountered
difficult adjustment problems in the Army and turned to drugs. (Tr. 64-65) Since their
marriage, she has consistently encouraged him to give up drugs and credited him with
positive changes in his life. (Tr. 66-73)
Equally supportive of Applicant’s progress in changing the direction of his life is
Applicant’s pastor. (AE A) In a favorably-worded letter, his pastor cited Applicant’s
achievements as a trustee for his church’s offering committee and active member of his
church, men’s group, and volunteers and offered his blessing of Applicant as  a valued
part of their church. (AE A)  As a commissioned officer of the Army with 22 years of
active duty service, Applicant’s pastor assessed Applicant’s performance in citizenship,
professionalism, and dedication to be superior to be superior to many in his former
commands. (AE A) Whether his pastor was aware of any of Applicant’s background
issues covered in this proceeding is unknown.
Policies
The SASs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering CAC cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect his or her eligibility to hold a common access card. The
overriding factor for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be
arrived at by applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent
with the national interest.
The SASs must be considered before deciding whether or not CAC eligibility
should be granted, continued, or denied. The standards do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the standards in arriving at a decision. Each of the standards is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person. Specific issues raised in individual cases
are listed I DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative Standards, and
Appendix 2. 
6
In addition to the relevant SASs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in SAS ¶ 1(b)
of the SASs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable CAC eligibility risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant standards are to be
considered together with the following  factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the
absence or presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. See DODI 5200.46. 
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Criminal Conduct
DODI 5200.46 Appendix 2 to enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards,
Paragraphs 2.a articulates the CAC concern as follows with respect to criminal conduct:
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put people, property, or information
systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or dishonest conduct may put people,
property, or information systems at risk.
Drugs
DODI 5200.46 Appendix 2 to enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards,
Paragraphs 5.a articulates the CAC concern as follows with respect to drugs:
An individual’s abuse of drugs may put people, property, or information systems at
risk. Illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or other controlled substances, to include abuse of
prescription or over-the-counter drugs, can raise questions about his or her
trustworthiness, or ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. For
example, a person’s long-term illegal use of narcotics without evidence of substantial
rehabilitation may indicate that granting a CAC poses an unacceptable safety risk in a
U.S. Government facility.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the SASs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's CAC eligibility may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the objective of
7
the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded assessment of a person’s life to
facilitate an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable risk, the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's CAC
eligibility, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. See United
States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings,
the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis
from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's CAC eligibility. To be
weighed in determining CAC eligibility are the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to demonstrate trust and reliability considerations. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement found in DODI Instruction 5200.46 that all CAC
eligibility determinations be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant
has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her CAC eligibility. “[S]ecurity-
clearance “[CAC eligibility] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
CAC eligibility concerns center on Applicant’s considerable history of positive
urinalysis tests over three-plus years (January 2008 and June 2011), and alcohol and
drug-related arrests. Applicable disqualifying conditions (DC) for criminal or dishonest
conduct under the SASs are as follows: DC ¶ 2a(1), “a single serious crime or multiple
lesser offenses which put the safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of
property or information. . . .” and DC ¶ 2a(2), “charges or admission of criminal
conduct relating to the safety of people and proper protection of property or
information systems, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted, or convicted,” apply to Applicant’s situation. Applicant’s accumulated
arrests and charges are neither minor nor aged (2008-2011) and raise continued
safety and recurrence concerns.
Overlapping, but covered separately by the CAC drug guidelines are
Applicant’s documented use and possession of marijuana with associates who
supplied him the marijuana over an eight year period (2007-2015 period). The SAS’s
list several conditions that may be disqualifying under the drug guideline: (1) current
or recent illegal drug use, serious narcotic, or other controlled substance offense; (3)
illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and (8) any illegal use or abuse of
prescription or over-the-counter drugs. See 5200.46, App. 2, Encl. 4. Each of these
listed disqualifying conditions fully apply to the facts in Applicant’s case. Judgment
8
concerns exist over Applicant’s past drug use. He has a considerable history of drug
and alcohol and drug abuse and lacks any documentation of prior and recent
substance abuse assessments or seasoned track record of proven abstinence.
Considering the recent and relatively prolonged nature of Applicant’s sustained
patterns of drug and alcohol abuse accompanied by dependence diagnoses and
related criminal offenses covering use and possession of illegal drugs, misuse of
prescription drugs, and DUI charges, insufficient time has elapsed to facilitate safe
predictable judgments that he poses no unacceptable risks of recurrence. Applicant’s
accumulated arrests and charges are neither minor nor unlikely recur in light of his
past history.
Pertinent mitigating conditions covered by SAS 2.c and 5.c are not available to
Applicant. Applicant has expressed no documented intent to avoid abuse of any illegal
drugs or prescription drugs without prescriptions in the future and furnished no
evidence of completion of a prescribed drug treatment program. While Applicant and
his wife expressed confidence in Applicant’s ability steer clear of drugs and related
criminal offenses, Applicant provided no updated evaluation of his current status. A
detailed assessment of Applicant’s drug and alcohol history by a licensed substance
abuse counselor is needed to provide corroborating assurances that Applicant is no
longer subject to an unacceptable risk of recurrence of his drug abuse of previous
years.
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established insufficient
probative evidence of his commitment to avert recurrent drug use in the future. His
positive support from his wife and pastor, while encouraging, are not enough to
overcome reasonable doubts about his ability to avert recurrent drug abuse.
Applicant’s admissions of regular marijuana use over an eight-year period,
prescriptive drug use without a lawful prescription on at least one occasion in 2011,
and insufficient probative evidence that is he not an unacceptable risk to return to
drug use in the foreseeable future preclude favorable conclusions about his overall
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. 
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
history of alcohol and drug-related arrests, regular use of drugs, either illegal per se or
used illegally, and associated judgment lapses, Applicant does not mitigate risk
concerns  related to his exhibited criminal conduct and use of illegal drugs, or drugs
used illegally. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations
covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. of SAS 2 and 2.a of SAS 5.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
SAS 2 (CRIMINAL or DISHONEST CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
9
Subpara. 1.a-1.d:              Against Applicant
SAS 5 (ILLEGAL USE OF DRUGS):                    AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 2.a:                                           Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s CAC
eligibility.  Eligibility for a CAC is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
