 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Redacted] )  CAC Case No. 15-06221 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Foreman, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the eligibility concerns raised by his criminal conduct, 
financial irresponsibility, and false statements in his Declaration for Federal 
Employment. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing concerns about his eligibility for a Common 
Access Card (CAC). The DOD found that granting Applicant CAC eligibility posed an 
unacceptable risk. The action was taken in accordance with Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive 12, Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal 
Employees and Contractors (August 27, 2004), and was based on the Adjudicative 
Standards found in DoD Instruction 5200.46, DoD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidance for Issuing the Common Access Card (September 9, 2014) (Instruction) and 
the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive). The SOR alleges eligibility concerns under the Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards (SAS) set out in Enclosure 4, Appendix 2 of the Instruction. The specific 
 
2 
concerns were alleged under the standards for Criminal or Dishonest Conduct (SAS ¶ 
2) and Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud (SAS ¶ 3).  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 20, 2017, but he did not admit or deny 
any of the allegations and did not indicate whether he wanted a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The SOR was returned to him on July 20, 2017. He admitted all 
the allegations and requested a hearing before a DOHA administrative judge. 
Department Counsel amended the SOR on September 6, 2017, by adding an additional 
allegation. Applicant did not admit or deny the additional allegation. Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on September 13, 2017, and the case was assigned to 
me on October 23, 2017. On November 13, 2017, DOHA notified Applicant that the 
hearing was scheduled for December 8, 2017. I conducted the hearing as scheduled. 
Department Counsel submitted Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified and presented the testimony of one 
witness. He did not submit any documentary evidence. I kept the record open until 
December 21, 2017, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. He timely 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A through I, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 15, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old warehouse worker employed by a federal contractor 
since September 2014. He has worked as a contractor employee for about 30 years. 
(Tr. 39.) 
 
 The SOR, as amended, alleges six federal tax liens filed in 1996, 2002, 2007, 
2009, 2012, and 2016. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e and 1.j.) The liens are reflected in credit reports 
from November 2002 and November 2015. (GX 3; GX 6.) Applicant testified that he and 
his wife accrued a federal tax debt due to insufficient withholding from their wages. His 
wife testified that they incurred a large tax debt in 1999, when she withdrew funds from 
her retirement account after 24 years, not realizing the tax consequences. (Tr. 46-48.) 
Applicant testified that he had not received any federal income tax refunds for 20 years. 
(Tr. 21.) The mortgage loan on their house was foreclosed around 2004, when they 
could not make the payment on a balloon loan, and the proceeds of the foreclosure sale 
were seized by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). He testified that he had an 
installment agreement with the IRS, but he submitted no documentation of any 
agreement. (Tr. 24-25.) After the hearing, he submitted nine tax statements from the 
IRS, all dated December 4, 2017, reflecting that he owed $4,710 for tax year 2006; 
$599 for 2007; $2,596 for 2008; $3,167 for 2009; $2,823 for 2010; $1,278 for 2011; 
$1,636 for 2012; $1,261 for 2013; and $796 for 2014. His total tax debt is $18,866. (AX 
A through I.) His federal income tax refund for 2015 was retained to pay the taxes due 
for 2015. (Tr. 51.) The federal tax liens alleged in the SOR are not resolved. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested in August 1982 for failure to appear 
at a court hearing. (SOR ¶ 1.f) Applicant testified that the court hearing was for an 
unpaid parking ticket. Department Counsel offered no documentary evidence of this 
 
3 
arrest or the disposition of the charge. Applicant testified that he spent the night in jail 
and appeared in court on the following day, when the charges were dismissed. (Tr. 27.) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested in March 1999 for driving with an 
open container of alcohol in his car. (SOR ¶ 1.g.) He testified that he appeared in court 
and paid a fine. (Tr. 28.) Department Counsel offered no documentary evidence 
regarding this arrest and conviction. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested in July 2012 and charged with 
violation of probation. (SOR ¶ 1.h.) He testified that he could not remember the offense 
for which he was on probation or the disposition of the charge of violating probation. (Tr. 
31-32.) Department Counsel submitted evidence that Applicant’s suspended sentence 
and probation imposed for a misdemeanor were revoked, but the evidence does not 
reflect the misdemeanor for which probation was imposed or the basis for the charge of 
violating probation. (GX 2.) 
 
In August 2013, Applicant was charged with felony possession of cocaine. (GX 
2.) (SOR 1.i.) The record reflects that he was convicted and placed on probation, but it 
provided no other details about his sentence. (GX 2.) He testified that he was arrested 
at the house of a neighbor, when the police raided the neighbor’s house and found 
drugs and paraphernalia, and the neighbor told the police that they belonged to 
Applicant. He testified that he spent 21 days in jail and was required to perform 100 
hours of community service. (Tr. 33-36.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his “Declaration for Federal Employment” in August 
2014, he answered “No” to questions asking if he had been convicted, imprisoned, 
placed on probation, or been on parole during the previous seven years; if he was 
currently under charges for any violations of law; and if he was delinquent on any 
federal debt. (GX 5.) He admitted that his answers were false. He explained that he 
wanted to keep the information to himself and did not want to be “out there like that.” 
(Tr. 38.) He knew that the information probably would be discovered, but he was 
worried about losing his job. (Tr. 39.) 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
concerns, standards, disqualifying conditions, and mitigating circumstances are listed in 
the Instruction, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative Standards (BAS), and 
Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards (SAS). The overriding factor for CAC 
eligibility decisions is “unacceptable risk,” which is defined as follows: 
 
A threat to the life, safety, or health of employees, contractors, vendors, or 
visitors; to the U.S. Government physical assets or information systems; to 
personal property; to records, including classified, privileged, proprietary, 
financial, and medical records, or to the privacy rights established by The 
 
4 
Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, or other law that is deemed 
unacceptable when making risk management determinations. 
 
(Instruction, Glossary, Part II at 28.) 
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. A CAC will not be issued if there is a reasonable 
basis to believe that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. Each case must be 
judged on its own merits, taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and 
applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (Instruction, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1.b.)  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Analysis 
 
SAS ¶ 2, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 The concern under this standard is set out in SAS ¶ 2.a:  
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property or information 
systems at risk.  
 
 The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(1): A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put 
the safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or 
information; 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(2): Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the 
safety of people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
5 
SAS ¶ 2.b(6): Financial irresponsibility may raise questions about the 
individual’s honesty and put people, property or information systems at 
risk, although financial debt should not in and of itself be cause for denial. 
 
 SAS ¶¶ 2.b(1) and 2.b(2) are not established for the failure to appear alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.f and the open-container violation alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, because these 
offenses are not the type that put the safety of people at risk, threaten the protection of 
property or information, or relate to the protection of property or information systems. 
They also are not established for the probation violation alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, because 
there is no evidence of the underlying crime for which probation was imposed or the 
basis for the charge of a probation violation. SAS ¶ 2.b(2) is established by Applicant’s 
arrest and the charge of felony possession of cocaine. SAS ¶ 2.b(6) is established by 
Applicant’s history of delinquent federal income taxes. 
 
 The following mitigating circumstances are potentially relevant: 
 
SAS ¶ 2.c(1): The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
and 
 
SAS ¶ 2.c(4): Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, 
including but not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, constructive community involvement, 
or passage of time without recurrence.  
 
 SAS ¶ 2.c(1) is not established for the probation violation in July 2012, because 
there is no evidence of the circumstances on which it was based. Neither mitigating 
condition is established for the drug offense or the federal income tax liens. The drug 
offense occurred more than four years ago, but it was not a minor offense.1 Applicant’s 
financial irresponsibility is recent, serious, and did not occur under unusual 
circumstances. He testified that he has an installment agreement with the IRS, but he 
submitted no evidence of payments or a payment agreement.  
 
SAS ¶ 3, Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in SAS ¶ 3.a: “The individual’s 
conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and put people, property, or information systems at risk.” The relevant 
disqualifying condition is SAS ¶ 3.b:  
 
                                                          
1 The SOR does not allege drug use under SAS ¶ 5, which recognizes that drug abuse may put people, 
property, or information systems at risk. SAS ¶ 5.b(3) lists illegal drug possession as a disqualifying 
condition. I have considered SAS ¶ 5.b(3) for the limited purpose of determining whether Applicant’s 
conviction of felony drug possession was the type of crime that may raise an unacceptable risk to people, 
property, or information systems.  
 
6 
[C]onditions that may be disqualifying include material, intentional 
falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or information provided 
during the employment process for the current or a prior federal or 
contract employment (e.g., on the employment application or other 
employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during 
interviews). 
 
 This disqualifying condition is established by Applicant’s admission that he 
intentionally falsified his Declaration for Federal Employment. The following mitigating 
circumstances are potentially relevant: 
 
SAS ¶ 3.c(1): The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was 
minor, or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
SAS ¶ 3.c(2): The misstatement or omission was unintentional or 
inadvertent and was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the 
situation. 
 
 Neither of these mitigating circumstances are established. Applicant’s 
falsifications were serious, recent, intentional, and did not happen under unusual 
circumstances; and he made no effort to correct them. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 My formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR are: 
 
 Paragraph 1 (Criminal or Dishonest Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.h:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.i and 1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2 (Material, Intentional False Statement, 
  Deception, or Fraud):    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I 
conclude that giving Applicant a CAC would pose an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is 
denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
