 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 15-05757 
 ) 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol, G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC 
eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for CAC eligibility pursuant 
to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). DOD was unable to find 
that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. 
The action is based on the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction 5200.46, 
DOD Investigative (DODI) and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, dated 
September 9, 2014, and made pursuant to the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The concerns raised under the 
Adjudicative Standards of DODI 5200.46 are criminal or dishonest conduct, or financial 
irresponsibility.  
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 3, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 11, 2016. The case was 
forwarded to the DOHA and assigned to me on January 22, 2016. On February 8, 2016, 
a Notice of Hearing was issued. I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 3, 
2016. Department Counsel submitted a copy of the discovery letter sent to Applicant. It 
was marked as Hearing Exhibit I. Also submitted were Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 7 which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
did not offer documentary evidence. The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 14, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He has completed three years of college, but did not 
receive a degree. He married in 1994 and has three children ages five, three, and two. 
He served in the military from 1994 to 1999 and was honorably discharged.1  
 
 Applicant had a 2007 state tax lien ($1,290) that he satisfied before he 
purchased his house in 2008. Credit reports from December 2014 and October 2015 
indicate the tax lien has not been released. He did not provide supporting documents.2  
 
 Applicant was arrested while on active duty in December 1995 by military police 
and was charged with possession of marijuana. He was giving a person a ride and was 
unaware the person possessed marijuana. After the arrest, the person admitted 
Applicant was unaware of the marijuana, and the charge was dismissed. Applicant 
credibly testified that he has never used marijuana.3 
 
 In April 2002, Applicant was arrested for disorderly conduct. He acknowledged 
he was intoxicated and was held in custody until he was sober and then released.4  
 
 In May 2002, Applicant was charged with failure to obey a police officer and 3rd 
degree assault. The charges were dismissed when the witnesses failed to appear in 
court.5 
 
 In May 2004, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI) of 
liquor. The charge was dismissed when the police officer failed to appear in court.6  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 16-18. 
 
2 Tr. 18-21. 
 
3 Tr. 20-23. 
 
4 Tr. 24-26. 
 
5 Tr. 26-30. 
 
6 Tr. 31. 
 
3 
 In May 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. He was found guility, 
fined, ordered to attend a course for DUI offenders, suspension of his license for a year, 
and probation for a year.7  
 
 In February 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with 3rd degree theft of 
property. He pled guilty to the charge and paid a fine. Applicant testified that he was 
intoxicated and was shopping with his wife when he took a keychain from a department 
store. He admitted it was a stupid act and being intoxicated affected his judgment.8  
 
 Applicant testified that all of his criminal conduct happened while he was 
relatively young and consuming alcohol. He is aware he makes poor decisions when he 
consumes alcohol, so he no longer drinks.9  
 
 Applicant stopped consuming alcohol when he became a father in 2011 because 
he wanted to set a positive example. Applicant and his wife could not have children for 
many years. After pursuing infertility options, they conceived. His relationship with his 
wife changed once they had a child. His father was never a part of his life, so when 
Applicant became a father, he decided he would always be there for his children and 
would never abandon them. He testified that after his child was born he gave his life to 
God and straightened up. He stated he does not want to ever jeopardize his relationship 
with his children. He has been working overseas to earn more money, be responsible, 
and take care of his family.10  
 
 Applicant has worked for federal contractors since 2010. Much of his work is 
done overseas. He supervises eight employees. When overseas he lives in a tent and 
alcohol is not available. When he is home he does not consume alcohol. He has made 
major changes in his life, and he is motivated to be a good father.11  
   
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 31-33. 
 
8 Tr. 34-37. 
 
9 Tr. 15, 33, 36. 
 
10 Tr. 15-16, 33, 43-45. 
 
11 Tr. 37-43. 
 
4 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) The 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) The recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) The individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) Contributing external conditions; and (6) The absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, paragraph 2.a articulates the CAC concern. 
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists four conditions that raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying:  
 
2.b.(1): A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the 
safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or 
information. A person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting 
a CAC poses an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical 
assets and to employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
 
2.b.(2): Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
 
5 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted;  
 
2.b.(3): Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, 
perjury, forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation without 
proper authorization);  
 
2.b.(4) Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, or other intentional financial breaches of 
trust; and 
 
2.b.(6): Financial irresponsibility may raise questions about the individual’s 
honesty and put people, property or information systems at risk, although 
financial debt should not in and of itself be cause for denial. 
 
The Government established through Applicant’s admissions and documentary 
evidence that Applicant was arrested for disorderly conduct, failure to obey a police 
officer, 3rd degree assault, 3rd degree theft, and twice for DUI. In addition, he has a 2007 
state tax lien. The above three disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis 
to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following four may be relevant:  
 
2.c.(1): The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
2.c.(2): Charges were dismissed or evidence was produced that the 
person did not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or 
her innocence; and  
 
2.c.(4) Evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, constructive community involvement, or passage of time without 
recurrence. 
 
Applicant attributed his criminal activity to his abuse of alcohol and bad decision 
making when he was intoxicated. When he became a father in 2011, he changed his 
life. There is no evidence that he has been in any trouble since his last arrest for theft in 
2010, which happened while he was under the influence of alcohol. Applicant credibly 
testified about the emotional impact of growing up without a father, and he is committed 
to being a responsible father for his children. It has been more than six years since 
Applicant’s last criminal conduct. He has not consumed alcohol since 2011. Some of the 
criminal charges against Applicant were dismissed and he paid the fine and completed 
probation on the others. Although Applicant did not provide documented proof that he 
satisfied the state tax lien, I found his testimony credible that it was paid before he 
 
6 
purchased his house. The above conditions mitigate any unreasonable risk raised by 
Applicant’s past conduct. I conclude Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility should be 
granted.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
