KEYWORD:  CAC Criminal or Dishonest Conduct
DIGEST:  We find the Judge’s findings of fact about the charges against Applicant and their
disposition were based on substantial evidence.  Furthermore, even if the Judge’s finding of a
conviction was in error, we conclude it would not have been harmful, since a finding of non-
adjudication with five years probation would likely have produced an adverse decision.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASE NO:  15-06229.a1
DATE:  02/15/2017
DATE:  February 15, 2017
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
CAC Case No. 15-06229
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Rodney A. Ray, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant eligibility for Common
Access Card (CAC) credentialing.  On November 17, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons
(SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–criminal or dishonest conduct or financial
irresponsibility concerns raised under the adjudicative standards in the appendices of DoD
Instruction 5200.46 (Sep. 9, 2014) (Instruction).  Applicant requested a decision on the written
record.  On October 28, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶ 6.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge erred in her findings of
fact.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
In completing a Declaration of Federal Employment application in 2014, Applicant, who is 
54 years old, answered “yes” to the question that asked if in the last seven years she had been
convicted, been imprisoned, been on probation, or been on parole.  In response to a follow-up
question, she listed the violation as “uttering forgery” and provided the date and place of occurrence,
but provided no other details. 
An FBI criminal report noted that Applicant was arrested in 2008 and charged with “making
fraudulent statements/misrepresentations.”  The charge was later amended to three counts of felony
“uttering forgery.”  In 2011, she was convicted of three felony counts of “uttering forgery” and
sentenced to five years of probation.  In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated, “I deny
conviction,” but did not provide any additional information.
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant failed to provide any information as to the facts and circumstances surrounding
her arrest and conviction for “uttering forgery” or whether she completed her probation.  Despite
evidence from the FBI report, she denied the conviction in her SOR answer.  Insufficient evidence
was presented to conclude the offense occurred under unusual circumstances or is unlikely to recur. 
Applicant failed to mitigate the concerns raised by her past criminal conduct.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that she was convicted of three felony
counts of uttering forgery and was sentenced to five years of probation.  In her appeal, she provided
court documents that were not previously submitted to the Judge.  Those documents constitute new
evidence that the Appeal Board can neither receive nor consider.  See Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive) ¶ E.3.1.29.  
When a Judge’s findings of fact are challenged, we examine the record to see if they are
supported by “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  In this
case, the FBI criminal report reflected that Applicant was “CONVICTED (CONVICT  2011 . . .
GUILTY)” of three felony counts of uttering forgery and was sentenced to “SUPERVISION: 5Y
PROBATION NON-ADJ - CTS 2 & 3 RETIRED.”  As the Judge noted, no information was
provided to show that Applicant completed her probation.  In also merits noting that Applicant was
provided the opportunity to respond to Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material and provide
information explaining how the charges were processed, but she did not submit a response.  Without
knowing that Applicant successfully completed her probation and that a criminal court later granted
her a petition for relief based on her successful completion of the probation, insufficient evidence
was presented to conclude the charges resulted in a “non-adjudication” of guilt.  We find the Judge’s
findings of fact about the charges against Applicant and their disposition were based on substantial
evidence.  Furthermore, even if the Judge’s finding of a conviction was in error, we conclude it
would not have been harmful, since a finding of non-adjudication with five years probation would
likely have produced an adverse decision.     
The applicable Supplemental Adjudicative Standards do not require that an applicant be
convicted of a crime to determine that issuance of a CAC to him or her presents an “unacceptable
risk.”  See, Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶¶ 2.b(1), 2.b(2), and 2.b(3).   In this case, the FBI criminal
report reflected that Applicant was charged with three felony counts of uttering forgery, that she was
“GUILTY” of those charges, and that she was sentenced.  Government Exhibit 5.  Although we do
not know the underlying facts that resulted in those charges, the record evidence is sufficient for the
Judge to conclude that Applicant presents an unacceptable risk (e.g., a threat to the safety of U.S.
Government physical assets, information systems, and records) to deny her CAC eligibility.  
 In light of the record as a whole, we conclude that the Judge examined the relevant evidence
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed:  Michael Y. Ra’anan   
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed:  James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy           
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
