 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:  ) 
  )   
   )  CAC Case No. 15-06299 
  ) 
   )   
  ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol, G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) eligibility concerns 
raised under the criminal or dishonest conduct and alcohol abuse supplemental 
adjudicative standards. CAC eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 17, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for CAC eligibility pursuant 
to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). The DOD was unable to 
find that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk. The action 
was based on the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, 
DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, and made pursuant 
to the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive). The concerns raised under the Adjudicative Standards of DODI 5200.46 are 
criminal or dishonest conduct and alcohol abuse.  
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 6, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM). It was mailed to Applicant and was received on March 10, 
2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. He was 
advised that failure to submit any material will result in the Administrative Judge 
proceeding to a determination based on the Government’s FORM. The Government’s 
documents are identified as Government Exhibits (GE) 2 through 6.1 Applicant did not 
object or provide documents within the time period. The Government’s documents are 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on November 4, 
2016.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel amended the SOR adding criminal or 
dishonest concerns and alcohol concerns. Applicant did not respond to the amendment 
and he did not admit or deny the additional allegations. I will consider his nonresponse 
as a denial to each additional allegation. The allegations are as follows: 
 
1.i. You were arrested and charged with uttering a fraudulent check on or about 
August 23, 1996. 
 
1.j. You were arrested and charged with driving with a suspended license on or 
about July 26, 2007. 
 
1.k. You were arrested and charged with DUI/Driving Under the Influence on or 
about December 1, 2013.  
 
Department Counsel amended the SOR by adding the following allegation under 
the alcohol abuse concern. It is: 
 
2.a. That information as set forth in subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, and 1.k., above. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He is a high school graduate.2 Applicant was arrested 
in December 1992 and charged with uttering fraudulent checks (two counts). In May 
1996, he was arrested and charged with driving under the influence (DUI), open 
container, and resisting arrest. He was convicted and sentenced to one year in jail, 
which was suspended and he was ordered to complete one year of probation and 40 
hours of community service. In early July 1996, he was arrested and charged with 
simple possession of marijuana and open container. In late July 1996, he was again 
                                                          
1 Item 1 is the SOR. 
 
2 GE 3. 
 
 
3 
arrested and charged with DUI. In August 1996, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with uttering a fraudulent check (one count).3 
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with driving with a suspended license in 
September 1997. He was arrested and charged with uttering multiple fraudulent checks 
in February 1998 (nine counts). He was convicted of eight counts of uttering fraudulent 
checks and fined.4  
 
 In May 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving with a suspended 
license and a child restraint violation. He was arrested and charged with uttering 
fraudulent checks in July 1999 (two counts). In July 2007, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with driving with a suspended license. In December 2013, he was arrested and 
charged with DUI.5  
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h in his answer, but 
did not provide any mitigating information. He did not respond to the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.i through 1.k or 2.a. A Federal Bureau of Investigation Criminal Report provided 
proof of all allegations.6 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.   
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
                                                          
3 Items 2 and 5. 
 
4 Items 2 and 5. 
 
5 Items 2 and 5. 
 
6 Items 2 and 5. 
 
4 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) The 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) The recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) The individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) Contributing external conditions; and (6) The absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration. 
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraph 2.a articulates the CAC concern: 
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, paragraph 2.b, Supplemental 
Adjudicative Standards lists three conditions that raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying:  
 
2.b.(1): A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the 
safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or 
information. A person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting 
a CAC poses an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical 
assets and to employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
 
2.b.(2): Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted;  
 
2.b.(3): Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, 
perjury, forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation without 
proper authorization); and 
 
2.b.(4) Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, or other intentional financial breaches of 
trust. 
 
 
5 
The Government established through Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the 
SOR and the FBI criminal report that over a 17-year-span, Applicant was arrested three 
times for DUI, the most recent in December 2013. He has a 1996 criminal conviction for 
DUI and resisting arrest. He was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana in 
1996. Over a seven-year period, Applicant was arrested and charged with writing 
fraudulent checks: two counts in 1992; one count in 1996; nine counts in 1998 
(convicted of eight counts); and two counts in 1999. Over an 11-year period, Applicant 
was arrested and charged with driving with a suspended license four times, in 1996, 
1997, 1998, and 2007. He was arrested and charged with open container violations 
twice in 1996. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, paragraph 2.c, Supplemental 
Adjudicative Standards lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether 
there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may 
be relevant:  
 
2.c.(1): The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
2.c.(2): Charges were dismissed or evidence was produced that the 
person did not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or 
her innocence; and  
 
2.c.(4) Evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, constructive community involvement, or passage of time without 
recurrence. 
 
Applicant failed to provide any information as to the circumstances or facts 
surrounding his arrests and convictions. Although some of the arrests are old, his most 
recent arrest was in 2013 for DUI. He also was arrested multiple times for writing 
fraudulent checks. Applicant’s record reflects a pattern of criminal and dishonest 
conduct. No evidence was provided to conclude the offenses happened under unusual 
circumstances; therefore, I am unable to find that similar conduct is unlikely to recur. 
There is no evidence of successful rehabilitation. Due to the 17-year history of criminal 
and dishonest behavior, I am unable to conclude that his conduct is mitigated by the 
passage of time without recurrence of similar illegal activity. Applicant failed to mitigate 
the concerns raised by his past criminal conduct.  
 
Alcohol Abuse 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, paragraph 4.a articulates the CAC concern: 
 
 An individual’s abuse of alcohol may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. Alcohol abuse can lead to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or failure to control impulses, and may put people, property, or 
 
6 
information systems at risk, regardless of whether he or she is diagnosed 
as an abuser of alcohol or alcohol dependent. A person’s long-term abuse 
of alcohol without evidence of substantial rehabilitation may indicate that 
granting a CAC poses an unacceptable safety risk in a U.S. Government 
facility. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, paragraph 4.b, Supplemental 
Adjudicative Standards lists two conditions that raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
4.b.(1) A pattern of alcohol-related arrests; and 
 
4.b.(3) Current continuing abuse of alcohol. 
 
The Government established through Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the 
SOR and the FBI criminal report that over a period of 17 years, Applicant was arrested 
three times for DUI, the most recent in December 2013, and two charges for open 
container. There is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, paragraph 4.c, Supplemental 
Adjudicative Standards lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether 
there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may 
be relevant:  
 
4.c.(1) The individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome the 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an abuser of alcohol);  
 
4.c.(2) The individual is participating in counseling or treatment programs, 
has no history of previous treatment or relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress; and  
 
4.c.(3) The individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare. He or she 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in an alcohol treatment program. 
The individual has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
Applicant failed to provide any information as to the circumstances or facts 
surrounding his alcohol abuse and arrests. The evidence shows that Applicant had two 
alcohol-related arrests for DUI in 1996 and one in 2013. Without additional evidence 
regarding Applicant’s alcohol use, I cannot find that there is a pattern of abstinence or 
 
7 
responsible use. There is no evidence of alcohol counseling, treatment, or rehabilitation. 
None of the above mitigating conditions applies.  
 
Conclusion 
 
Applicant has a long history of criminal and dishonest conduct. He also has a 
history of alcohol-related offenses. He failed to provide amplifying information about his 
arrests and criminal charges or his alcohol use and alcohol-related offenses. Without 
mitigating information, these issues pose an unacceptable risk. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility should be denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:     Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Alcohol Abuse:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
