 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
           )    CAC Case No. 15-02128 
   ) 
Applicant for Common Access Credentialing  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns 
raised under criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC 
eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 18, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive 
Positions (SF-85). On May 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common 
Access Card eligibility pursuant to  Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 
(HSPD-12).  DOD was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility.  
 
The action is based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards (SAS) found in 
DOD Instruction 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the 
Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The concerns raised under 
the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards of DODI 5200.46 are “criminal or dishonest 
conduct.”   
 
2 
On June 14, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated November 5, 2015, was provided to him by letter dated 
November 6, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on November 15, 2015. He was 
afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit additional information within the 30-
day period. On May 2, 2016, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except SOR ¶ 1.d. His SOR 
answers are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old maintenance trade helper employed by a defense 
contractor since August 2014. He seeks CAC eligibility as a condition of his continued 
employment. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant was awarded his General Education Development certificate in August 
2013. He is married and has three children.1 He did not serve in the armed forces. 
(Items 1, 2) 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 CAC credentialing concerns were identified during Applicant’s background 
investigation as a result of his criminal conduct spanning approximately eight years. In 
December 2000, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession, distribution, and 
manufacture of Schedule IV drugs. He denied this allegation, however, his state arrest 
record documents this arrest as well as the other arrests alleged. Applicant did not 
provide any documentation rebutting this December 2000 arrest. In August 2001, 
Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of cocaine. He was convicted and 
sentenced to two and one-half years in prison, suspended, and three years of probation, 
which was extended from August 2004 to December 2004. In March 2006, Applicant 
was arrested and charged with disturbing the peace and being loud and profane and 
resisting an officer. In January 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with criminal 
trespass. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d; Items 2, 4) 
 
 In his SOR answer, Applicant stated that since these arrests, he is a “completely 
different man.” He is married, has three children, is a church member, and has done 
everything he could to turn his life around. Applicant submitted an October 2012 letter 
from his state board of pardons advising him that the board of pardons had forwarded a 
recommendation to the Governor for a pardon and restoration of rights without firearms. 
It is unknown whether the Governor acted on that recommendation or whether that 
recommendation is still pending. (Item 1) 
                                                          
1
The FORM does not contain additional detailed information about Applicant’s family situation 
such as when he got married or the ages of his children. 
 
3 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraphs 2.a., 2.b.(1) and (2) articulate the CAC concern: 
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
 DODI Instruction 5200.46, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists two conditions that raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
4 
2.b.(1) – A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the 
safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or 
information. A person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting 
a CAC poses an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical 
assets and to employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
and  
 
2.b.(2) – Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 The Government established these two disqualifying conditions through 
Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented as a result of his four arrests spanning 
a ten-year period. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS 2c, lists four conditions that could mitigate 
CAC credentialing concerns: 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; 
 
(3) Improper or inadequate advice from authorized personnel or legal 
counsel significantly contributed to the individual’s omission of information. 
When confronted, the individual provided an accurate explanation and 
made prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
  Having carefully considered the facts of this case, I find none of the mitigating 
factors are applicable. Applicant has an eight-year history of serious criminal 
misconduct. This lengthy pattern of behavior calls into question Applicant’s judgment 
and trustworthiness as well as his willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. His SOR answer fails to adequately mitigate the security concerns raised in 
the SOR allegations, which clearly establish a basis for disqualification under the 
Instruction’s Supplemental Adjudicative Standards Paragraph 2b.(1) and (2). 
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
limited written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
 
5 
articulate his position, and mitigate the criminal or dishonest CAC concerns. By failing to 
provide such information, and in relying on an explanation lacking sufficient detail to 
fully establish mitigation, criminal or dishonest concerns remain. 
 
After weighing the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating 
the evidence in light of the whole-person concept, I conclude Applicant did not present 
sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, and mitigate the criminal or dishonest 
concerns. Accordingly, Applicant has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion to show 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his CAC eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
