 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
REDACTED )  CAC Case No. 15-07490 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant did not mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns 
raised by her criminal history and falsification of a federal employment form. Of 
particular concern is that Applicant was forced to resign her position with a former 
employer after she was caught stealing from other employees and she then deliberately 
failed to disclose this material information on a federal employment form. Applicant did 
not present sufficient evidence of reform and an insufficient amount of time has passed 
to safely conclude that granting her a CAC would not pose an unreasonable risk to U.S. 
personnel, property, or information systems. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
On December 7, 2015, pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 
12 (HSPD-12), the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing concerns about her eligibility for a CAC. This action was 
taken under DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5200.46, DoD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Issuing the Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014 
(Instruction), and in accordance with the established administrative process set out in 
DoD Directive (DoDD) 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992) (Directive).  
 
2 
The CAC credentialing concerns cited in the SOR are Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards (SAS) ¶ 2.a (criminal or dishonest conduct) and SAS ¶ 3.a (deliberate 
falsification, deception, or fraud). Applicant answered the SOR on December 21, 2015, 
and requested a decision on the written (administrative) record.  
 
 On April 7, 2016, Department Counsel prepared his written case, a file of 
relevant material (FORM), and sent it to Applicant. The FORM contains:  the SOR (Item 
1); Applicant’s Answer (Item 2);1 her application for a non-sensitive position (Item 3), her 
declaration for federal employment (Item 4), her criminal record (Item 5), and responses 
to pre-employment checks (Items 6 and 7). As further explained below, Items 1 – 7 
were admitted into the administrative record without objection.  
 
 On May 12, 2016, Applicant submitted her response to the FORM (Item 8) and, 
without objection, it was admitted into the record.2 On February 13, 2017, I was 
assigned Applicant’s case. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
DOHA proceedings are designed to provide for a full, fair, and complete record of 
an applicant’s eligibility, whether such eligibility is for a security clearance, a position of 
trust or, as in this case, a CAC.3  In order to allow for the development of such a record, 
the Directive states that the technical rules of evidence “shall serve as a guide.”4 
Furthermore, the DOHA Appeal Board has stated that DOHA judges should liberally 
apply the “technical rules of evidence” and err on the side of admitting relevant and 
material evidence to ensure the development of a full and complete record.5  
 
The Directive, however, does contain two major exceptions to this liberal policy of 
admitting relevant evidence. Specifically, a DoD personnel background report of 
investigation (“ROI”) and a third-party statement adverse to an applicant on a 
controverted issue are potentially inadmissible in a DOHA proceeding.6  
 
Here, Department Counsel offered Items 6 and 7, which are standard Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) forms that were sent to two of Applicant’s former 
employers. They contain short, one-line handwritten notations from said employers 
denoting the purported adverse circumstances surrounding Applicant’s employment 
                                                          
1 The two documents Applicant submitted with her Answer have been marked Exhibits A and B. 
 
2 The reference letter Applicant submitted with her Response has been marked Exhibit C. 
 
3 Directive, ¶ E3.1.19. See generally, CAC Case No. 15-06091 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 10, 2017) (Board’s 
past decisions “interpreting and analyzing” procedural guidance in DoDD 5220.6 should be followed by 
DOHA judges in CAC cases). See also, ISCR Case No. 94-0084 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 1994).  
 
4 Directive, ¶ E3.1.19. 
 
5 ISCR Case No 03-21434 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2007). 
 
6 Directive, ¶¶ E3.1.20, E3.1.22. 
 
3 
termination. These pre-employment checks were conducted by OPM as a part of the 
Government’s background investigation into Applicant’s CAC eligibility.7 The Appeal 
Board has held that similar documents are inadmissible in a DOHA proceeding, but only 
if the opposing party timely raises an objection.8  
 
Accordingly, although the Directive does not specifically state that a party can 
waive an objection, the Board has in the past accepted the generally accepted legal 
proposition that a party’s failure to timely raise an objection waives it.9 However, this 
precedent has recently been called into question in cases where a pro se applicant 
elects a determination on the written record and the Government offers a portion of an 
ROI, namely, an unauthenticated summary of the person’s subject interview (“SI”).10  
 
I have given due consideration to these recent decisions. I have also considered 
that the danger of admitting potentially unreliable information is arguably far greater 
when considering unverified information from a person’s former employer versus a 
summary of an interview prepared by a government agent. However, in this case, 
Applicant did not raise an objection to the admission of any of the exhibits offered by 
Department Counsel with the FORM, including Items 6 and 7.11 Moreover, she did not 
challenge the accuracy of the information contained in these exhibits. Therefore, I find 
that Applicant waived any potential objection to these exhibits and FORM Items 1 – 7 
are admitted into the administrative record. Additionally, in exercising my authority 
                                                          
7 See generally Instruction, Enclosure 3, CAC Investigative Procedures.  
 
8 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 95-0817 (App. Bd. Feb. 21, 1997) (Judge erred in sua sponte excluding 
portion of an ROI that was submitted by Department Counsel as evidence with a FORM under E3.1.20, 
because “[n]owhere in Applicant's energetic criticisms of various portions of the FORM does he challenge 
the completeness, accuracy, or truthfulness of FORM Item 5 [SI] or any portion of it.”) See also ISCR 
Case No. 02-12199 at 8 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 2004) (exclusion of ROI prepared by another government 
agency, containing SI, was upheld because applicant timely raised objection citing E3.1.20). See also 
ISCR Case No. 15-05252 (App. Bd. Apr. 13, 2016) (judge erred in excluding SI submitted with a FORM). 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 02-12199 at n. 6 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 2004) (“An applicant can waive his or her objection to 
the admissibility of evidence even though the Directive is silent on the matter of waiver.”). See also ISCR 
Case No. 14-06781 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 16, 2016) (failure to raise an objection to an exhibit offered by the 
Government with the FORM waives it). 
 
10 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (AJ Ra’anan’s concurring 
opinion regarding potential due process concerns raised by SIs submitted with FORMs). See also ISCR 
Case No. 14-05232 at 2 (AJ Leonard Feb. 10, 2016) (notwithstanding explicit warning to applicant in 
FORM that he or she could object to the SI, judge ruled that the SI was inadmissible because “a pro se 
applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM does not equate to a waiver of the authentication 
requirement.”); ISCR Case No. 15-01554 at 2 (CAJ Hogan Feb. 24, 2016) (Applicant’s failure to object to 
the admission of unauthenticated SI in response to the FORM is not a knowing waiver of E3.1.20’s 
authentication rule); ISCR Case No. 15-01554 at 2 (AJ Duffy Feb. 12, 2015) (same) (“failure to object 
does not amount to authentication of the documents or a waiver of the rule [E3.1.20].”). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 02-12199 05-03307 at 2 (App. Bd. May 7, 2007) (“Although pro se applicants cannot be 
expected to act like a lawyer, they are expected to take timely, reasonable steps to protect their rights 
under the Directive. If they fail to take timely, reasonable steps to protect their rights, that failure to act 
does not constitute a denial of their rights.”) (emphasis added) 
 
4 
under the Directive, I have given all the admitted exhibits the weight I deem appropriate 
in light all the facts and circumstances raised by the evidence.12 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 51, is a contract employee of a national guard unit. Her former 
supervisor, a guard member, provided a favorable recommendation.13 
 
In May 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with domestic battery. She and 
her former husband were in a heated argument. Her ex-husband, a police officer, 
submitted a letter stating that during the argument, he “became loud” which led their 
neighbors to call police. He unequivocally states that Applicant did not physically hit him 
during the argument. Applicant entered a diversion program, she and her ex-husband 
received counseling, and the criminal charge was later dismissed. Applicant and her ex-
husband eventually divorced, but they remain friends.14  
 
Applicant did not disclose the May 2010 arrest on her declaration for federal 
employment form. But, the relevant question does not require an applicant to disclose 
all arrests. Instead, it only requires an applicant to disclose those arrests resulting in 
conviction, imprisonment, probation, or parole in the past seven years.15 It is unclear 
from the limited record whether the diversion program was a term of probation.  
 
 In October 2012 and August 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
shoplifting. She was placed in a first offender’s diversion program, which she 
successfully completed, and the criminal charges were subsequently resolved without 
an adjudication of guilt.16 Applicant disclosed the October 2012 shoplifting arrest on her 
declaration for federal employment form, stating “Loss prevention felt I was guilty of 
putting items in my shopping bag. I was arrested. . . . Incident happened.”17 In her 
Answer, Applicant stated the following regarding the shoplifting incidents:  
 
October 2012 Charged with Retail/Theft. . . . I did take an item from this 
store. . . . I admit this happened, and it will appear I am minimalizing the 
circumstances, but obviously I was not proud of my conduct and had 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No 03-21434 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2007) (“the DOHA process encourages Judges to err 
on the side of initially admitting evidence into the record, and then to consider . . . what, if any, weight to 
give to that evidence.”). See also ISCR Case No. 14-06011 (App. Bd. Dec. 9, 2015) (“The weight that a 
Judge assigns to evidence is a matter within his or her discretion.”).  
 
13. Items 2, 3, 9; Exhibit C.  
 
14 Items 2, 5; Exhibit A. The SOR alleges in ¶ 1.e a supposed arrest in 2008 for larceny. Applicant denied 
this allegation and her criminal record (Item 5) do not reflect any arrest before the 2010 domestic incident. 
No evidence was supplied to support the allegation. Accordingly, SOR 1.e is decided in Applicant’s favor. 
 
15 Items 2, 5. 
 
16 Items 2, 5; Exhibit B. 
 
17 Item 4. 
 
5 
hoped to only disclose what was absolutely necessary as I realize it does 
not portray a very good picture of my conduct. 
 
August 2013 Retail Theft. I admit this happened and again, I minimized 
this because I was given a [citation]. This was something that was rolled 
into one court hearing in relation [to October 2012 charge]. I obtained an 
attorney and it was settled with a withhold [of adjudication.]18  
 
 Applicant worked for a county agency from 1995 to 2008, and then again from 
2010 to 2013. She resigned in August 2013. Applicant claims that she resigned after a 
coworker told her supervisor about the shoplifting incidents. She further notes several 
matters that were going on in her personal life (bad marriage) and work (low morale) 
that contributed to her decision to resign.19 A background check conducted by OPM 
revealed that Applicant’s former employer, the county agency, let her resign after 
Applicant “was caught stealing from other employees.”20  
 
Applicant admits in her Answer she was forced to resign from the county agency 
in 2013 under threat that she would otherwise be fired. She did not disclose this 
adverse or derogatory employment information on her declaration for federal 
employment.21 In response to the concerns raised about her criminal record and failure 
to disclose the adverse employment information, Applicant states the following: 
 
I can most definitely understand your concern, and I realize the 
information doesn’t present me in the best light, but that particular time 
period was an extremely difficult time and I most definitely made 
significant changes since then. I have been working with a counselor for 
[the] last two years and volunteer at my Church as the lead coordinator to 
counsel others who struggle with addiction and behavior problems.22 
 
Policies 
 
As established in HSPD-12, CAC “credentialing adjudication considers whether 
or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally controlled facilities and/or 
                                                          
18 Item 2 (emphasis in original). The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified her declaration for federal 
employment by failing to disclose the 2013 shoplifting arrest. However, Applicant’s criminal record, Item 5, 
notes the case was resolved by “adjudication withheld.” This evidence supports Applicant’s assertion that 
she was placed in a diversion program and there was no adjudication of guilt. Again, based on the limited 
record, I cannot find that such a program or adjudication amounts to a “conviction, imprisonment, 
probation, or parole,” which applicant would have been required to disclose on her employment form. 
 
19 Item 2, 3.  
 
20 Item 6. Applicant was sent Item 6 with the FORM and did not raise an objection to its admission, nor 
did she contest the accuracy or truthfulness of the information provided by her former employer.  
 
21 Items 2, 4. 
 
22 Item 2. No evidence was submitted to corroborate Applicant’s assertions of having received counseling, 
documenting the type of counseling received, or indicating if a favorable prognosis was given. 
 
6 
information systems.” Instruction, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1.a. The Instruction recognizes that 
each CAC case is unique and a fair and impartial overall commonsense decision should 
examine all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The “overriding factor” or standard in all CAC adjudications is “unacceptable 
risk.” Id. This term is specifically defined by the Instruction as follows: 
 
A threat to the life, safety, or health of employees, contractors, vendors, or 
visitors; to the U.S. Government physical assets or information systems; to 
personal property; to records, including classified, privileged, proprietary, 
financial, and medical records; or to the privacy rights established by The 
Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, or other law that is deemed 
unacceptable when making risk management determinations.23 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires Department Counsel to present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR, i.e., allegation(s) denied. On the other 
hand, pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to establish his or her eligibility for a CAC.  
 
Adjudicative factors to be applied consistently in all CAC cases include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. Instruction, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1.b. Any 
reasonable doubt concerning an applicant’s CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor 
of protecting the Government’s vital interests in making certain that only persons that do 
not pose an unacceptable risk are granted a CAC.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 SOR 1.a – 1.d allege Applicant’s domestic battery arrest and shoplifting arrests. 
(SOR 1.e alleges a purported 2008 arrest for larceny, but no evidence was offered to 
support this allegation.) These allegations of criminal conduct raise the CAC 
credentialing concern set forth in SAS ¶ 2.a: 
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk.  
                                                          
23 See Instruction, Glossary. See also CAC Case No. 15-00898 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2016) 
 
7 
 In assessing whether Applicant’s criminal history raises a reasonable basis to 
believe there is an unacceptable risk to people, property, or information systems, I 
considered the following disqualifying conditions and potentially mitigating 
circumstances: 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(1):  A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put 
the safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or 
information. A person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting 
a CAC poses an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical 
assets and to employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility.  
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(2):  Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the 
safety of people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(3):  Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying 
claims, perjury, forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation 
without proper authorization). 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(4):  Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as 
embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense 
account fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, or other intentional 
financial breaches of trust. 
 
SAS ¶ 2.c(1):  The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, 
or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. 
SAS ¶ 2.c(2):  Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the 
person did not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or 
her innocence. 
 
SAS ¶ 2.c(4):  Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, 
including but not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, constructive community involvement, 
or passage of time without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history continues to call into question her present eligibility 
for a CAC. Although the domestic incident involving her former spouse appears to have 
been an isolated event that took place some seven years ago during a turbulent 
marriage, her shoplifting is part of a much larger and serious credentialing concern. 
Notably, the shoplifting was not a one-time occurrence, as Applicant committed the 
same offense just a year after being arrested for the first offense. More disconcerting 
from a CAC eligibility perspective is that Applicant’s criminal behavior did not end after 
the second shoplifting incident. As reflected in Item 6, Applicant was forced to resign 
from her former job after it was discovered that she was stealing from other employees. 
This type of criminal behavior is directly tied to the credentialing concern at issue, in that 
Applicant might pose a risk to other U.S. Government employees or property.  
 
8 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct continued after she was forced to resign. 
Specifically, she deliberately omitted the information about the forced resignation on her 
recent declaration for federal employment. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s claims of reform 
and rehabilitation, as well as apparent recent good employment record, she failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the credentialing concerns raised by a pattern of 
criminally deceptive conduct. 
 
 Accordingly, I find that Applicant mitigated credentialing concerns raised by the 
2010 domestic incident, but did not mitigate the credentialing concerns raised by her 
shoplifting arrests in 2012 and 2013. The disqualifying conditions identified at SAS 
2.b(1) – 2.b(4) apply. The potential mitigating circumstances do not fully apply and, for 
all the above reasons, do not mitigate the credentialing concerns raised by Applicant’s 
history of criminally deceptive behavior. 
 
Falsification, Deception, or Fraud 
 
 SOR 2.a alleges that Applicant falsified her declaration for federal employment 
form by failing to disclose a number of her arrests, none of which resulted in conviction, 
imprisonment, probation, or parole. Department Counsel failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to establish this allegation and it is decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
 On the other hand, the evidence does establish SOR 2.b, which alleges that 
Applicant falsified her declaration for federal employment by deliberately omitting the 
adverse or derogatory information about her 2013 forced resignation from the county 
agency.24 SAS ¶ 3 states, in pertinent part, the following:  
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, 
deception, or fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.  
 
The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and put people, 
property, or information systems at risk 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions and mitigating circumstances were 
potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
SAS ¶ 3.b: . . . material, intentional falsification, deception or fraud 
related to answers or information provided during the employment process 
for the current or a prior federal or contract employment (e.g., on the 
employment application or other employment, appointment or investigative 
documents, or during interviews.); 
                                                          
24 The specific question at issue asked Applicant to disclose whether “[d]uring the last 5 years, have you 
been fired from any job for any reason, did you quit after being told you would be fired, did you leave any 
job by mutual agreement because of specific problems . . . ?” 
 
9 
SAS ¶ 3.c(1): The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was 
minor, or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
SAS ¶ 3.c(2): The misstatement or omission was unintentional or 
inadvertent and was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the 
situation. 
 
 The crux of the Government’s credentialing concern is that Applicant deliberately 
falsified her declaration for federal employment by failing to disclose the adverse or 
derogatory circumstances that led her to resign from the county agency in 2013. The 
omission of material, adverse information standing alone is not enough to establish that 
an applicant intentionally falsified a federal form used for CAC credentialing purposes. 
An omission is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot the information requested, 
inadvertently overlooked or misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the 
information did not need to be reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts 
and circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.25 
 
 Applicant admits in her Answer that she was embarrassed about her past 
misconduct and did not want to disclose more than was “absolutely necessary” on the 
declaration for federal employment. She continues to provide misleading information 
about the facts and circumstances leading to her forced resignation from the county 
agency in 2013. She now readily admits that she was forced to resign, but does not 
acknowledge it was because she was caught stealing from other employees. After 
considering all the evidence and reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom, I find 
that Applicant deliberately falsified her declaration for federal employment. She did not 
want the Government to know the true adverse reasons that led to her forced 
resignation. Applicant’s deliberate falsification of the declaration of the federal 
employment form raises serious questions about her honesty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. She failed to provide sufficient evidence to establish any of the 
applicable mitigating conditions. She also failed to demonstrate that she has reformed 
the past conduct that raised credentialing concerns.26 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
25 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
26 See ISCR Case No. 15-04856 (Mar. 9, 2017) (notwithstanding 15-year gap between applicant 
deliberating omitting material information from a federal application form and adverse decision, the 
decision was affirmed by Board because applicant failed to acknowledge his past misconduct ) 
 
10 
Paragraph 2, Falsification, Deception, or Fraud:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I find that 
Applicant did not meet her burden of persuasion. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
     Administrative Judge 
