 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
REDACTED )  CAC Case No. 15-07599 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) 
eligibility concerns purportedly raised by his tax debts and alcohol-related criminal 
conduct. Granting him eligibility for a CAC will not create an unreasonable risk to U.S. 
personnel, property, or information systems. CAC eligibility is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 4, 2016, pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 
(HSPD-12), the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing concerns about his continued eligibility for a CAC. This action was 
taken under DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5200.46, DoD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Issuing the Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014 
(Instruction), and in accordance with the established administrative process set out in 
DoD Directive (DoDD) 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992) (Directive). The SOR alleges CAC credentialing concerns 
under Supplemental Adjudicative Standards (SAS) ¶ 1.a (employment misconduct), 
SAS ¶ 2.a (criminal or dishonest conduct), and SAS ¶ 4 (alcohol abuse).  
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2016, and requested a hearing. On 
March 16, 2017, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held.1  
 
At hearing, Department Counsel’s motion to amend the SOR to strike or 
withdraw the employment misconduct allegations was granted without objection.2 
Applicant testified at the hearing, and Government Exhibits 1 – 8 and Applicant’s 
Exhibits A – J were admitted into the administrative record without objection.  
 
 At the conclusion of the hearing, I advised the parties that the case appeared 
appropriate for resolution through summary disposition.3 On March 23, 2017, 
Department Counsel objected to the resolution of the case in such manner and 
requested a full decision.4 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on March 24, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old mechanical engineer. He has been working for his 
current employer for the past three years. He needs a CAC to enter the military 
installation where his job is located. A vice president (VP) for the company that employs 
Applicant states that Applicant has “developed strong leadership and interpersonal skills 
that have been unanimously praised by colleagues.” The VP goes on to state that 
Applicant is a “model employee.”5 
 
Applicant owned his own business from 2004 to 2013. He and his wife divorced 
in 2008, after eight years of marriage. They share custody of their 12-year-old child. 
Applicant’s business started experiencing problems a year after his divorce. Applicant 
was unable to generate sufficient business and his income decreased sharply. He was 
unable to pay his federal and state income taxes. He voluntarily reported this adverse 
financial information on the federal employment form that he submitted in connection 
with his current job. 
 
After starting at his current job in 2014, Applicant took steps to address his tax 
situation. He contacted the IRS and the state tax authority, and negotiated repayment 
plans. He also made the conscious and deliberate decision to increase his tax 
withholdings to pay down his tax debt. For tax years 2014 and 2015, his increased 
withholding resulted in federal tax refunds of $2,670 and $5,800, respectively; which 
                                                          
1 Prehearing correspondence and the notice of hearing are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits 
(App. Exh.) I and II, respectively. Apparently, the case was initially incorrectly processed, as the 
Government issued a file of relevant material (Exhibit 7). Subsequently, the case was forwarded to the 
hearing office for assignment to a judge for hearing.  
 
2 Transcript (Tr.) 8-9, 12. Department Counsel also withdrew Exhibit 3 for identification, an Office of 
Personnel Management Records Request, and the remaining exhibits were renumbered. The 
Government’s revised exhibit list is attached to the record as App. Exh. III.  
 
3 Tr. 55-57.  
 
4 App. Exh. IV. 
 
5 Tr. 25, 48-51; Exhibit C. 
 
3 
were applied by the IRS against his federal tax debt. He has made consistent monthly 
payments as required by the repayment plans and continues to have an increased 
amount withheld from his salary to pay down his tax debt.6 
 
Around the time of his divorce, Applicant started abusing alcohol. He drove his 
vehicle under the influence (DUI) in 2008, 2013, and 2014. He received a deferred 
adjudication for the 2008 DUI. He was convicted after pleading guilty to the 2013 and 
2014 DUI charges. He received a 30-day jail sentence, which he served on weekends. 
He has completed all terms of his sentences, to include the terms of his probation. He 
reported this adverse information on his federal employment form. He also informed his 
ex-wife about the DUIs and the jail sentence. They worked out an alternate custody 
schedule, so he could continue to care for his child.  
 
Applicant obtained alcohol counseling. He successfully completed a 26-week 
outpatient alcohol treatment program. During the program, he was subject to random 
screenings for alcohol and drugs. At the conclusion of the program, Applicant was 
advised to abstain from consuming alcohol in the future. He recognizes that he is an 
alcoholic and must abstain. He is active in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). At hearing, he 
volunteered that he had a slip-up about a year ago at a work-related function where 
alcohol was served. Before realizing what he was doing, he consumed some alcohol 
that had been offered to him. He sought help from his AA support group and has 
maintained his sobriety to the present day. He intends to remain sober, as he 
recognizes the danger alcohol poses to himself and his ability to provide for his child.7  
 
Policies 
 
As established in HSPD-12, CAC “credentialing adjudication considers whether 
or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally controlled facilities and/or 
information systems.” Instruction, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1.a. The Instruction recognizes that 
each CAC case is unique and a fair and impartial overall commonsense decision should 
examine all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The “overriding factor” or standard in all CAC adjudications is “unacceptable 
risk.” Id. This term is specifically defined by the Instruction as follows: 
 
A threat to the life, safety, or health of employees, contractors, vendors, or 
visitors; to the U.S. Government physical assets or information systems; to 
personal property; to records, including classified, privileged, proprietary, 
financial, and medical records; or to the privacy rights established by The 
Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, or other law that is deemed 
unacceptable when making risk management determinations.8 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. 23-32, 50-51; Exhibit 2; Exhibits E, F, G, I, J.  
 
7 Tr. 33-48, 52; Exhibits 2 – 6; Exhibits D, H. 
 
8 See Instruction, Glossary. See also CAC Case No. 15-00898 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2016) 
 
4 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”9 An applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Adjudicative factors to be applied consistently in all CAC cases include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. Instruction, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1.b. Any 
reasonable doubt concerning an applicant’s CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor 
of protecting the Government’s vital interests in making certain that only persons that do 
not pose an unacceptable risk are granted a CAC.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 SOR 2.a – 2.d allege that Applicant’s back taxes and DUIs raise the CAC 
credentialing concern set forth in SAS ¶ 2.a: 
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk.  
 
 In assessing whether the evidence raises a reasonable basis to believe there is 
an unacceptable risk to people, property, or information systems, I considered the 
following pertinent disqualifying conditions and mitigating circumstances: 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(1): A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put 
the safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or 
information. A person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting 
a CAC poses an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical 
assets and to employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility.  
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(4): Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as 
embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense 
account fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, or other intentional 
financial breaches of trust. 
 
                                                          
9 See also CAC Case No. 15-06091 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 10, 2017) (Board’s past decisions “interpreting 
and analyzing” procedural guidance in DoDD 5220.6 should be followed by DOHA judges in CAC cases). 
 
5 
SAS ¶ 2.b(6): Financial irresponsibility may raise questions about the 
individual’s honesty and put people, property or information systems at 
risk, although financial debt should not in and of itself be cause for denial. 
 
SAS ¶ 2.c(1): The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, 
or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. 
 
SAS ¶ 2.c(4): Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, 
including but not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, constructive community involvement, 
or passage of time without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant’s back taxes do not raise a CAC credentialing concern under SAS ¶ 
2.a. Applicant revealed the adverse information regarding his taxes on his federal 
employment form. He responsibly addressed his tax debts by reaching out to the IRS 
and the state tax authority and negotiating repayment plans. He is repaying his tax 
debts through the agreed-upon repayment plans and is having an additional amount 
withheld from his salary each pay period to further pay down his tax debts.  
 
 Furthermore, Applicant’s tax situation is not related to criminal or dishonest 
conduct. His honesty in revealing the potentially disqualifying financial information about 
his taxes on the federal employment form and the responsible manner in which he is 
addressing his tax debts refutes any potential negative inference that could arguably be 
drawn from this situation. See generally CAC Case No. 15-02333 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Mar. 
22, 2017) (in a unanimous decision, the Board soundly rejected Department Counsel’s 
position that tax debts alone, without evidence of criminality or deception, raised a 
credentialing concern under SAS ¶ 2.a); CAC Case No. 15-00895 (App. Bd. Nov. 16, 
2016) (remanding unfavorable decision for judge to explain how tax debts alone raised 
a CAC credentialing concern). 
 
 Applicant’s DUIs, on the other hand, do potentially raise a CAC credentialing 
concern under SAS ¶ 2.a, and specifically disqualifying condition SAS ¶ 2.b(1). It has 
been nearly three years since Applicant’s last DUI offense. He was going through 
significant upheaval and turmoil in his personal and professional life around the time the 
DUIs occurred. Since the 2014 DUI, Applicant has received counseling for his 
alcoholism, voluntarily remains active in AA after successfully completing all terms of his 
probation, and has become a leader at work and a model employee. He has remained 
sober since the 2014 DUI, except for the one incident that he volunteered at hearing. He 
did so despite knowing such disclosure could negatively impact his CAC eligibility and 
continued employment. This sole incident did not involve excessive or binge alcohol 
consumption, nor did he engage in any criminal or questionable behavior under the 
influence. Instead, he immediately sought the help of his AA support group to deal with 
the one-time relapse. He has been sober since that incident, which occurred over a year 
ago. He credibly testified about his intent to remain sober going forward. He is 
dedicated to his 12-year-old child, and recognizes that any use of alcohol could 
jeopardize his ability to provide for his child.  
 
 
6 
 Overall, the evidence demonstrates successful rehabilitation on Applicant’s part. 
Admittedly, it is always difficult in these types of cases to say with 100% certainty that a 
person will not relapse or, in common parlance, fall off the proverbial wagon. Here, 
though, the evidence supports a finding that there is a low probability of similar issues 
recurring. More importantly, if Applicant were to have another slip-up, he has 
demonstrated the ability and intestinal fortitude to seek the necessary help. SAS ¶¶ 
2.c(1) and 2.c(4) apply.  
 
 Moreover, as evidenced by Applicant’s truthful disclosure on the federal 
employment form and at hearing, he can be trusted to place his obligations to the 
Government over his own personal interests and concerns. Accordingly, after 
thoroughly considering the record evidence, I find that Applicant met his burden of 
persuasion and mitigated the CAC credentialing concerns raised by his past alcohol-
related criminal conduct. His past conduct does not create a reasonable basis to believe 
that he presently poses a risk to people, property, or information systems.  
 
Alcohol Abuse 
 
 SOR 3.a allege that Applicant’s DUIs raise the CAC credentialing concern set 
forth in SAS ¶ 4.a: 
 
An individual’s abuse of alcohol may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. Alcohol abuse can lead to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or failure to control impulses, and may put people, property, or 
information systems at risk, regardless of whether he or she is diagnosed 
as an abuser of alcohol or alcohol dependent. A person’s long-term abuse 
of alcohol without evidence of substantial rehabilitation may indicate that 
granting a CAC poses an unacceptable safety risk in a U.S. Government 
facility.  
 
 In assessing whether Applicant’s past alcohol abuse raises a reasonable basis to 
believe there is an unacceptable risk to people, property, or information systems, I 
considered the following pertinent disqualifying conditions and mitigating circumstances: 
 
SAS ¶ 4.b(1): A pattern of alcohol-related arrests.  
 
SAS ¶ 4.c(1): The individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or 
issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome 
this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an abuser of alcohol). 
 
SAS ¶ 4.c(2): The individual is participating in counseling or treatment 
programs, has no history of previous treatment or relapse, and is making 
satisfactory progress. 
 
SAS ¶ 4.c(3): The individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare. 
 
7 
He or she has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in an alcohol treatment program. 
The individual has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 For similar reasons already explained above, Applicant mitigated the alleged 
alcohol abuse credentialing concerns. Specifically, the mitigating conditions enumerated 
above apply, in full or in part, and together with the other favorable record evidence 
mitigate the credentialing concern raised by Applicant’s past alcohol-related issues. 
Applicant recognizes that he has an alcohol problem, has received treatment for his 
alcoholism, and is actively working to remain sober. Under the circumstances presented 
by the record, no reasonable basis exists to believe that Applicant currently poses an 
unacceptable risk to people, property, or information systems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Employment Misconduct or Negligence:  WITHDRAWN 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:     Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 2, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Alcohol Abuse:      FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 3.a:       For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility would not pose an unreasonable risk. CAC eligibility is granted. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
     Administrative Judge 
