 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
           )    CAC Case No. 15-04512 
   ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andreas Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 10, 2014, Applicant submitted a Declaration for Federal 
Employment (OF306). On August 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing concerns for Common Access Card 
(CAC) eligibility pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). 
Specifically, the concerns raised were misconduct or negligence in employment; and false 
statement, deception, or fraud. DOD was unable to find that granting Applicant CAC 
eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk.  
 
These actions are based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards found in 
DOD Instruction 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the 
Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). 
  
Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2015. He denied the allegations and 
requested a decision on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on December 24, 2015. Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on December 28, 2015, and was provided the opportunity to 
file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
 
2 
conditions. Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM. I was assigned the case 
on September 27, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His SOR answer is 
incorporated in my findings of fact. Applicant is a 44-year-old mechanic seeking 
employment with a defense contractor. He served on active duty in the  
Army from August 1992 until August 1998. He was honorably discharged. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant was employed as a mechanic from February 2013 until March 2014. A 
report from his employer shows that he was terminated in March 2014 for falsifying 
information on a maintenance checklist. Applicant signed off that a required safety 
inspection had been completed. On review, it was discovered that the safety inspection 
had not been accomplished, so the company terminated Applicant. (Item 5)  
 
On September 10, 2014, Applicant submitted a Declaration for Federal 
Employment (OF306), dated September 10, 2014. The form he submitted was a 
computer-generated form. Applicant check the “no” box to question 12 asking if he had 
ever been fired, quit after being informed he would be fired, or left a job by mutual 
agreement because of a specific problem. (Item 4)  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant explained that he sent the wrong OF306. 
He meant to submit an OF306 with the correct information concerning the termination 
from his mechanic’s job with a previous employer handwritten. Instead, he submitted the 
OF306 that was computer generated. Applicant forwarded with his SOR answer an 
OF306 with the correct information concerning his job termination handwritten on the 
form. Applicant acknowledged his mistake in submitting the wrong form. He also stated 
that the incorrect OF306 was not submitted with the intent to mislead or falsify information.  
 
Applicant referenced in his SOR response a state unemployment compensation 
request based on his termination. Applicant and another employee, who was working with 
Applicant and was also terminated for falsifying inspection information, requested state 
unemployment compensation benefits but were denied. Applicant testified in the other 
employee’s case. Applicant found another job before his case was completed, so his 
unemployment request was dismissed. A state employment judge determined that the 
other employee was not properly trained on the sign-off procedures for work and was not 
cleared by the company to work without supervision. According to Applicant, the judge 
ruled that the other employee did not falsify the completed work report but incorrectly 
completed the document because he was not properly trained. Applicant did not present 
any documents to verify his statement concerning the judge’s ruling on the unemployment 
compensation issue. 
 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
3 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk.  
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, taking 
into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature 
thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the nature 
and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; (3) the 
recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of 
the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or presence of 
efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1)  
 
Analysis 
 
Misconduct or Negligence in Employment 
 
 A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is reason to believe, based on the 
individual’s misconduct or negligence in employment, that the issuance of a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk. The CAC concern is stated in DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to 
Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 1.a as, “An individual’s 
employment misconduct or negligence may put people, property, or information systems 
at risk.” 
 
 The Government’s case is supported by evidence contained in the termination 
notice showing that a required safety inspection was not performed, and the record was 
falsified to report that the safely check was performed. (Item 5) The information raises the 
following disqualifying conditions under Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, paragraph 1.b:  
 
(1) A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, disruptive, 
violent, or other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to people, 
property, or information systems; and 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Paragraph 1.c provides mitigating 
conditions relevant to the determination whether there is a reasonable basis to believe 
 
4 
that there is an unacceptable risk based on Applicant providing false information to his 
employer: 
 
(1) the behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current trustworthiness or good judgment relating to the 
safely of people and proper safeguarding of property and information 
systems; 
 
(2) The individual was not adequately warned that the conduct was 
unacceptable and could not reasonably be expected to know that the 
conduct was wrong; 
 
(3) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the behavior; 
and  
 
(4) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial training and 
has since demonstrated a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
information-handling or security responsibilities.  
 
 The mitigating conditions are not established. Applicant falsified a required 
maintenance checklist in March 2014. Falsification of a work document, particularly one 
that concerns a safety inspection, is not a minor matter. There are no unusual 
circumstances presented that would require Applicant to falsely report a safety inspection 
had been performed. Applicant did not present any information to indicate if he made a 
prompt good-faith effort to correct his behavior. Applicant has not mitigated the 
employment misconduct.  
 
Intentional false, deception, or fraud in federal employment 
 
 A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on an individual’s material, intentional, false statement, deception or fraud in 
connection with federal or contract employment that issuance of a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk. The CAC concern is stated in DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 
4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, “The individual’s conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about the individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and put people, 
property, or information systems at risk.” 
 
 Applicant’s intentional failure to report on his OF306 that he was terminated from 
his prior employment raises the following disqualifying condition under paragraph 3 of 
Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4 of DODI 5200.46:  
 
Conditions that may be disqualifying include material, intentional 
falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or information provided 
during the employment process for the current or prior federal or contract 
employment.  
 
5 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Paragraph 3 c. provides the following 
mitigating circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable 
basis to believe that there is an unacceptable risk:  
 
(1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent and was 
followed by a prompt good-faith effort to correct the situation. 
 
 Applicant did not report that he was terminated from a previous employment for 
falsifying a maintenance checklist. He failed to note the termination on hisOF306. I find 
that the omission was deliberate and not minor. Applicant’s explanation for his deliberate 
omission is not credible. Based on all of the foregoing, I conclude Applicant’s request for 
CAC eligibility should be denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1: Misconduct or Negligence in Employment: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2: Material, Intentional False Statement;  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, 
granting Applicant CAC eligibility poses an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is 
denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
