 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 15-06085 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or other controlled substances supplemental 
adjudicative standards, but he did not mitigate criminal or dishonest conduct 
credentialing concerns. CAC eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility under 
the adjudicative standards of criminal or dishonest conduct and illegal use of narcotics, 
drugs, or other controlled substances. Applicant responded to the SOR on August 25, 
2015, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on March 8, 2016. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the credentialing concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 17, 2016. 
As of May 9, 2016, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on November 
9, 2017. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
2 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 66 years old. He has a general educational development (GED) high 
school equivalency certificate.1  
 
 Applicant has a criminal history going back more than 48 years. In 1969, he was 
arrested and charged with forgery. He was convicted and sentenced to incarceration for 
three years. In 1971, he was arrested and charged with carrying a pistol without a 
license, carrying a concealed pistol, and armed robbery. He was convicted of armed 
robbery and sentenced to incarceration for ten years, with seven years suspended.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 1976 and charged with simple assault. He does not 
remember this incident. There is no evidence that the charge resulted in a conviction.3 
 
 In 1996, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession with intent to 
distribute cocaine. He was convicted. The sentence is not in the record.4 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2005 and charged with possession of a controlled 
substance for resale and driving under the influence (DUI). The charges were dismissed 
and then refiled in 2007 as possession of over 26 grams of cocaine for resale, 
possession of drug paraphernalia, and DUI. In 2008, he was convicted of possession of 
a controlled substance and sentenced to incarceration for ten years. Applicant was 
released on parole in 2010. He was still on parole as of August 2015.5 
 
 Applicant completed a two-year residential drug treatment program and 
participated in religious studies when he was incarcerated. He asserted that he was no 
longer involved in illegal drugs.6 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 
(HSPD-12); DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidance for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014; and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 1, 2, 5. 
 
3 Items 1, 2, 5. 
 
4 Items 1, 2, 5. 
 
5 Items 1-3, 5. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
3 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1)  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC eligibility concern and 
may be disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility;  
 
 
4 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(5) Actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that 
poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled 
facilities and federally-controlled information systems. For example, 
convictions for sexual assault may indicate that granting a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk to the life and safety of persons on U.S. Government 
facilities. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history is sufficient to establish the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f allege the same underlying criminal conduct. The same 
conduct should not be alleged more than once. SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur;  
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant does not remember the 1976 arrest for simple assault. There is no 
evidence that the charge resulted in a conviction. The mitigating circumstance in ¶ 
2.c(2) is applicable to SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
Applicant has a long criminal history. His last criminal offense was in 2005; he 
completed a two-year residential drug treatment program when he was incarcerated; 
and he asserted that he was no longer involved in illegal drugs. However, his 2008 
conviction carried a sentence of ten years. He was released on parole in 2010, and he 
was still on parole as of August 2015. Applicant appears to be sincere, but that is 
insufficient to mitigate the well-established pattern of criminal conduct. I am unable to 
determine that criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. There is some mitigation, but the 
 
5 
limited information in the FORM has not convinced me that Applicant does not pose an 
unacceptable risk. I also considered the factors in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1. 
 
Illegal Use of Narcotics, Drugs, or Other Controlled Substances 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 5 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the nature or duration of the individual’s illegal use of 
narcotics, drugs, or other controlled substances without evidence of 
substantial rehabilitation, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable 
risk. 
 
a. An individual’s abuse of drugs may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. Illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or other controlled 
substances, to include abuse of prescription or over-the-counter drugs, 
can raise questions about his or her trustworthiness, or ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. For example, a 
person’s long-term illegal use of narcotics without evidence of substantial 
rehabilitation may indicate that granting a CAC poses an unacceptable 
safety risk in a U.S. Government facility.  
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 5.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC eligibility concern and 
may be disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(2) A pattern of drug-related arrests or problems in employment; and  
 
(3) Illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement raises the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 5.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur (e.g., clear, lengthy 
break since last use; strong evidence the use will not occur again); 
 
 
 
 
6 
(2) A demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(a) Abstaining from drug use; 
 
(b) Disassociating from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(c) Changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(4) Satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 There is no evidence of any drug involvement after 2005. Applicant completed a 
two-year residential drug treatment program when he was incarcerated. He asserted 
that he was no longer involved in illegal drugs. Concerns about Applicant’s drug 
involvement are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:   Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:      For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:      Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.f:     For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Illegal Use of Controlled Substances:  For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility poses an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
 
      
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
