 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 15-04510 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
08/15/2016 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the criminal or dishonest conduct and material false statement supplemental 
adjudicative standards. CAC eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing criminal or dishonest conduct eligibility concerns 
and material, intentional false statement, deception or fraud. The DOD was unable to 
grant Applicant CAC eligibility. The action was taken under Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12); the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD 
Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing 
the CAC, dated September 9, 2014; and the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 19, 2015, and requested a review 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on June 
29, 2016. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
 
2 
September 23, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on October 12, 2015. Applicant did 
not respond to the FORM.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He has worked for his current employer as a propane 
driver since July 1991. He did not serve in the military. Applicant completed a 
questionnaire for non-sensitive positions on October 24, 2014. (Item 3) He completed a 
Declaration of Federal Employment, Form 306, on October 15, 2014. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant was arrested on September 16, 2011, and charged with domestic 
battery. (Item 6) On October 19, 2011, the charge was amended to disorderly conduct. 
He was fined and ordered to pay court costs ($882) and placed on 12 months of Court 
supervision. (Item 5) There are no other details in the record concerning the incident. 
   
 When Applicant completed his Form 306, he failed to disclose the 2011 charge, 
which had occurred three years earlier. He answered “no” to question nine – “During the 
last seven years, have you been convicted, been imprisoned, been on probation, or 
been on parole?” Applicant admits to this allegation, but he stated that he forgot about 
the incident in question and that he rushed through the application. He added that he 
and his wife attended counseling for six months. He noted that he has not had any 
incidents of that nature since 2011. He stated that it was not his intent to falsify any 
information on the application. He apologized for any inconvenience that may have 
been caused to his employer and all involved in this process.  
 
      Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.   
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1) In all 
adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
 
3 
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection or property or information, A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that Financial 
irresponsibility may raise questions about the individual’s honesty and put 
people, property or information systems at risk, although financial debt 
should not in and of itself be cause for denial. 
 
 The Government established this disqualifying condition through Applicant’s 
admission and evidence presented as a result of his 2011 arrest for domestic battery, 
which was amended to disorderly conduct. He was convicted in October 2011 of 
disorderly conduct. The above disqualifying condition has been established. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
 
4 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
Applicant’s charge of domestic battery was amended to disorderly conduct. He 
and his wife have attended counseling for a period of six months. He paid court costs 
and completed 12 months of court supervision. This one incident occurred in 2011. 
There are no other incidents on his record. He has been employed with the same 
employer since 1991. The above mitigating circumstances are established. I also 
considered the factors in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1. 
 
Material, Intentional Falsification, Deception, or Fraud 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, paragraph 3, lists two conditions that raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and put people, property, 
or information systems at risk; and 
 
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material, intentional 
falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or information provided 
during the employment process for the current or a prior federal or contract 
employment (e.g., on the employment application or other employment, 
appointment or investigative documents, or during interviews.) 
 
Applicant admitted that he did not list the 2011 offense of disorderly conduct, and 
explained that he completed his 2014 application in haste and had simply forgotten 
about the incident. There is nothing in the record to contradict that this was a onetime 
occurrence with his wife. He stated that he had no intent to falsify the application.  He 
expressed remorse for any inconvenience and apologized to all involved in the process. 
I find the misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent. I have carefully 
considered the facts in the record and applied the standards in DODI 5200.46. I 
conclude Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility should be granted. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 2, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Intentional False Statement: For Applicant 
 
 
5 
Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
