                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------                          )     CAC Case No. 15-06220
)
)
Applicant for CAC Eligibility )
Appearances
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
failed to mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised under the
supplemental adjudicative standards for the illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or other
controlled substances without evidence of substantial rehabilitation. Eligibility for access
to a CAC card is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On May 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing eligibility concerns for
CAC eligibility pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive - 12 (HSPD-12),
Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors,
dated August 27, 2004. DOD adjudicators were unable to make the affirmative
determination that granting Applicant CAC eligibility posed no unacceptable risk. The
action was based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards (SAS) found in DODI
Instruction 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the
Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set out in
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
2
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and Regulation 5200.2-R
(Reference (q)). The concerns raised under the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards
of DOD 5200.46 are: “Individual use of narcotics, drugs or other controlled substances
without evidence of substantial rehabilitation.” 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 18, 2015, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s File of
Relevant Material (FORM) on February 9, 2016, and did not submit any information in
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2016.  
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Supplemental Adjudicative Standards-Paragraph 5.a - Drugs, Applicant
allegedly (a) used illegal mushrooms between December 2009 and December 2010; (b)
illegally used Oxycontin from August to December 2010; (c)  illegally used Adderall from
December 2009 to December 2010; (d) used cocaine in June 2014; and (e) used
marijuana from January 2008 to December 2014.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with
explanations. He claimed he refrained from any illegal drug use since his most recent
use of marijuana in December 2014.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 26-year-old graduate mechanical engineer for a defense
contractor who seeks CAC eligibility. The allegations covered in the SOR, and admitted
by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering in December
2012. (Item 3) He claimed no military service. Applicant worked for his last reported
employer between March 2013 and November 2014 as a graduate mechanical
engineer. (Items 1 and 3)
Drug Use 
Between December 2009 and December 2014, Applicant used multiple drugs of
choice: some illegal (mushrooms, marijuana, and cocaine) and others illegal when used
without prescription (OxyContin and Adderall) (Items 1 and 2) While SOR allegations
detailing Applicant’s use of OxyContin and Adderall do not indicate whether Applicant
used these drugs without a prescription, Applicant’s admission to using these drugs
illegally is sufficient to cure any defects in the allegation. Inferences of illegal use of
controlled substances and drugs that are illegal when used without a prescription are
warranted based on the established facts in this written record.  
3
Applicant assured that he has refrained from any illegal drug use since his most
recent marijuana use in December 2014. (Item 1) Without any additional proof of post-
2014 use of illegal drugs or prescriptive drugs without a prescription, no inferences can
be drawn of recurrent drug use beyond December 2014.
            
Character References and Awards 
Applicant provided no character references on his behalf, either with his answer
or with his response to the FORM.  Nor did he furnish any performance evaluations or
evidence of community and civic contributions. 
Policies
The SASs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering CAC cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect his eligibility to hold a common access card. The
overriding factor for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be
arrived at by applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent
with the national interest.
The SASs must be considered before deciding whether or not CAC eligibility
should be granted, continued, or denied. The standards do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the standards in arriving at a decision. Each of the standards is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
In addition to the relevant SASs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in SAS ¶ 1(b)
of the SASs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable CAC eligibility risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant standards are to be
considered together with the following  factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the
absence or presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. See DODI 5200.46. 
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
4
Drugs
DODI 5200.46 Appendix 2 to enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards,
Paragraphs 5.a articulates the CAC concern as follows:
An individual’s abuse of drugs may put people, property, or
information systems at risk. Illegal use of narcotics, drugs, or
other controlled substances, to include abuse of prescription
or over-the-counter drugs, can raise questions about his or
her trustworthiness, or ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations. For example, a person’s long-
term illegal use of narcotics without evidence of substantial
rehabilitation may indicate that granting a CAC poses an
unacceptable safety risk in a U.S. Government facility.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the SASs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's CAC eligibility may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the objective of
the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded assessment of a person’s life to
facilitate an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable risk, the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a CAC depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain CAC eligibility. The required materiality showing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to demonstrate trust and reliability
considerations. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement found in DODI Instruction 5200.46 that all CAC
eligibility determinations be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant
has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her CAC eligibility. “[S]ecurity-
clearance “[CAC eligibility] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
5
Analysis  
The SAS’s list several conditions that may be disqualifying: (1) current or
recent illegal drug use, serious narcotic, or other controlled substance offense; (3)
illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and (8) any illegal use or abuse of
prescription or over-the-counter drugs. See 5200.46, App. 2, Encl. 4. Each of these
listed disqualifying conditions fully apply to the facts in Applicant’s case. Judgment
concerns exist over Applicant’s past drug use. He has a considerable history of drug
abuse over a five-year period spanning 2009 through 2014 and less than four years of
demonstrated abstinence.
Considering the recent and relatively prolonged nature of Applicant’s past
abuse of illegal drugs, insufficient time has elapsed to facilitate safe predictable
judgments that he poses no unacceptable risks of recurrence. Pertinent mitigating
conditions covered by SAS 5c are not available to Applicant. Applicant has expressed
no documented intent to avoid abuse of any illegal drugs or prescription drugs without
prescriptions in the future and furnished no evidence of completion of a prescribed
drug treatment program. 
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established insufficient
probative evidence of his commitment to avert recurrent drug use in the future. He
has provided no character references, performance evaluations, or evidence of civic
contributions. Applicant’s admissions of multiple drug use over a five-year period and
insufficient probative evidence that is he not an unacceptable risk to return to drug
use in the foreseeable future preclude drawn favorable conclusions about his overall
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. 
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
drug use and associated judgment lapses, Applicant does not mitigate risk concerns
related to his use of illegal drugs. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e. of SAS 5.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
SAS 5 (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):                    AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.e                                 Against Applicant
6
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s CAC
eligibility.  Eligibility for a CAC is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
Applicant is a fully employed network engineer for a defense contractor who
accumulated delinquent mortgage-related debts exceeding $275,000. Two of the
listed debts (i.e., the home equity lines of credit with creditors 1.a and 1.c) were 
charged off and remain outstanding with no evidence of their being addressed by
Applicant to date. The remaining debt with creditor 1.b remains in collection status
with no evidence of any initiated payment action by Applicant. The record evidence
confirms that Applicant has made no payments on any of the listed lines of credit and
expressed no plans to do so.
Applicant’s collective accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application
of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligation,”  apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his accumulation of
unaddressed delinquent debts covered in the SOR negate the need for any
independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of
Applicant’s listed filing lapses and debts are fully documented in his credit reports.
Some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s insufficiently explained accrual of
mortgage-related  debts with his lenders.  To date, he has taken no documented 
corrective steps to resolve his delinquencies and demonstrate he acted responsibly in
addressing his listed debts. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Holding a public trust position involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the public trust position holder. Quite apart from any agreement the
public trust position holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the
public trust position holder’s duties and access to privacy information necessarily
imposes important duties of trust and candor on the public trust position holder that
are considerably higher than those typically imposed on Government employees and
contractors involved in other lines of Government business. See Snepp v. United
States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Dishonesty issues associated with Applicant’s transfer of assets to his sister for
holding compound judgment concerns over Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability.
By placing his assets beyond the reach while contemplating filing for bankruptcy,
Applicant impaired the ability of the creditors to enforcement their creditor rights. 
8
Whether Applicant ever pursues Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief is still very
difficult to predict. Should he ever decide to petition for Chapter 13 relief, his asset
transfers are potentially at risk to being determined fraudulent transfers under his
state’s law governing fraudulent conveyances and set asides. Based on the evidence
presented, none of the mitigating conditions  covered by Guidelines F and E apply to
Applicant’s situation.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent mortgage debts and
failure to resolve them. Resolution of his listed delinquent accounts is a critical
prerequisite to his regaining control of his finances. His ensuing placement of his
assets beyond the reach of his creditors adds to the judgment concerns associated
with his accrual of delinquent mortgage-related debts only adds to the judgment
concerns associated with his debt accruals. 
While unanticipated financial burdens might have played a considerable role in
his failures to address his delinquent debts, Applicant failed to provide more specific
explanatory material for consideration. Endorsements and performance evaluations
might have been helpful, too, in making a whole-person assessment of her overall
clearance eligibility, but were not provided. 
Overall, public trust position eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the
limited amount of information available for consideration in this record does not
enable him to establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome trust 
concerns arising out of his lapses in judgment associated with his accumulation of
delinquent mortgage debts and placing his assets beyond the reach of his creditors.;
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s accrual of delinquent mortgage-related debt and his lack of more specific
explanations for his debt accruals and his lack of documented resolution of them, it is
still too soon to make safe predictions of  Applicant’s ability to satisfactorily resolve his
outstanding debts. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c of Guideline F and subparagraph 2.a of
Guideline E.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1.d:      Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):              AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a:               Against Applicant
   
9
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
