 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  CAC Case No. 15-00839 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Hogan, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access 
Credential eligibility pursuant to  Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-
12).  DOD was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant Common Access Credential (CAC) eligibility.  
 
The action is based on the Adjudicative Standards found in DoD Instruction 
5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the Common 
Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and made pursuant to the procedures set out 
in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  The concerns 
raised under the Adjudicative Standards of DoDI 5200.46 are:  Supplemental 
Adjudicative Standards – Paragraph 3a- Material, Intentional False Statement, 
Deception, or Fraud.    
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 18, 2015, and requested a decision based 
on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  
 
2 
on August 28, 2015. The Form contained three items. The FORM was forwarded to 
Applicant on October 8, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on October 17, 2015. She 
timely responded to the FORM on that same date. Applicant’s response to the FORM is 
admitted as Item 4. Department Counsel had no objection to Applicant’s response to the 
FORM. Department Counsel’s response dated October 22, 2015, is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. The FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office on October 23, 2015, 
and assigned to me on October 27, 2015. Based on the record evidence presented in 
this case, CAC eligibility is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The sole allegation in the SOR, alleges Applicant falsified material facts on a 
Declaration for Federal Employment form (Optional Form 306), dated May 12, 2014, 
when she answered, “No” to the question in Item 12, which asked: 
 
During the last 5 years, have you been fired from any job for any reason, 
did you quit after being told that you would be fired, did you leave any job 
by mutual agreement because of specific problems, or were you debarred 
from Federal employment by the Office of Personnel Management or any 
other Federal agency? If “Yes” use item 16 to provide the date, 
explanation of the problem, reason for leaving, and the employer’s name 
and address. 
 
(Item 3)  
 
Applicant failed to disclose that she was terminated from employment with  
Employer A on March 5, 2010 for failing to meet position requirements. The record does 
not include evidence of Applicant’s termination from Employer A.  However, Applicant 
admits to the termination in her response to the SOR, dated June 18, 2015. Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, enclosure 3.1.14 states Department Counsel is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to establish facts alleged in the 
SOR that have been controverted. Aside from the intent issue, the fact that Applicant 
did not list her termination from Employer A in March 2010 on her Declaration for 
Federal Employment, Form 306, is not in dispute.   
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant indicates she made a mistake in reporting 
the employment termination. The question asked that terminations be reported which 
occurred within the past five years. Applicant attempted to recall from memory when 
she was terminated from Employer A. She answered, “No” to the question because she 
believed she was terminated just outside of the five year period required by the 
question. Applicant says this was a mistake on her part and she was not attempting to 
deceive or show an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. (Item 1)  
 
After completing her Declaration for Federal Employment form on May 12, 2014, 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), 
SF 85, Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive Positions on May 30, 2014.  In section 10 of the 
e-QIP, Applicant listed that she was employed by Employer A from August 1999 to 
 
3 
March 2010. She also listed that she collected unemployment from March 2010 to April 
2010. The SF 85 did not have a question about employment terminations. (Item 2)  
 
In her response to the FORM, Applicant mentions that when she completed this 
paperwork, she was given a short suspense to complete it. When completing the 
Declaration for Federal Employment she based her answer on her memory rather than 
looking at paperwork. She realized she had made a mistake while later completing the 
e-QIP, SF 85. Her employer had discovered other discrepancies and forwarded them 
back to her for her to correct. Applicant was under the assumption the rest of her 
answers would be screened as well. Applicant stresses that this was a mistake and she 
was not attempting to deceive or show an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations. (Item 4)   
 
 Applicant provided four reference letters attesting to her character. Her job 
involves working with children with disabilities. A mother of one of her clients wrote a 
letter attesting to Applicant’s professionalism and understanding when caring for her 
son. She states, “[Applicant’s] experience and compassion have allowed my time with 
my son to be much more manageable and enjoyable when we are out in public. She 
has been a lifesaver, what she has done for me is given me more peace of mind.” (Item 
1 at 5) 
 
 Three teachers who worked with Applicant wrote letters on her behalf. They 
describe Applicant as “punctual, reliable, and trustworthy”. (Item 1 at 6) “She dedicates 
herself to her job. She is passionate about working with children with disabilities and 
helping them find ways to be successful. She goes beyond her job requirements.” (Item 
1 at 7) “She is very caring, organized, and a quick learner. She always had great ideas 
to help children learn new skills.” (Item 1 at 8)  
    
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) The 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) The recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) The individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) Contributing external conditions; and (6) The absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
 In Applicant’s case, overall CAC eligibility concerns are raised under DoDI 
5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, paragraph 
3: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s material, intentional, false statement, 
deception, or fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable security risk.   
  
3.a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
put people, property, or information systems at risk.  
 
3.b. Therefore, the conditions that may be disqualifying include material, 
intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or 
information provided during the employment process for the current or a 
prior federal or contract employment (e.g. on the employment application 
or other employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during 
interviews). 
 
3.c.  Circumstances relevant to a determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable security risk include: 
 
(1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was 
minor, or happened under such unusual circumstances it is 
unlikely to recur. 
        
(2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent 
and was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the 
situation.  
 
 
5 
 Applicant admits that she did not list that she was terminated from Employer A in 
March 2010, on a Declaration for Federal Employment Form 306 completed on May 12, 
2014. She states the omission was not intentional. Item 12 of Form 306 asks applicants 
to list employment terminations within the last five years. Applicant states she made an 
error in calculations when completing the form on May 12, 2014. She believed she had 
been terminated more than five years from the time she completed the Declaration for 
Federal Employment Form 306. I find her explanation credible.   
 
 Two weeks after submitting the Form 306, Applicant completed an e-QIP form, SF 
85 on May 30, 2014. Section 10 of the SF 85, asked her to provide a detailed entry of all 
employment activities for the past five years. She listed the fact that she was employed 
with Employer A from August 1999 to March 2010. She also listed that she received 
unemployment compensation from March 2010 to April 2010.  The SF 85 does not ask 
specifically about employment terminations. Regardless, Applicant provided sufficient 
information to put the Government on notice about her period of unemployment from 
March 2010 to April 2010. I find Applicant did not intentionally omit her termination on 
the FORM 306 completed on May 12, 2014. Having more time to complete her SF 85, 
Applicant provided more accurate information on her SF 85. Her explanation that she 
initially made an error when calculating the five year period when completing her federal 
employment application is plausible.  
 
 Applicant’s favorable character letters from former co-workers and the mother of 
one of the children she cares for attest to her professionalism and trustworthiness. For 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility should be granted.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception or Fraud: FOR 
APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
Erin C. Hogan  
  Administrative Judge 
