 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
         )    CAC Case No. 15-00898 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Maryam Z. Khajavi, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
On November 26, 2013, Applicant submitted a Declaration for Federal 
Employment (Optional Form (OF) 306). He falsely denied that he had been on probation 
or received a conviction in the previous seven years. Actually, he received two 
misdemeanor-level convictions in 2010, and he was on probation at the time he signed 
his OF 306. The falsification of his OF 306 is recent and demonstrated a serious lapse 
in judgment. All of his criminal conduct was alcohol related and occurred before 2011. 
He ended his alcohol consumption in December 2009. Criminal dishonest conduct and 
alcohol abuse common access card (CAC) credentialing concerns are mitigated; 
however, material, intentional false statement, deception, or fraud in connection with 
federal or contract employment concerns are not mitigated. CAC credentialing eligibility 
is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 17, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive 
Positions (SF 85). (GE 1) On May 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for CAC 
credentialing pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12, Policy for a 
Common Identification Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors, August 27, 
2004 (HSPD-12). DOD was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility.  
 
2 
This action is based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards (SAS) found in 
DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidance for 
Issuing the Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set 
out in Enclosure (Encl.) 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The 
concerns raised under DODI 5200.46 are “criminal dishonest conduct,” “material, 
intentional false statement, deception, or fraud in connection with federal or contract 
employment,” and “alcohol abuse” in DODI 5200.46, Appendix (App.) 2 to Encl. 4, SAS 
¶¶ 2, 3, and 4.    
 
On June 10, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR. Department Counsel was ready 
to proceed on March 9, 2016. The case was forwarded to the hearing office and 
assigned to me on March 21, 2016.  On June 20, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for July 12, 
2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered five documents. 
(Transcript (Tr.) 13-14; Government Exhibits (GE) 1-5) Applicant objected to the 
admissibility of Applicant’s FBI Criminal History Record (GE 3) because it is not current 
and does not reflect subsequent expungement of criminal information. (Tr. 15-16) The 
objection to the admissibility of the FBI Criminal History Records was overruled because 
the objections go to the weight and not the admissibility of GE 3. (Tr. 15; GE 3) The 
subsequent expungements of two convictions were accepted as relevant information.  
 
Applicant objected to GE 4 and GE 5, unsigned printouts of local law 
enforcement records provided to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), because 
they are hearsay and lack relevance, and they are not official government records. (Tr. 
16) The objections to GE 4 and 5 were sustained. Applicant offered six exhibits, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. (Tr. 19-21; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-F) 
Applicant made a statement on his own behalf. The transcript was received on July 20, 
2016.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.h. He partially or 
fully denied the remaining SOR allegations. He also provided extenuating and mitigating 
information. His SOR admissions are incorporated in the findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old heavy equipment mechanical inspector employed by a 
defense contractor since October 2001. (Tr. 25; GE 1) He seeks continued CAC 
eligibility as a condition of his employment. In 1988, Applicant married. (Tr. 82) He has 
never served in the military. (GE 1) There is no evidence of security violations, felony 
convictions, financial problems, or illegal drug abuse. 
 
 Applicant provided good work performance. (Tr. 65) His colleagues at work 
describe him as pleasant, dedicated, responsible, helpful, diligent, and proficient. (AE D) 
 
3 
He reports to work on time, and he contributes to his employer’s accomplishment of 
tasks. (AE D) 
 
Criminal Dishonest Conduct and Alcohol Abuse  
 
 Over the previous 30 years, Applicant had five misdemeanor convictions. (Tr. 63) 
In 1986, 1990, and 2009, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence of 
alcohol (DUI), and he was convicted of all three DUI offenses. (Tr. 48-49, 35-37, 69-72, 
80)  
 
In 1987, Applicant admitted that he was convicted for resisting or obstructing a 
police officer. (Tr. 49, 69) In 1993, Applicant was arrested for drunk in public. (Tr. 41-43, 
62-63; SOR response ¶ 1.h) It is unclear whether he was convicted of the 1993 offense. 
 
In 1998, Applicant was arrested for forcible incest and rape. (Tr. 40, 71) He said 
the victim was 18 years old. (Tr. 40, 84) Applicant agreed to pay child support, and the 
charge was dismissed when she failed to appear in court. (Tr. 84) He said the sexual 
intercourse with her was consensual. (Tr. 84) He denied that he was arrested in 
February 2007 for threats of violence and domestic violence. (Tr. 39-40, 66; SOR 
response ¶ 1.e) 
  
In about December 2009, Applicant was arrested for DUI. (Tr. 35-36, 71; SOR ¶ 
1.d) He hit another car; however, he did not leave the scene of the accident. (Tr. 81) He 
said he could not remember his blood-alcohol level. (Tr. 81) He was convicted, and in 
June 2010, he was sentenced. (Tr. 35-37, 71-72; SOR response) He received 13 days 
of community service, a fine of $1,828, and five years of probation. (SOR response) 
Applicant has been sober since his DUI offense in December 2009. (Tr. 27) He 
completed a four-month alcohol course. (Tr. 28, 38; AE F) He has attended Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meetings since about 2003, with increased attendance after 
Christmas 2009.  (Tr. 28, 51-54, 74-78; AE D) He tries to go to AA meetings every day. 
(Tr. 75) He provided attendance records for his AA meetings in 2015 and 2016, and a 
letter from his AA sponsor describing 13 years of AA attendance. (AE C; AE D) On 
November 12, 2015, his DUI conviction was expunged. (Tr. 29; AE A) He has never 
been diagnosed as alcohol dependent. (Tr. 55) 
 
On July 24, 2010, Applicant was arrested for domestic violence involving his 
spouse. (Tr. 24, 72; SOR response ¶ 1.a) He was convicted of battery on his spouse. 
(SOR response) He received fines and fees totaling $660. (SOR response) He 
completed a 52-week domestic violence course. (Tr. 24, 32, 72; AE E) The course 
entailed one class a week for two hours. (Tr. 32) In October 2011, he completed the 
domestic violence course. (Tr. 33) His conviction was subsequently expunged. (Tr. 24; 
AE B) 
  
Material, Intentional Falsification, Deception, or Fraud 
 
 On November 26, 2013, Applicant completed an OF 306. (GE 2) He answered, 
no, to question nine, which asked, “During the last 7 years, have you been convicted, 
 
4 
been imprisoned, been on probation, or been on parole? (Includes felonies, firearms or 
explosives violations, misdemeanors, and all other offenses.).”  
 
Applicant said that at the time he completed the November 26, 2013 OF 306, he 
believed seven years had elapsed since his most recent criminal conviction. (Tr. 22) He 
acknowledged that he was still on informal or court probation from his 2010 DUI 
conviction at the time he completed his OF 306. (Tr. 44, 57-58) Informal probation does 
not include reporting to a probation officer, and it does not necessarily include 
notification when probation is complete. (Tr. 57-59) He also said he was confused when 
he answered question nine on his OF 306. (Tr. 44-46) Applicant’s coworkers told him 
that the government only checked for felonies. (Tr. 46)  
 
Applicant is familiar with completing OF 306s. (Tr. 86) In 2001, 2003, 2007, and 
2008 or 2009, Applicant completed OF 306s. (Tr. 85) He did not list his two criminal 
convictions in 2010 because he did not think the government would check on his 
misdemeanor-level criminal record, and he did not believe the government would find 
out about them. (Tr. 87-87)    
  
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Encl. 4, App. 1, Basic Adjudicative Standards, 
and App. 2, SAS. The overriding factor for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. 
The decision must be arrived at by applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility 
is clearly consistent with the national interest.    
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility. In all adjudications, the 
protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  Therefore, any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor of 
the national interest.  
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 2 describes the concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 2b, lists seven conditions that raise a 
concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted; 
 
(3) Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, perjury, 
forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation without proper 
authorization); 
 
(4) Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, or other intentional financial breaches of 
trust; 
 
(5) Actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that 
poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled 
facilities and federally-controlled information systems. For example, 
convictions for sexual assault may indicate that granting a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk to the life and safety of persons on U.S. Government 
facilities; 
 
 
6 
(6) Financial irresponsibility may raise questions about the individual’s 
honesty and put people, property or information systems at risk, although 
financial debt should not in and of itself be cause for denial; and 
 
(7) Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts or 
deliberately providing false or misleading information to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official 
U.S. Government representative, particularly when doing so results in 
personal benefit or which results in a risk to the safety of people and 
proper safeguarding of property and information systems. 
 
 In 1986, 1990, and 2009, Applicant was arrested for DUI, and he was convicted 
of three DUI offenses. In 1987, he was convicted for resisting or obstructing a police 
officer. In 2000, he was convicted of committing battery on his spouse. There is 
insufficient evidence to establish Applicant committed the offense of rape or incest. 
There is no police report describing this offense. Applicant admitted he engaged in 
sexual intercourse with the victim; however, he claimed she was 18 years old. There is 
no evidence to contradict his claim. SAS ¶¶ 4b(1), 4b(2), and 4b(5) apply to his five 
misdemeanor-level convictions.   
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS 2c, lists four conditions that could mitigate 
CAC credentialing concerns: 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; 
 
(3) Improper or inadequate advice from authorized personnel or legal 
counsel significantly contributed to the individual’s omission of information. 
When confronted, the individual provided an accurate explanation and 
made prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
Three of Applicant’s five substantiated misdemeanor-level offenses are alcohol-
related. He attended alcohol-related counseling for four months, and he has participated 
in AA meetings since December 2009. He has refrained from alcohol consumption for 
six years. He has not committed any criminal offenses since 2010. In 2015, he 
successfully completed probation. His two most recent convictions were expunged. He 
has a good record of employment as documented in several character statements. SAS 
¶¶ 2c(1) and 2c(4) apply because: he provided evidence of actions taken to overcome 
 
7 
his alcohol abuse and criminal conduct; he established a pattern of abstinence from 
alcohol use; and criminal conduct has not recurred since 2010. Concerns about criminal 
dishonest conduct are mitigated. 
 
Alcohol Abuse 
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 4 describes the concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the nature or duration of the individual’s alcohol abuse 
without evidence of substantial rehabilitation, that issuance of a CAC 
poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
An individual’s abuse of alcohol may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. Alcohol abuse can lead to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or failure to control impulses, and may put people, property, or 
information systems at risk, regardless of whether he or she is diagnosed 
as an abuser of alcohol or alcohol dependent. A person’s long-term abuse 
of alcohol without evidence of substantial rehabilitation may indicate that 
granting a CAC poses an unacceptable safety risk in a U.S. Government 
facility. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 4b, lists four conditions that raise a CAC 
concern and may be disqualifying:  
 
(1) A pattern of alcohol-related arrests; 
 
(2) Alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job; 
 
(3) Current continuing abuse of alcohol; and 
 
(4) Failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
In 1986, 1990, and 2009, Applicant was arrested for DUI, and he was convicted 
of these three DUI offenses. SAS ¶ 4b(1) applies because Applicant has a pattern of 
alcohol-related arrests.   
 
DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 4c, lists three conditions that could 
mitigate concerns about “whether there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an 
unacceptable risk”: 
 
(1) The individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an abuser of alcohol); 
 
8 
(2) The individual is participating in counseling or treatment programs, has 
no history of previous treatment or relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress; and 
 
(3) The individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare. He or she 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in an alcohol treatment program. 
The individual has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s three alcohol-related problems (DUIs) are also criminal conduct. His 
abstinence from alcohol consumption and rehabilitation are discussed in the previous 
section. SAS ¶ 4c(1) applies because he acknowledged his alcohol-related problems, 
provided evidence of actions taken to overcome his problem, and established a pattern 
of alcohol abstinence of more than five years. Concerns about alcohol abuse are 
mitigated. 
 
Material, Intentional Falsification, Deception, or Fraud 
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS, ¶ 3 articulates the CAC concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, 
deception, or fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and put people, 
property, or information systems at risk. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS, ¶ 3b indicates a condition that “may be 
disqualifying include[s] material, intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to 
answers or information provided during the employment process for the current or a 
prior federal or contract employment (e.g., on the employment application or other 
employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during interviews.).” 
 
The Government established this disqualifying condition through Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented that he did not disclose his two misdemeanor-level 
convictions in 2010 and his being on probation at the time he completed his November 
26, 2013 OF 306. He did not disclose this information because he believed the 
government would not find out about it. 
 
 
9 
DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 3c, lists two circumstances relevant to 
the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an 
unacceptable risk: 
 
(1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
and 
 
(2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent and 
was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation. 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information on his November 26, 2013 OF 
306 about his criminal history when he denied that he had criminal convictions and was 
on probation in the previous seven years. This falsification is recent, intentional, and 
serious. Material, intentional falsification, deception, or fraud concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Assessment 
  
 DODI 5200.46, Encl. 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, ¶ 1, Guidance For 
Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the following mitigating 
factors: 
 
As established in Reference (g),1 credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c).2  
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious the 
conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient information 
concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained to 
determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property, or information systems. 
 
                                                          
1Reference (g) is HSPD – 12.  
 
2Reference (c) is U.S. Office of Personnel Management Memorandum, Final Credentialing 
Standards for Issuing Personal Identity Verification Cards Under HSPD-12, July 31, 2008.  
 
10 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural conditions 
may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable 
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions are currently 
removed or countered (generally considered in cases with relatively minor 
issues). 
 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
 (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
  
 (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not just 
alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be a 
consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
  Applicant is a 48-year-old heavy equipment mechanical inspector employed by a 
defense contractor since October 2001. He is credited with being a good employee. He 
seeks continued CAC eligibility as a condition of his employment. His colleagues at 
work describe him as pleasant, dedicated, responsible, helpful, diligent, and proficient. 
He reports to work on time, and he contributes to his employer’s accomplishment of 
tasks. There is no evidence of security violations, felony convictions, or illegal drug 
abuse. 
 
 On November 26, 2013, Applicant completed an OF 306. Applicant answered, 
no, to question 9, which asked, “During the last 7 years, have you been convicted, been 
imprisoned, been on probation, or been on parole? (Includes felonies, firearms or 
explosives violations, misdemeanors, and all other offenses.).” He provided this false 
answer despite having two misdemeanor convictions in 2010 and being on probation on 
November 26, 2013, when he signed his OF 306. He lied because he believed the 
government would not find out about his criminal history.     
  
 I have carefully considered the facts of this case and applied the standards in 
DODI 5200.46. None of the mitigating conditions are sufficient to fully resolve CAC 
eligibility concerns because his submission of a false OF 306 on November 26, 2013, is 
 
11 
recent and demonstrated a serious lapse in judgment. Applicant’s request for CAC 
eligibility is denied.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Encl. 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal Dishonest Conduct: FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Material, Intentional False 
    Statement, Deception, or Fraud:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Alcohol Abuse:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is denied. 
                                     
 
   
__________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
