 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 15-08117 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns 
raised under the criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. 
CAC eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility under 
the adjudicative standards of criminal or dishonest conduct. Applicant responded to the 
SOR on January 9, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 28, 2016. On April 11, 
2016, Applicant changed his request to a decision on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on April 19, 2016. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on April 26, 2016. He 
responded to the FORM with documents that I have marked collectively as Applicant’s 
 
2 
Exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2017. The Government 
exhibits included in the FORM and AE A are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2012. He attended a technical school for more than two 
years. He filed his 2002 federal income tax return as married with two children. His 2011 
return was filed as single without dependents. His current status is unknown.1  
 
 Applicant has a long criminal history. He was convicted of inflicting corporal injury 
to a spouse or cohabitant in 1992; inflicting injury to a child in 1997; and trespass in 
1998.2   
 
 Applicant was arrested in September 2008 and charged with battery/domestic 
violence. He was convicted and received time served, a fine, and a suspended 
sentence. He completed a six-month course on domestic violence and anger 
management. He was arrested in 2009 for failure to pay the fine for the conviction. He 
paid the fine and was released.3 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2009 and charged with battery/domestic violence. He 
asserted that he was falsely accused. The disposition of the charge is unclear.4 
 
 Applicant has a history of traffic citations and criminal moving violations. Between 
2007 and 2011, he was cited on multiple occasions for speeding, open container, 
driving without a license, driving with a suspended license, driving with a revoked 
license, expired license plate, no insurance, no registration, and fictitious registration. 
He was arrested on a bench warrant in 2011 for failure to pay the fines for the various 
citations. Applicant stated that he was in between jobs and homeless at the time. He 
asserted that the fines were lowered and eventually paid.5 
 
 Applicant accepted responsibility for his actions and charges. He wrote that it 
was a bad chapter of his life. He longed to return to a “normal life” at his current job. He 
requests to continue to hold his CAC so that he can continue to assist our troops in 
defending this great country.6 
                                                          
1 Item 2; AE A. 
 
2 Item 3. These convictions were not alleged in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. They may be considered in the application of mitigating conditions and in the whole-person 
analysis. 
 
3 Items 1, 3, 4. 
 
4 Items 1, 3, 4. 
 
5 Items 1, 4. 
 
6 Item 1. 
 
 
3 
 Applicant did not file his state and federal income tax returns when they were due 
for tax years 2002 and 2008 through 2011. He filed the returns in 2014. His 2002 
returns show that he owed the IRS $3,576 and the state $3,084. His 2008 through 2011 
federal returns show a mixture of refunds and additional taxes owed.7 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 
(HSPD-12); DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidance for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014; and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1)  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
                                                          
7 Items 1, 4; AE A. 
 
4 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC eligibility concern and 
may be disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility;  
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted; 
 
(4) Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, or other intentional financial breaches of 
trust;  
 
(5) Actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that 
poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled 
facilities and federally-controlled information systems. For example, 
convictions for sexual assault may indicate that granting a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk to the life and safety of persons on U.S. Government 
facilities; and 
 
(6) Financial irresponsibility may raise questions about the individual’s 
honesty and put people, property or information systems at risk, although 
financial debt should not in and of itself be cause for denial. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history is sufficient to establish disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 
2.b.(1); 2.b.(2); and 2.b.(5). Some of Applicant’s traffic violations were not criminal 
offenses, but at a minimum, his driving without a valid license offenses were 
misdemeanor criminal offenses.  
 
 Applicant did not file his tax returns or pay his taxes for several years. However, I 
am not convinced that he had the specific intent to evade his income tax obligation 
under 26 U.S.C. § 7201 or file tax returns under 26 U.S.C. § 7203, which is necessary 
for criminal liability. Disqualifying condition ¶ 2.b.(6) states that “financial debt should not 
in and of itself be cause for denial.” Absent criminal intent, no disqualifying conditions 
are established. See CAC Case No. 15-02333 (App. Bd. Nov. 16, 2016). SOR ¶ 1.e is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
5 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c allege that in January 2009 and July 2009, Applicant “was 
arrested and charged with failure to appear in court on the charge of battery domestic 
violence.” Those allegations were not established through substantial evidence. SOR ¶¶ 
1.b and 1.c are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur;  
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
Applicant has a long criminal history. While he has not been arrested on a 
domestic violence charge since 2009, his disregard for the law, manifested by 
numerous charges of driving without a valid license, continued through 2011. Applicant 
appears to be sincere, but that is insufficient to mitigate the well-established pattern of 
criminal conduct. I am unable to determine that criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. 
There is some mitigation, but the limited information in the FORM has not convinced me 
that Applicant does not pose an unacceptable risk. I also considered the factors in DODI 
5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility poses an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
 
      
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
