 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
        XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX   )    CAC Case No. 15-00790 
   ) 
Applicant for Common Access Credentialing  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC eligibility 
is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 9, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for non-sensitive positions 
(SF 85). On February 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access 
Credential eligibility pursuant to  Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-
12).  DOD was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant CAC eligibility.  
 
The action is based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards found in DoD 
Instruction 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the 
Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  The concerns raised 
under the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards of DoDI 5200.46 are criminal or 
dishonest conduct.   
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 23, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 20, 2015. The case was forwarded 
to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on April 23, 2015.  On May 5, 2015, a Notice 
of Hearing was sent out scheduling the hearing for May 29, 2015. On May 7, an 
Amended Notice of Hearing was sent out scheduling the hearing for May 27, 2015. The 
hearing was held as rescheduled. 
 
 Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 3, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, 
which was received without objection. I held the record open until June 5, 2015, to 
afford the Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely 
submitted AE B through AE D, which were received without objection. The transcript 
(Tr.) was received on June 3, 2015. Based on the record evidence and testimony 
presented in this case, CAC eligibility is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His SOR 
answers are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old accountant employed by a defense contractor since 
August 2014. He seeks CAC eligibility as a condition of his continued employment. (GE 
1; Tr. 18-20, 26-27) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in May 2008. He was awarded a bachelor 
of science in business administration with a double major in accounting and finance in 
August 2014. Applicant is not married and does not have any dependents. He did not 
serve in the armed forces. (GE 1; Tr. 20-24) 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 CAC credentialing concerns were identified during Applicant’s background 
investigation as a result of a two misdemeanor arrests over a five-month period. The 
first arrest occurred on February 18, 2014, when Applicant was 24-years-old, for 
domestic violence and harassment following an altercation between Applicant and his 
former girlfriend (GF).  (GE 1 – GE 3)  
 
Applicant met GF at college. She was unable to pay out-of-state tuition and was 
forced to drop out of college. Applicant offered to let GF move in with him while she 
worked and established herself as an in-state resident. Their relationship subsequently 
deteriorated resulting in an altercation on February 18, 2014. Applicant testified that GF 
attacked him and assaulted him with household objects such as a phone and lamp. He 
went outside and called the police. (Tr. 27-30, 61) 
 
 
3 
When the police arrived, they were unable to determine who the aggressor was 
and arrested both Applicant and GF and brought them to the police station where they 
spent the night in jail. Applicant and GF subsequently entered an identical pre-trial 
diversion program. He successfully completed the program on August 21, 2014 and all 
charges were dismissed. The program required Applicant to undergo random drug 
testing, complete an alcohol assessment program, and pay all court costs. In addition to 
the diversion program requirements, Applicant consulted with a psychologist to explore 
alternative problem resolution avenues. He is no longer involved with GF. (SOR answer; 
Tr. 30-33, 49-50, 60) 
 
The second arrest occurred on June 21, 2014, also when Applicant was 24-
years-old, for boating under the influence of alcohol. (GE 1 – GE 3) Applicant was with 
two out-of-town friends celebrating at his family’s lake house. At the time he was 
arrested, he and his friends were sitting in his parent’s powerboat drinking while the 
boat was anchored. They were approached by a police boat and Applicant as the boat 
operator was arrested and charged with boating under the influence after it was 
determined his blood alcohol content was .15%. (Tr. 33-37) 
 
On August 6, 2014, Applicant pled guilty to the charge and was sentenced to 90 
days, suspended; 24 months of unsupervised probation; a $600 fine; a $100 bail bond 
fee; $30 driving/criminal history fee; $25 victim compensation assessment; and court 
costs. He also completed a Level I alcohol education class. Apart from waiting to 
complete 24 months of supervised probation, Applicant has complied with all 
requirements of his sentence. (SOR answer; (Tr. 37-41, 46-49. 59-60) 
 
At the time of his first arrest, Applicant was employed at a very stressful job at a 
bank and his father had just had a second heart attack.  Applicant had just returned 
from the hospital visiting his father before his first arrest. Since Applicant’s boating 
under the influence arrest, he has made significant lifestyle changes to include rarely 
drinking alcohol and participating in a rigorous fitness program. (Tr. 41-45, 50-52, 54) 
 
Applicant recognizes his mistakes and is ashamed and embarrassed not only for 
himself, but also for his family. He added that not a day goes by that he does not regret 
his mistakes. (SOR answer; Tr. 48-57)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted a Performance Plus Certificate signed by his company 
president, and two work-related reference letters -- one from his supervisor and the 
second from the head of the accounts payable department. It is clear from both letters 
that Applicant is viewed as a valuable, dedicated, and trustworthy employee. (AE A – 
AE C; Tr. 52-54) Applicant also submitted the results of his 2015 company-sponsored 
physical fitness challenge documenting that he came in second place. (AE D)  
 
Applicant is also involved with the local high school’s computer information 
technology department by serving on their advisory committee and is involved with 
student preparations for computer and business-related competitions. (SOR answer; Tr. 
 
4 
54-57) Applicant regularly spends time with his family who live locally. (Tr. 57-58) He is 
also preparing to take the GMAT with the intention of attending graduate school and 
earning a master of business administration degree. (Tr. 61-62) 
   
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraphs 2.a., 2.b.(1) and (2) articulate the CAC concern: 
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
 
5 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
 DODI Instruction 5200.46, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists two conditions that raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
2.b.(1) – A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the 
safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or 
information. A person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting 
a CAC poses an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical 
assets and to employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
and  
 
2.b.(2) – Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 The Government established these two disqualifying conditions through 
Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented as a result of his arrests for domestic 
violence, harassment, and boating under the influence of alcohol. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, Paragraph 1, 
Guidance For Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the 
following mitigating factors: 
 
a. As established in Reference (g), credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c).  
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious 
the conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient 
information concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained 
to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property, or information systems. 
 
 
6 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural 
conditions may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions 
are currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
     (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
  
    (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not 
just alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
  When Applicant was arrested for domestic violence and harassment, he was in a 
stressful job and had just returned home after visiting his father in the hospital who had 
just had his second heart attack. It is unlikely that all of the circumstances surrounding 
the altercation between Applicant and GF will ever be determined with certainty. What is 
noteworthy is that Applicant called the police; however, when the police arrived they 
arrested both Applicant and GF. Both Applicant and GF entered an identical pre-trial 
diversion program.   
 
 Applicant fully complied with and completed the requirements of his diversion 
program and on August 21, 2014, all charges were dismissed. In addition to completing 
the requirements of his diversion program, Applicant also consulted a psychologist to 
provide him with better coping skills when dealing with stressful situations.  
 
 Approximately five months after his domestic violence and harassment arrest, 
Applicant was arrested for boating under the influence of alcohol. While not operating 
the boat at the time he was arrested, Applicant accepted responsibility as the boat 
operator. He pled guilty a little more than a month after his arrest. Applicant completed 
all aspects of his sentence and is waiting out the completion of his two-year 
unsupervised probation. Applicant was 24-years-old and a recent college graduate at 
the time of both of his misdemeanor arrests over a year ago. 
 
7 
 Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his actions and it is evident that this 
process has impacted him. He has made lifestyle changes that include minimum alcohol 
consumption and is engaged in an active lifestyle. Applicant’s employer considers him 
to be a loyal, productive, and trustworthy employee. Having carefully considered the 
facts of this case, I find ¶¶ 1.b. (1) through (4) and (6)(a) and 6(b) of the credentialing 
standards are applicable.  
 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility should be 
granted.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct: FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
