 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:  ) 
  )   
   )  CAC Case No. 15-05750 
  ) 
   )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hymans, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol, G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) eligibility concerns raised 
under the criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC 
eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 4, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for CAC eligibility pursuant to 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). The DOD was unable to find 
that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk. The action was 
based on the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD 
Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, and made pursuant to 
the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive). The concerns raised under the Adjudicative Standards of DODI 5200.46 are 
criminal or dishonest conduct.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 28, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
 
2 
relevant material (FORM). It was mailed to Applicant and was received by him on May 
30, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The 
Government’s documents are identified as Items 2 through 5. Applicant provided 
documents within the time period, and they are marked Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through D. All documents are admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on March 21, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He has three children. He has been working overseas 
for a government contractor for over a year. Applicant admitted all of the allegations in 
the SOR, with explanations. 
 
 A State Investigation Criminal Report was included in the FORM and it reflected 
Applicant’s criminal charges.1 Applicant was arrested in approximately November 2003, 
and charged with theft by shoplifting, theft by taking, criminal trespass, and simple 
battery. Applicant explained he was detained and arrested and went to court. His 
offenses were adjudicated as a “first offender.” He plead nolo contendere. It is unknown 
what if any punishment he received.2  
 
 In approximately July 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving with 
a suspended or revoked license, a misdemeanor. Applicant stated in his answer that he 
was unaware that his license was suspended at the time. He indicated he was 
sentenced to two days confinement.3  
 
 In approximately May 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving with 
a suspended or revoked license, a misdemeanor. Applicant stated in his answer that he 
was subsequently convicted, fined, and placed on 12 months probation. He stated he 
paid the fine, and completed the probation and the six-month suspension of his license.4  
 
 In about January 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving with a 
suspended or revoked license. He admitted the charge, but provided no further 
explanation. It is unclear how he successfully completed the terms of the 12 months 
probation from his May 2012 conviction if he was arrested in January 2013. It is 
unknown if he was convicted of this charge.5 
 
 In about August 2013, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving with a 
suspended or revoked license. He admitted the charge and stated: 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
3 
 The system was not recognizing my license at the time I was being 
detained and when I went to court I had to present my license on my 
behalf. I was placed on a 6 month probation to pay off the court fees which 
was paid off 2 months later.6  
 
 Applicant was arrested in October 2013, and charged with probation violation 
due to a new arrest for driving with a suspended or revoked license. He was 
subsequently convicted of driving without a valid license, a misdemeanor, and 
sentenced to ten days community service, probation for 12 months, and fined $730.7  
 
 On about June 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged with a probation 
violation for driving on a suspended violation. Applicant stated in his answer that he was 
late paying the fees for the probation that was ordered in October 2013, so he was 
detained for approximately a week. He stated that after he was released he finished 
paying the fine.8  
 
 Applicant provided a letter stating that he apologizes for his past behavior and 
has no excuses for it. He has grown and learned from his mistakes. He stated he was 
not deliberately or intentionally making the mistakes. Applicant stated he has had a 
driver’s license now for a few years and has not been in trouble. He has been working 
hard at his current job for over a year and is doing well.9  
 
 Applicant provided character letters. The program manager for his job is aware of 
his past criminal charges. He stated that he believes Applicant has good moral 
character and that he has aggressively attempted to correct his past mistakes. His work 
performance has been outstanding, and he had received praise from his coworkers and 
those in superior positions. He is remorseful for his past conduct. Other character letters 
state that Applicant is always professional and maintains the highest standard of 
customer service. He is reliable. He has a good work ethic, willingly works long hours, 
and is respectful to people at all levels.10 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about the circumstances of each of his 
arrests for driving with a suspended license. He did not provide information about his 
failure to comply with his probation. He has complied with his state’s requirements to 
obtain a valid license.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 Item 2. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
8 Item 2. 
 
9 AE A. 
 
10 AE B, C, D. 
 
4 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.   
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) The 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) The recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) The individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) Contributing external conditions; and (6) The absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraph 2.a articulates the CAC concern: 
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists three conditions that raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying:  
 
5 
2.b.(1): A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the 
safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or 
information. A person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting 
a CAC poses an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical 
assets and to employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
 
2.b.(2): Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
2.b.(3): Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, 
perjury, forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation without 
proper authorization).  
 
The Government established through the state criminal report that Applicant was 
arrested and charged in 2003 for theft by shoplifting, theft by taking, criminal trespass, 
and simple battery. It was adjudicated as a first offense and Applicant plead nolo 
contendere. He was also arrested and charged six times from July 2010 to June 2014 
for driving with a suspended license and for violating probation. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis 
to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be relevant:  
 
2.c.(1): The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
and 
 
2.c.(4) Evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, constructive community involvement, or passage of time without 
recurrence. 
 
Applicant did not provide amplifying information about the circumstances 
surrounding his 2003 arrest and conviction for theft. He also did not provide amplifying 
information about his repeated violation for driving with a suspended license and a 
probation violation. However, he took full responsibility for his past behavior and 
indicated he has learned from his past mistakes. He expressed remorse for his past 
conduct. He has a valid license from his state. It has been three years since his last 
arrest. Based on character evidence, he has a positive employment record. Although 
the record reflects that Applicant had multiple arrests for the same offense, thereby 
failing to comply with the law, the evidence strongly indicates that he has put his life on 
the right track and further misconduct is unlikely to recur. There is sufficient evidence of 
rehabilitation. The above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 
6 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
