 
1 
                                      
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  CAC Case No. 15-06225 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Common Access Card (CAC) eligibility concerns raised 
under the misconduct or negligence in employment, as well as the criminal or dishonest 
conduct, supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC eligibility is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 4, 2014, Applicant submitted a Declaration for Federal Employment 
(DFE).1 On November 19, 2014, he submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).2 On September 10, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Homeland Security 
Presidential Directive – 12, Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal 
Employees and Contractors, dated August 27, 2004 (HSPD-12); DOD Instruction 
5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidance for Issuing the Common Access 
Card, dated September 9, 2014 (DODI); Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program, dated January 1987, as amended and modified (Regulation); and DOD 
                                                          
1 GE 2 (DFE, dated November 4, 2014). 
 
2 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated November 19, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive). The SOR alleged concerns 
pertaining to “misconduct or negligence in employment” under ¶ 1.a., Appendix 2, 
Enclosure 4, and “criminal or dishonest conduct” under ¶ 2.a., Appendix 2, Enclosure 4, 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators 
were unable to find that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable 
risk. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
such eligibility should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated December 4, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.3 
On February 18, 2016, Applicant changed his mind and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. On May 18, 2016, Department Counsel indicated the government 
was prepared to proceed. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2016. A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on August 31, 2016. I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on 
September 21, 2016.  
 
 During the hearing, four government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 4), two Applicant 
exhibits (AE A and AE B), and one administrative exhibit were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 29, 
2016. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took 
advantage of that opportunity. He timely submitted a number of additional documents, 
which were marked as AE C through AE E that were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record closed on October 19, 2016. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, only one of the 
factual allegations pertaining to criminal or dishonest conduct (¶ 2.b.) of the SOR. He 
denied, also with comments, the remaining factual allegations related to misconduct or 
negligence in employment, as well as criminal or dishonest conduct. Applicant’s 
admissions, as well as his explanations and comments related to those allegations which 
he denied, are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been an 
operations manager for his employer since January 2007. He had previously been a 
foreman or superintendent for other employers from at least January 1990 until January 
2007.4 He is seeking to retain his CAC eligibility which was initially granted to him 25 
                                                          
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated December 4, 2015. 
 
4 GE 1, supra note 2, at 8-10. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
years earlier.5 Applicant graduated from high school in 1983.6 He completed two years of 
college, but did not earn a degree.7 He has never served in the U.S. military.8 Applicant 
was married the first time in 1985 and divorced in 2005 or 2006.9 He was married the 
second time in 2007 and divorced in 2015.10 He has two biological children: sons born in 
1990 and 1995; as well as the three step-children his second wife abandoned when she 
left the marital home: a daughter born in 2000, and sons born in 2002 and 2003.11 Until 
recently, Applicant was also the legal guardian of his second wife’s minor niece and 
nephew.12 
 
Misconduct or Negligence in Employment & Criminal or Dishonest Conduct13 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.c.): In October 2005, Applicant and his fiancé were seated in the car 
arguing when she started pushing or hitting him. Applicant was trying to keep her from 
doing so. A neighbor called the police. Applicant was arrested and charged with assault 
– domestic violence 3rd degree and harassment. On November 30, 2005 – approximately 
a decade before the SOR was issued – after hearing Applicant’s version of the events, 
supported by the testimony of his fiancé, the charges were nolle prossed.14 
 
 (SOR ¶ 2.b.): On January 12, 2012, while driving on a two-lane road, Applicant 
came upon a vehicle traveling in the same direction, at about 10 to 20 miles per hour, 
weaving all over the road. As he passed the vehicle he honked the horn and noticed that 
the driver, an older woman, was telephone texting. He continued on for about one-half 
mile without incident, and pulled into a service station. The driver of the other vehicle 
followed him to the station and started screaming profanity at him. Applicant continued 
pumping gasoline into his vehicle, and when the other driver continued her tirade, he said 
a “few choice words” and flipped her “the finger.” The other driver called the police and 
alleged that Applicant beat on her car and threatened her life. The police arrived and 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 24. 
 
6 GE 1, supra note 2, at 7. 
 
7 Tr. at 5, 46. 
 
8 GE 1, supra note 2, at 11; Tr. at 48. 
 
9 Tr. at 47. 
 
10 Tr. at 47. 
 
11 Tr. at 49-50. 
 
12 Tr. at 50. 
 
13 General source information pertaining to the alleged incidents of misconduct or negligence in employment 
and criminal or dishonest conduct discussed below can be found in the following exhibits:  GE 4 (Criminal History 
Record, dated December 1, 2014); Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2; GE 2, supra note 1; GE 3 (Military 
Police Report, dated June 10, 2014); AE C (Criminal Docket, dated September 16, 2014);  AE B (Evidence/Property 
Custody Document, dated November 24, 2014); AE A (Commander’s Report of Disciplinary or Administrative Action, 
dated August 15, 2014). 
 
14 GE 4, supra note 13, at 4; Tr. at 25-27; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
arrested him. He was charged with simple assault – reckless endangerment; crimes 
against person – harassment; disorderly conduct; and traffic offense – safe and prudent 
speed. Applicant engaged the professional services of an attorney to represent him. 
During a court hearing, the service station surveillance video was viewed, and the judge 
determined that none of the allegations reported by the other driver, with the exception of 
the “flipped finger” had taken place, and that Applicant had never left the side of his 
vehicle while pumping gasoline. Nevertheless, to avoid a protracted and potentially costly 
trial, Applicant’s attorney advised him to plead guilty to disorderly conduct. On September 
13, 2012, Applicant was convicted of disorderly conduct, and the remaining charges were 
dismissed.15 The judge fined the other driver for filing false warrants and allegations.16 
 
 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a.): During the week leading up to June 10, 2014, Applicant 
had been on annual leave at a campground festival in another part of the state. In the 
console of his vehicle he had his licensed handgun. Returning home after vacation, with 
his vehicle still filled with his camping and vacation gear, Applicant decided to check up 
on one particular job site on the military facility where he was employed. Upon arriving at 
the front gate, it was noticed that a full security inspection of all vehicles was taking place. 
Hoods were raised, mirrors checked under the vehicles, trunks were inspected, seats 
were lifted, and glove boxes were opened. Applicant opened his console glove box to get 
his credentials and realized his pistol was still in his vehicle. Unable to turn around, 
Applicant approached the gate guard and advised him that he was on vacation and had 
forgotten to remove his handgun. Applicant was ordered to step out of the vehicle without 
touching the handgun. Military police were called. They took possession of the handgun. 
Applicant was issued a violation notice for violating a security regulation and then 
permitted to continue onto the facility without further incident.17 
 
Applicant appeared pro se in the federal district court before a magistrate. 
Prosecuting the case against him were an assistant U.S. attorney and a judge advocate 
(JAG). On August 12, 2014, the magistrate convicted Applicant of the offense of security 
violation – prohibited weapon, and sentenced him to one year of probation.18 Upon 
receiving written notice of the court action, Applicant sought out the JAG to explain  what 
had happened. The JAG responded that he was under the impression that Applicant had 
been caught on base with the weapon, but Applicant explained the true facts. On 
September 12, 2014, the government filed a motion to dismiss the charge, and on 
September 16, 2014, the order dismissing the charge was issued by the magistrate.19 On 
October 1, 2014, the handgun was returned to Applicant.20 
 
                                                          
15 GE 2, supra note 1, at 2; GE 4, supra note 13, at 5; Tr. at 25-27; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 
2, at 2; Tr. at 27-30. 
 
16 Tr. at 29-30. 
 
17 Tr. at 30-35; GE 3, supra note 13, at 13; AE A, supra note 13.  
 
18 Tr. at 35; AE A, supra note 13, at 1, 4 
 
19 AE C, supra note 13; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 2, at 1; Tr. at 36-37. 
 
20 AE B, supra note 13. 
 
5 
                                      
 
Character References and Community Activities 
 
 The president of the company for which Applicant works has known Applicant for 
20 years. He characterized Applicant in extremely positive terms, referring to him as a 
hard worker, honest, and very conscientious.21 The fire protection engineer for the military 
installation on which Applicant works, has known Applicant for seven years. He, too, is 
very supportive of Applicant’s retention of his CAC eligibility. He feels that Applicant is a 
person of good moral character who is trustworthy and very reliable. He also noted that 
Applicant always follows the rules and regulations.22 Applicant is active in community 
affairs, especially in the area of youth sports. He previously coached youth football and 
baseball, and he is currently the co-captain for a youth fishing team.23 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall common sense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by applying 
the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the national interest. 
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded common sense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, taking 
into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature 
thinking, and careful analysis. An administrative judge need not view the standards as 
inflexible, ironclad rules of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human 
behavior, these standards are applied in conjunction with the factors listed below in the 
adjudicative process.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If there is evidence sufficient to present a 
reasonable basis to conclude that a disqualifying factor in accordance with the basic CAC 
credentialing standards is substantiated, or when there is a reasonable basis to conclude 
that derogatory information or conduct relating to the supplemental CAC credentialing 
standards presents an unacceptable risk for the U.S. Government, under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15, the applicant has the burden of persuasion to present witnesses and other 
evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the 
doubts raised by the Government’s case. The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility. 
 
                                                          
 
21 AE D (Character Reference, dated September 27, 2016). 
 
22 AE E (Character Reference, dated September 27, 2016). 
 
23 Tr. at 48-49. 
 
6 
                                      
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the nature 
and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; (3) the 
recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of 
the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or presence of 
efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1) In all adjudications, the 
protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration. Therefore, any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor of 
the national interest. 
 
A person who seeks CAC eligibility enters into a fiduciary relationship with the 
Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends normal 
duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is because of this special 
relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and 
confidence in those individuals to whom it grants CAC eligibility for access to information 
systems and installation access. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, unacceptable risk. In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 1 articulates the CAC concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 5. lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying. 
However, under the evidence presented, none of those conditions raised in ¶ 5 are 
applicable in this case.  
 
There is no previous history or patterns of intentional wrongdoing or rule violations 
associated with Applicant’s employment that could pose an unacceptable risk to 
individuals, property, or proprietary, protected, or classified information. The sole incident 
alleged that Applicant had attempted to bring a prohibited weapon onto a military 
installation. In fact, before Applicant entered the facility, upon realizing that his handgun 
was still in his vehicle, Applicant informed the gate guard of its presence to avoid bringing 
it onto the facility. While the facts were not developed before the U.S. magistrate, leading 
to his conviction, they were eventually developed to the satisfaction of the Government 
and the charge was withdrawn. The handgun was returned to Applicant, a testament by 
the Government that Applicant’s possession of a handgun did not pose an unacceptable 
risk to life, limb, or property. In some ways, this incident is similar to the one that created 
an international incident in 2013 when a member of the U.S. Marine Corps was arrested 
 
7 
                                      
 
at the Mexican border after realizing he had a weapon in his vehicle but was unable to 
turn back into the United States.  
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 2 articulates the CAC concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that issuance of a 
CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put people, 
property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or 
dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 2.b. lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying. 
The following conditions are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of people 
and proper protection of property or information systems, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or 
convicted; 
 
(5) Actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that 
poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled 
facilities and federally-controlled information systems. For example, 
convictions for sexual assault may indicate that granting a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk to the life and safety of persons on U.S. Government 
facilities; 
 
Applicant’s history of criminal conduct is sufficient to establish all of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 2.c. lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable 
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following mitigating conditions may be 
relevant: 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
Applicant was involved in three incidents of a criminal nature, and two of those 
incidents eventually resulted in the charges being dismissed. The October 2005 incident 
occurred a decade before the SOR was issued. The January 2012 incident involved 
essentially false allegations made against Applicant, and based on his attorney’s 
guidance and the fear of a costly and drawn-out battle, Applicant pled guilty to disorderly 
conduct – flipping the finger to an offensive provocateur. The most recent incident, in 
June 2014, eventually resulted in a wrong being corrected. The handgun was returned to 
Applicant. 
 
Based on the extremely positive information presented by his character 
references, as well as Applicant’s own comments, I am convinced Applicant is 
“rehabilitated,” to the extent that he needed rehabilitation. His history as a justice-involved 
individual from the past does not pose an unacceptable risk. The above mitigating 
circumstances are established. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Misconduct or Negligence 
  In Employment:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:      For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Criminal or Dishonest 
  Conduct:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:      For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:      For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c.:      For Applicant 
 
  
 
9 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
  
