 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  
------------------------- )   CAC Case No. 15-06377 
  )    
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
March 29, 2017 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access Card 
(CAC) eligibility pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12) 
Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors 
(August 27, 2004). (Item 1.) DOD was unable to find that granting Applicant CAC 
eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk. The action is based on the Adjudicative 
Standards found in DoD Instruction 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Issuing the Common Access Card (September 9, 2014), and made 
pursuant to the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive). The concerns raised under the Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards of DoDI 5200.46 are: Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Paragraph 1.a. Misconduct 
or Negligence in Employment; and Paragraph 3.a. Material, Intentional False 
Statement, Deception or Fraud.   
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 18, 2015, and requested a decision 
based on the administrative record. (Item 1.) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case (FORM) consisting of five items to Applicant on January 20, 
2016. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on February 3, 2016. Applicant was 
given 30 days after receipt of the FORM to file objections to any of the Government’s 
documents, or to provide additional documentation of her own. No additional information 
was submitted by Applicant. The case was assigned to me on July 19, 2016. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 48 years old. She works in the medical field for a defense contractor. 
Her marital status is unknown. (Item 3.) 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in paragraph 1 of the SOR with 
explanations. She denied paragraph 2. 
 
Paragraph 1 – Misconduct or Negligence in Employment 
 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for CAC 
credentialing because she has engaged in misconduct or negligence in employment 
that may put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
a. Applicant worked for Company A from October 2009 to April 2012. In her 
answer, Applicant states:  
 
I admit I was let go by [Company A] in April 2012. I left under the 
perception and understanding it was a mutual agreement. I had been 
working for the company for over two years when the working environment 
became hostile and stressful to the point I felt that I was being 
disrespected and humiliated. (Item 1.) 
 
An Investigative Request for Employment Data and Supervisor Information is 
contained in the file. (Item 4.) This form is dated December 1, 2014, and signed by 
Applicant’s supervisor, who stated Applicant was discharged for “unfavorable 
employment or conduct,” and was not eligible for rehiring. She further states the reason 
for Applicant’s discharge was, “Repeated error [sic] which could jeopardize patients’ 
wellbeing.” Applicant did not contest the stated reason for her discharge. The supervisor 
marked the form in Block 7 not recommending Applicant for a security clearance. 
 
Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from a co-worker at Company A. 
The writer states, “She [Applicant] was always hard working, great customer service, 
professional and dependable.” 
 
 
 
 
3 
b. Applicant worked at Company B from October 2013 to May 2014. In her 
answer, Applicant states: 
 
I admit to have discontinued my employment with [Company B] in May 
2014, but not for gross misconduct and company policy violations as the 
Statement of Reasons suggest. I was still in the 90 day probationary with 
a 30 day extension when I was let go. (Item 1.) 
 
An Investigative Request for Employment Data and Supervisor Information is 
contained in the file from this employer as well. (Item 5.) This form is dated November 
25, 2014, and signed by Applicant’s supervisor, who stated Applicant was discharged 
for “unfavorable employment or conduct,” and was not eligible for rehiring. She went on 
to state Applicant was, “Terminated due to gross misconduct & company policy 
violations.” It is noted that both parties agree Applicant worked for Company B for 
approximately eight months. A 120-day probationary period would be shorter, only 
approximately four months. 
 
Paragraph 2 – Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for CAC 
credentialing because she has made material false statements during the employment 
process. 
 
 Applicant filled out a Declaration for Federal Employment (Form 306) on 
November 17, 2014. Item 12 of that form asks Applicant, “During the last 5 years, have 
you been fired from any job for any reason, did you quit after being told that you would 
be fired, did you leave any job by mutual agreement because of specific problems, or 
were you debarred from Federal employment by the Office of Personnel Management 
or any other Federal agency? If “Yes,” use Item 16 to provide the date, explanation of 
the problem, reason for leaving, and the employer’s name and address.” (Emphasis in 
original.) Applicant answered, “No.” This was a false answer to a relevant question 
pertaining to Applicant’s employment record. 
 
 Applicant denied this allegation stating, “My intention was never to mislead or 
falsify a document.” Based on her responses to the other allegations, Applicant appears 
to be arguing that she did not know the adverse nature of her discharge from 
employment from Company A or Company B. The question asks for information 
concerning an applicant leaving a job “by mutual agreement because of specific 
problems.” In relation to Company A, Applicant certainly knew she had employment 
problems there, and left by mutual consent. With Company B, she left after the 
probationary period, not during it, as she states. Applicant was under an affirmative duty 
to tell the Government about the reasons she left both jobs.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility. 
  
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) The 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) The recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) The individual’s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) Contributing external conditions; and (6) The absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 – Misconduct or Negligence in Employment 
 
1. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in 
employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s employment misconduct or negligence may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include: 
 
(1) A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, disruptive, 
violent, or other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to people, 
property, or information systems. 
 
(2) A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations in the workplace which put 
people, property or information at risk. 
 
(3) A documented history of misusing workplace information systems to 
view, download, or distribute pornography. 
 
(4) Violation of written or recorded commitments to protect information 
made to an employer, such as breach(es) of confidentiality or the release 
of proprietary or other information. 
 
(5) Failure to comply with rules or regulations for the safeguarding of 
classified, sensitive, or other protected information. 
 
c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk include: 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current trustworthiness or good judgment relating 
to the safety of people and proper safeguarding of property and 
information systems. 
 
(2) The individual was not adequately warned that the conduct was 
unacceptable and could not reasonably be expected to know that the 
conduct was wrong. 
 
(3) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the behavior. 
 
(4) The individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial training 
and has since demonstrated a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
information-handling or security responsibilities. 
 
Documentation provided by Company A indicates that Applicant engaged in 
conduct involving rule violations, which potentially put people at risk. At Company B, 
she engaged in gross misconduct and violated company rules. I find that Disqualifying 
Conditions Supplemental Adjudicative Standards Paragraphs 1.b.(1), and 1.b.(2) apply. 
 
Applicant’s conduct occurred two and four years ago in a workplace environment. 
Her dismissal from Company A was directly related to patient safety. Applicant did not 
submit sufficient information to overcome the concerns raised by the statements of her 
 
6 
former supervisors. None of the mitigating conditions are established. I find Paragraph 1 
of the SOR against Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2- Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud 
 
3. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, 
deception or fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material, 
intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or 
information provided during the employment process for the current or 
prior federal or contract employment (e.g., on the employment application 
or other employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during 
interviews). 
 
c. Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk include: 
 
(1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. 
 
(2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent and 
was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation. 
 
 Applicant’s explanations for her failure to tell the Government the truth about the 
circumstances of her dismissals from Company A and Company B, do not withstand 
scrutiny. With regard to Company A, she admits leaving by mutual agreement, but does 
not attempt to dispute that it was due to her misconduct. She left Company B at least 
two months after her probationary period ended. Even if the dismissal had occurred 
during the probationary period, that does not preclude the fact that her misconduct led 
to the company’s action. I find that Disqualifying Conditions 3.a and 3.b apply. Applicant 
has not mitigated her falsifications, and I find Paragraph 2 of the SOR against Applicant. 
 
I have examined Applicant’s conduct in relation to the general adjudicative 
guidance contained in Enclosure 4 of DoDI 5200.46, as described above. None of those 
mitigating conditions apply to the facts of this case. Based on my analysis of the facts 
as related to the guidance in DoDI 5200.46, I conclude Applicant’s request for CAC 
eligibility should be denied.    
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Misconduct or Negligence in Employment: AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Material, Intentional False Statement:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:      Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
