 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  CAC Case No. 15-06088 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 20, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Goldstein, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access Card 
(CAC) issuance pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive–12 (HSPD-12). 
DOD was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant CAC eligibility. The action is based on the Adjudicative Standards found in 
DoD Instruction 5200.46, DoD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the 
Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and made pursuant to the 
procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive). The concerns raised under the Adjudicative Standards of DoDI 5200.46 are: 
Paragraph 1.a-Misconduct or Negligence in Employment.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 27, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 29, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 29, 2016, scheduling the hearing for March 23, 2016. The hearing was 
 
2 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. GE 1, GE 
2, and GE 4 were admitted without objection. GE 3 was admitted over Applicant’s 
objection. The Government also offered a letter it sent to Applicant along with GE 1 
through 4, marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through I, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. The record 
was left open until April 6, 2016, for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. On March 
28, 2016, Applicant submitted two emails, with attachments, which were marked AE J 
and AE K. Department Counsel had no objections to AE J and AE K, and they were 
admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 30, 2016. Based 
on the record evidence and testimony presented in this case, Common Access Card 
eligibility is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old veterinarian. She has been employed by a 
Government contractor in Afghanistan since 2014. She is divorced and has no children. 
(GE 1; Tr. 38-39.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s employment misconduct or negligence raised 
concerns under DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards. Specifically, it alleged that Applicant was fired by three different employers in 
March 2011, January 2013, and June 2014. Applicant admitted subparagraphs 1.a and 
1.c. She denied 1.b, in part.  
 
 In March 2011 Applicant’s employment was terminated by her employer, as 
alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a. This termination was retaliatory in nature and 
occurred after Applicant reported her employer to a state board for violations of state 
law. It was the subject of law suits and ended in a confidential settlement, as 
documented by Applicant in her post-hearing exhibits. (GE 2; AE K; Tr. 23-25, 29-31.) 
 
 In January 2013 Applicant’s employment was terminated by a second employer 
for disregarding the employer’s policies, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.b. Her 
employer, a veterinary clinic, had a policy that pets were not allowed in the staff doctors’ 
office during work hours. Applicant admitted that she violated this policy once when the 
heater was broken in the staff-run kennels and the temperatures were near freezing, 
and at other times to feed her dog for brief periods of time. She acknowledged that she 
was aware of the policy, but chose to disregard it. She also acknowledged her 
unprofessional conduct in July 2012 relating to a mock license she created as a joke 
while employed in this position. (GE 2; GE 3; AE H; Tr. 26-27, 31-35.) According to a 
letter from the personnel manager at this employer: 
 
Though there were rules that were disregarded toward the end of 
[Applicant’s] employment, it was never anything that would cause harm, 
physically or emotionally, to any of the team members or patients. There 
was no vocal blatant disregard for the rules, rather a disagreement 
involving a protocol that was ultimately the reason she was terminated. 
 
3 
This protocol has since been adjusted and I do not believe that [Applicant] 
would have been terminated if she were currently employed. (AE C.) 
 
 In June 2014 Applicant’s employment was terminated by a third veterinary clinic, 
as alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.c. Applicant testified that the causes for this 
termination varied, but cited disagreements with her employer’s minimalistic approach 
to the care of stray animals; an unhappy referring hospital; and her employer’s critiques 
of her unprofessional appearance, to include coming to work with wet hair and wearing 
no make-up. (GE 2; GE 4; AE G; Tr. 28, 35-38.) 
 
Applicant testified: 
 
A lot of things in my life have changed. I learned a lot, actually, through 
these different employments – things about myself and other people. I feel 
that I really have made an effort to correct some of my more immature and 
deficient behaviors . . . as well as trying to maintain appropriate medical 
and ethical standards. (Tr. 41-42.) 
  
 Applicant presented six letters of recommendation, including one from her direct 
supervisor since 2014. He indicated, “I consider her a highly professional and 
trustworthy individual with no record of disciplinary issues.” (AE J.) The vice president of 
her current employer also wrote a letter on Applicant’s behalf, noting that she is 
trustworthy and loyal. (AE A.) An army deputy commander that Applicant worked with in 
Afghanistan indicated Applicant was extremely meticulous, honest, and had no security 
violations. (AE B.) Additionally, Applicant presented a certificate of training in 
operational security.  
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The HSPD-12 
credentialing standards are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic 
Adjudicative Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The 
overriding factor for all of these eligibility criteria is unacceptable risk. The decision must 
be arrived at by applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly 
consistent with the national interest.    
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1.) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 1.a 
 
 DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
expresses concerns pertaining to misconduct or negligence in employment. Paragraph 
1 of this section states: 
  
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in 
employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.   
 
a. An individual’s employment misconduct or negligence may 
put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
 The disqualifying conditions set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, 
Subparagraph 1.b that are raised by Appellant’s misconduct or negligence in 
employment are: 
 
(1) A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, disruptive, 
violent, or other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to people, 
property, or information systems; and 
 
(2) A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations in the workplace which put 
people, property or information at risk. 
 
 Applicant was terminated twice by different employers for misconduct, in 2013 
and 2014. In those instances, she knowingly and willfully violated her employer’s rules 
when she disagreed with her employer’s policies. Her 2011 termination was retaliatory 
in nature and does not appear to be a direct result of any misconduct. As such, it does 
not raise a significant concern. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 Potentially mitigating conditions are set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, 
Appendix 2, Subparagraph 1.c. The conditions that could apply to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by the evidence in this case are: 
 
5 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current trustworthiness or good judgment relating 
to the safety of people and proper safeguarding of property and 
information systems; and 
 
(4) The individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial training 
and has since demonstrated a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
information-handling or security responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant’s misconduct was minor and isolated to two periods of employment. 
She has matured since accepting a position with a Government contractor. She has no 
record of disciplinary actions with her current employer and is considered a highly 
professional and trustworthy individual. Her past misconduct with two previous 
employers does not cast doubt on her current trustworthiness or good judgment relating 
to the safety of people and proper safeguarding of property and information systems. 
Further, she demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of information-
handling or security responsibilities. The concerns are mitigated. 
 
Further Mitigation 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, Paragraph 1, 
Guidance For Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the 
following: 
 
a. As established in Reference (g), credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c).  
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious 
the conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient 
information concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained 
to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property or information systems. 
 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
6 
 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural 
conditions may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions 
are currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
     (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
  
    (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not 
just alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
 As noted above, Applicant provided details concerning the three alleged 
terminations. She documented that her 2011 termination was in retaliation for reporting 
her employer’s workplace violations to a state agency. The other two terminations 
occurred over two years ago, and were the result of minor rule violations. She has 
acknowledged her improper behavior. She has now matured and has demonstrated 
positive behavior in her current position, as documented in her letters of support. She 
demonstrated sufficient rehabilitation. For these reasons, Applicant’s request for CAC 
eligibility should be granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Misconduct or Negligence in Employment: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 
7 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
