 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 16-01524 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Clarice Attaway Allen, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns 
raised under the criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. 
CAC eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility under 
the adjudicative standards of criminal or dishonest conduct. Applicant responded to the 
SOR on August 5, 2016, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
Government amended the SOR on October 6, 2016, by adding another allegation. 
Applicant responded to the additional allegation on October 14, 2016. 
 
The case was originally assigned to me on December 1, 2016. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 20, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for January 26, 2017. A continuance was granted at 
Applicant’s request. The case was reassigned to me on May 10, 2017. DOHA issued 
another notice of hearing on May 16, 2017, scheduling the hearing for June 27, 2017. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
2 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, which 
were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. The deadline was extended several times at Applicant’s request. 
He submitted documents that I have marked AE G and H and admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 7, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2014. He served on active duty in the U.S. military 
from 1991 until he received a general under honorable conditions discharge in 1995. He 
is a high school graduate. He is twice married and divorced. He married his second wife 
in 2001, and they divorced in 2005. They continued to live together in the house that 
was awarded to her in the divorce decree. He considered it a common-law marriage 
that ended in 2013. He has a daughter from his first marriage.1  
 
 Applicant’s criminal history includes four incidents. He was arrested in 2002 for 
assault causing bodily injury on a family member. Applicant’s second wife told the 
deputy that Applicant pushed her onto a bed and held her down. She kicked him off and 
went to the door where Applicant shoved her out the door from behind. She told the 
deputy that she was afraid because Applicant broke her nose in the past. The deputy 
noted that she had scratches on her leg. Applicant told the deputy that she initiated the 
incident, threw things, and kicked at him. He grabbed her, pushed her out the door, and 
locked it. Applicant then called the sheriff’s office. Applicant admitted that he broke her 
nose in the past, but did so in self-defense.2 
 
 Applicant’s second wife contacted the investigator a few days after the incident 
and stated that she wanted to drop the charges against Applicant. After conferring with 
the county attorney, the investigation was dropped without charges being filed against 
Applicant.3 
 
 Applicant’s testimony about the incident was consistent with what he told the 
deputy. He testified that he broke his second wife’s nose after she grabbed his wallet. 
They were struggling over the wallet when he punched her, breaking her nose.4 
 
 The second incident occurred in 2007 when Applicant was arrested and charged 
with criminal mischief. Applicant testified that he was walking in the crosswalk of a 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19-20, 22, 26-27, 46, 50-51, 70-71; GE 1, 2; AE C. 
 
2 Tr. at 20-21; Applicant’s response to SOR GE 3-5; AE H. The broken-nose incident was not specifically 
alleged in the SOR. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. It may be considered in assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in the whole-person analysis. 
 
3 Tr. at 21-22; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-5; AE H. 
 
4 Tr. at 51-54. 
 
3 
department store parking lot when a woman bumped him with her car. She called him a 
****ing moron and drove off. He ran after her; she stopped suddenly; and he slammed 
into her car. He got angry and kicked the car. He stated that he believed the damage to 
her car was from when she hit him. He paid the damages, and the charge was 
dismissed.5 
 
 The third incident occurred in 2009 when Applicant was arrested and charged 
with the felony offenses of aggravated assault with a deadly weapon and obstruction or 
retaliation. His second wife told the deputy that Applicant came home drunk at about 
11:00 p.m. He told her that she had five seconds to get out or he was going to kick her 
out. He then slapped and hit her. He pulled her hair while holding her down on the floor. 
She reached for a Bowie knife to hit him. He took the knife off her and hit her with the 
handle of the knife in the back of the head. While the deputy was placing him in custody 
Applicant said to his wife: “*****, you had better be gone when I get out or they’re going 
to need a body bag.” The deputy further reported that while Applicant was being 
transported to jail, he stated that he was going to kick his wife’s *** when he was 
released from jail. The charges were dismissed about four months later.6 
 
 Applicant testified that his second wife was mentally unstable. She was jealous 
and did not take her medication. He described the incident as “she assaulted [him] with 
a knife, and [he] injured her when [he] took it away from her.” He also stated that she 
initiated the incident by hitting him. He stated that he hit her with his fist about three or 
four times as she came at him with the knife. He stated the butt of the knife hit the back 
of her head when he yanked it out of her hand. He admitted that he made the 
comments about the body bag and that he was going to kick her *** when he was 
released from jail. 7  
 
 The fourth incident occurred in June 2014. Applicant was living with a woman 
and her children. The deputies were called to the house by the woman’s pregnant 
daughter who complained that Applicant pushed her in the stomach after an argument 
between Applicant and her sister. The daughter stated that she went to her room, but 
Applicant followed her. She told him that he could not enter the room, but he attempted 
to walk through her to the room. She pushed him slightly, and he shoved her in the 
stomach with both hands. The second daughter provided a similar statement. The 
deputy noticed slight redness on the pregnant daughter’s stomach.8 
 
 The pregnant daughter, her fiancé, and her sister told the deputy that about two 
to three months before the June 2014 incident, Applicant slapped and choked the 
pregnant daughter and punched her fiancé in the face. She told the deputy that she did 
not want to file criminal charges against Applicant; she only wanted him to leave her 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 22-25; GE 4, 5; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, H. 
 
6 Tr. at 22, 25-26, 37; GE 3-5; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B, H. 
 
7 Tr. at 19-20, 25-32, 55-59. 
 
8 Tr. at 33-36; GE 3; AE H. 
 
4 
alone. An incident report was generated for assault by contact and assault causing 
bodily injury-impeding breathing or circulation, but no charges were filed.9 
 
 Applicant stated that he was living with the woman as a roommate and that they 
were not cohabitating. He admitted drinking during the June 2014 incident. He testified 
that he was assaulted by the two girls, and they jumped in front of him so that he could 
not pass. He denied hitting the girl during this incident. He stated that he was not 
arrested or charged. He moved out of the house that night and ended his relationship 
with the family.10 
 
 Applicant stated the incident with the two daughters and the fiancé happened 
after one daughter and her mother were arguing. Applicant asked her why she acted 
that way. The daughter told him it was none of his **** business. He told the daughter 
that if she talked to him like that he would slap her. She then “hit [him] with closed fists, 
and [he] hit her with [an] open hand.” He had her in a headlock, when her mother and 
fiancé jumped on him. The fiancé had Applicant in a choke hold, and Applicant started 
choking the daughter to stop her from hitting him in the private area. When the fiancé let 
go of the choke hold, Applicant hit him.11 
 
 Applicant completed an anger-management program in March 2017. His 
daughter stated that Applicant’s second wife was jealous, angry, and had to be 
institutionalized for a period. Applicant’s arrests in 2002, 2007, and 2009, and his 2014 
incident report were expunged by the district court on December 15, 2017.12  
 
Applicant submitted numerous letters attesting to his excellent job performance. 
He is praised for his trustworthiness, dependability, work ethic, dedication, patriotism, 
and honesty.13 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 
(HSPD-12); DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidance for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014; and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
                                                          
9 GE 3; AE H. 
 
10 Tr. at 33-38, 60-61, 64-69. 
 
11 Tr. at 61-64. 
 
12 Tr. at 38-39; AE D-H. 
 
13 AE F. 
 
5 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1)  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC eligibility concern and 
may be disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility;  
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
 
6 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(5) Actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that 
poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled 
facilities and federally-controlled information systems. For example, 
convictions for sexual assault may indicate that granting a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk to the life and safety of persons on U.S. Government 
facilities. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history as reflected by the incidents in 2002, 2007, 2009, and 
2014 is sufficient to establish the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur;  
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
Applicant was never convicted of any of the offenses. His arrests in 2002, 2007, 
and 2009, and the 2014 incident report were expunged by the district court on 
December 15, 2017. He denied committing most of the underlying offenses, stating his 
second wife was angry, jealous, and mentally unstable; the alleged victims were 
untruthful; he acted in self-defense; or he was provoked. He attended anger 
management.   
 
I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible. The common denominator in the 
incidents is not Applicant’s second wife; there were other victims and witnesses. The 
common denominator is Applicant and his anger. I find sufficient evidence that he 
committed the underlying offenses even without a conviction. I am not convinced 
Applicant is rehabilitated or that additional criminal conduct is unlikely to recur.  
 
Applicant has not mitigated his well-established pattern of criminal conduct. I am 
unable to determine that criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant has not 
convinced me that he does not pose an unacceptable risk. I also considered the factors 
in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1. 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility poses an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
 
      
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
