 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  CAC Case No. 16-01521 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
January 18, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 1, 2016, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access Card 
(CAC) issuance pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive–12 (HSPD-12). 
DoD was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant CAC eligibility. The action is based on the Adjudicative Standards found in 
DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5200.46, DoD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Issuing the Common Access Card (CAC), dated September 9, 2014, and made 
pursuant to the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive). The concerns raised under the Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards of DoDI 5200.46 are: Paragraph 2.a (criminal or dishonest conduct).   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2016 (Answer), with Attachments 1 ~3, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on December 27, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on February 6, 2017, scheduling the hearing for February 23, 2017. 
The hearing was convened via video teleconference, as scheduled. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 4, and they were admitted without objection. Applicant 
 
2 
testified and called a witness to testify on his own behalf. The transcript of the hearing 
(TR) was received on March 3, 2017. The record was left open until March 24, 2017, for 
the receipt of additional exhibits. Applicant offered Attachments 5~8 as exhibits, which 
were admitted without objection. Based on the record evidence and testimony 
presented in this case, Common Access Card eligibility is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. (GX 1 at page 4.) He is married and has four children. 
(Attachment 5.) 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleged, under the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards concerning 
criminal conduct that Applicant should be disqualified from CAC eligibility because: 
Applicant was arrested three times, and convicted at least once. This was initially 
supported by a Record Report from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), but is not 
supported by the extensive court documents and witness statements provided by 
Applicant. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 1.c.1 In December of 2009, Applicant was arrested for, and subsequently 
charged with, “Occupant Concealed Carry Weapon Vehicle, and Possession . . . 
Dangerous Weapon.” This was Applicant’s first arrest, and there is no evidence of a 
Previous Felony Conviction, as alleged. (Attachments 5 and 6.) Applicant had a “knife . . 
. in the center console” of his vehicle, and a firearm under his front passenger seat. (TR 
at page 25 line 5 to page 46 line 5.) 
 
 1.b. As a result of a conviction for these two charges, on October 5, 2010, 
Applicant turned himself into a Sheriff’s Department Office, and was incarcerated 
overnight. (Id., and Attachment 2.) He was not arrested on this date, as alleged in the 
SOR. 
 
 1.a. In June of 2014, Applicant’s son appeared at school with a mark on his face. 
When asked by school authorities how received the mark on his face, Applicant’s son 
said his father hit him. His son, however, failed to mention that the mark was the result 
of an accident during Karate training at “Open Spar Night”. (TR at page 46 line 6 to 
page 49 line 25, and Attachment 8.) Nothing further occurred as a result of this 
accident. (Attachment 1.)  
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The HSPD-12 
credentialing standards are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic 
                                                          
1 These allegations will be addressed in chronological order. 
 
3 
Adjudicative Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The 
overriding factor for all of these eligibility criteria is unacceptable risk. The decision must 
be arrived at by applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly 
consistent with the national interest.    
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1.) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 2.a 
 
 DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
expresses concerns pertaining to criminal or dishonest conduct. Paragraph 2 of this 
section states: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.   
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack 
of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about his or her reliability or 
trustworthiness and may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or dishonest 
conduct may put people, property, or information systems at 
risk. 
 
 
4 
 The disqualifying conditions set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, 
Subparagraph 2.b that are raised by Appellant’s criminal conduct are: 
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; and 
 
(2) Charges or admissions of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of weapon-related offenses in 2009. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 Potentially mitigating conditions are set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, 
Appendix 2, Subparagraph 2.c. The conditions that could apply to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by the evidence in this case are: 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant admitted the one criminal incident that occurred seven years prior to 
his hearing, for which he spent one day in jail. Applicant has met his burden to establish 
mitigation under the conditions in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, 
Subparagraph 2.c. 
 
Further Mitigation 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, Paragraph 1, 
Guidance For Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the 
following: 
 
a. As established in Reference (g) [HSPD-12], credentialing adjudication 
considers whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to 
federally controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate 
 
5 
determination to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a 
credentialing determination of the PSI [personal security investigation] 
must be made after consideration of applicable credentialing standards in 
Reference (c) [U.S. Office of Personal Management Memorandum, “Final 
Credentialing Standards for Issuing Personal Identity Verification Cards 
Under HSPD-12,” July 31 2008.]   
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious 
the conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient 
information concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained 
to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property or information systems. 
 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural 
conditions may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions 
are currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
     (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
  
    (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not 
just alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
 
6 
 Applicant presented evidence of good character through the statements of his 
former attorney, his wife, and his Site Manager. (Attachments 5 and 8.) I find that he 
has demonstrated that he has the requisite judgment to have CAC eligibility. Applicant’s 
request for CAC eligibility should be granted. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  SOR Paragraph 1:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a~1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
