 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
REDACTED )  CAC Case No. 16-00004 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
by inaccurate information provided by her former employer during a routine employment 
check. Applicant resigned her position with her former employer due to a breakdown in 
the relationship with her boss, not due to misconduct or other issues that would raise a 
concern. She honestly responded to questions on a federal employment form. 
Continuing her eligibility for a CAC will not create an unreasonable risk to U.S. 
personnel, property, or information systems. CAC eligibility is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 21, 2016, pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 
(HSPD-12), the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant detailing concerns about her continued eligibility for a CAC. This action was 
taken under DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5200.46, DoD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Issuing the Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014 
(Instruction), and in accordance with the established administrative process set out in 
DoD Directive (DoDD) 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992) (Directive).  
 
2 
The CAC credentialing concerns cited in the SOR are:  Basic Adjudicative 
Standards (BAS) ¶ 6 (misuse of information systems or failure to follow rules, 
procedures, guidelines, or regulations pertaining to information systems), Supplemental 
Adjudicative Standards (SAS) ¶ 1.a (employment misconduct or negligence), and SAS ¶ 
3 (deliberate falsification, deception, or fraud).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 2, 2016, and requested a hearing. On 
November 17, 2016, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held.1 
Applicant testified at the hearing, and Government Exhibits 1 – 5 and Applicant’s 
Exhibits A – F were admitted into the administrative record without objection. The 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on November 28, 2016. 
 
 On December 29, 2016, after reviewing the transcript, the record evidence, and 
the parties’ post-hearing submissions,2 I advised Department Counsel and Applicant 
that the matter appeared appropriate for resolution through summary disposition. On 
January 4, 2017, Department Counsel objected and requested a full decision.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, a high school graduate, currently works as a patent paralegal in the 
staff judge advocate’s (SJA) office for a U.S. military installation. She was hired by the 
SJA’s office as a contract employee in July 2015, on a five-year renewable contract and 
was subsequently issued a CAC. Her CAC does not expire until July 2018. Applicant 
needs a CAC to enter the military installation where her office is located. Her current 
and former supervisor provided favorable recommendations.4 
 
Applicant’s current supervisor writes that Applicant’s job duties include “creating 
patent application folders, accessing the U.S. Patent & Trademark’s Office publically 
accessible database … and [performing] other administrative tasks . . .” She goes on to 
state their “office is not involved in handling any classified work or documents.”5  
 
 Before being hired by the SJA’s office, Applicant worked for about 19 years in a 
state county prosecutor’s office (CPO). She started at the CPO as a receptionist and 
received repeated promotions over the years. Her last position with the CPO was as 
victim-witness coordinator for felony-level sexual offenses. This was an appointed 
position by the county prosecutor and Applicant was an at-will employee.6  
                                                          
1 Prehearing correspondence and the notice of hearing are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits 
(App. Exh.) I and II, respectively. 
 
2 App. Exh. III and IV. 
 
3 App. Exh. V.  
 
4 Tr. 27-29, 64-65; Exhibits E, F. 
 
5 Exhibit F. 
 
6 Tr. 29-30.  
 
3 
Applicant started experiencing problems at the CPO in about 2014, when her 
support for the former county prosecutor in his bid to become a judge was revealed. 
The new county prosecutor had made it clear to the CPO staff that he did not want 
anyone in his office supporting his former political rival in the rival’s bid for judicial office.  
 
At around same time, Applicant was handling a case involving a nine-year-old girl 
who was raped by her brother and became pregnant as a result of the sexual assault. 
Applicant refused the county prosecutor’s request that she obtain a letter of medical 
necessity before releasing victim-witness funding to pay for the medical procedure to 
terminate the pregnancy.7  
 
Afterwards, Applicant’s relationship with the county prosecutor, which up to that 
point had been good, soured markedly. She made the mistake of venting her 
frustrations to another employee using her official work email. She regrets making 
derogatory comments about the county prosecutor in some of these emails.8  
 
 Applicant disclosed at the hearing that she used her office computer and official 
work email to help a deputy county prosecutor remodel a bedroom in her (the deputy’s) 
home. Applicant discussed the remodel with the deputy via her work e-mail and 
purchased furniture for the deputy using her work computer. The deputy paid Applicant 
for her help. She was unaware of any policy, rule, or regulation prohibiting the use of 
CPO information systems for this purpose. She testified that after 19 years at the CPO 
and having previously helped the deputy county prosecutor redecorate other rooms in 
the deputy’s house, she was “lulled” into the belief that her use of the CPO information 
systems in this manner was appropriate.9 
 
In about May 2015, Applicant had a meeting with the county prosecutor and two 
of his top deputies. She was handed a letter proposing her removal based on an 
internal investigation that purportedly found she improperly accessed sensitive law-
enforcement databases, or allowed someone else to use her credentials to access the 
law-enforcement databases. Applicant disputed this letter because she would not and 
could not have engaged in the alleged misconduct, as she did not have access to the 
databases at issue, except for one and her access to this one database was limited.10  
 
The two deputy county prosecutors present at the meeting confirmed Applicant’s 
account as to the limited nature of her access to the law-enforcement databases. It then 
appeared to Applicant that the county prosecutor reconsidered his decision to fire her, 
because the serious accusations in the letter were unfounded. He then showed 
Applicant some of the disparaging emails that she had sent about him. Applicant 
recognized that her relationship with her boss could not be saved and, at some point 
                                                          
7 Tr. 42-45.  
 
8 Tr. 22; 42-45. 
 
9 Tr. 21-22, 30-32, 42-50. 
 
10 Tr. 20-21, 48-52.  
 
4 
down the line, he would likely get rid of her. She had also grown weary of going to work 
every day and dealing with the toxic environment that her workplace had become over 
the course of the last year. She offered to resign in return for the county prosecutor’s 
agreement that her employment record would not be marred and would accurately 
reflect her favorable 19-year tenure. The county prosecutor agreed and Applicant 
submitted her resignation.11 
 
Applicant was out of work for two months before being hired by her current 
employer in July 2015. She interviewed for the paralegal job opening with the SJA’s 
office on a Thursday and was offered the job to begin work the following Monday. She 
filled out and submitted numerous employment-related forms after taking the job offer.12  
 
In August 2015, a month after starting at the SJA’s office, Applicant filled out and 
submitted a questionnaire for non-sensitive positions and a declaration for federal 
employment.13 She disclosed her employment with the CPO on the questionnaire.14 
She was asked a number of questions on the federal employment form, including: 
 
12. During the last 5 years, have you been fired from any job for any 
reason, did you quit after being told that you would be fired, did you leave 
any job by mutual agreement because of specific problems, or were you 
debarred from Federal employment by the Office of Personnel 
Management or any other Federal agency? 
 
Applicant, who genuinely believed her resignation from the CPO was due to the 
breakdown in her professional relationship with the county prosecutor, not the false 
allegations in the letter proposing her removal, answered the question “No.”15  
 
After Applicant submitted the federal employment forms, the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) conducted a routine employment check. OPM sent the CPO an 
investigative request form for employment data (INV Form 41). A CPO human 
resources (HR) representative filled out the form and indicated that Applicant “resigned 
after informed of possible discharge.”16 The proposed removal letter, with the false 
allegation that Applicant improperly accessed law enforcement databases, was sent to 
the federal government by the CPO.17 
                                                          
11 Tr. 20-26, 31-35, 45-52; Exhibits A - D. 
 
12 Tr. 23-24, 29. 
 
13 The record is silent as to whether Applicant submitted the declaration for federal employment in 
connection with a potential federal civilian service position. DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 6.a(1), provides 
new civilian and contractor applicants denied a CAC a different avenue of appeal.  
 
14 Exhibit 1. 
 
15 Exhibit 2; Tr. 24, 39-40. 
 
16 Exhibit 3; Tr. 34-35. 
 
17 Exhibit 4. Directive, E3.1.20 (such documents are inadmissible upon objection by a party).  
 
5 
In March 2016, DoD adjudicators issued the SOR based on the information OPM 
was provided by the CPO. SOR allegations 1.a and 2.a state that Applicant was 
terminated from her employment with the CPO for abusing the CPO’s e-mail system 
and sensitive law enforcement databases.  
 
In May 2016, Applicant submitted her Answer to the SOR. With her Answer, 
Applicant provided an official CPO personnel document, which reflects that she 
voluntarily resigned from her former position with the CPO. Her resignation was 
accepted by one of the deputy county prosecutor’s present at the May 2015 meeting 
and approved by the county prosecutor.18  
 
In April 2016, Applicant contacted the other deputy county prosecutor present at 
the May 2015 meeting. The deputy, in a text message, confirmed Applicant’s 
recollection that she (Applicant) resigned from the CPO.19 
 
In June 2016, the county prosecutor and Department Counsel had a 
conversation. The county prosecutor told Department Counsel that, following a second 
internal investigation, it was determined that Applicant “did not personally or directly 
access any other databases or resources, or allow others to use her credentials for 
such access.” (Exhibit A (emphasis added)). 
 
The county prosecutor sent Department Counsel an e-mail summarizing the 
substance of their conversation. The CPO forwarded this e-mail to Applicant and it was 
admitted into the administrative record as Exhibit A. The e-mail is set forth below:  
 
-----Original Message----- 
From: [New County Prosecutor] 
Sent: Monday, June 13, 2016 3:31 PM 
To: 'Petcher, Rhett Mr, DoD OGC' <redacted> 
Subject: RE: DoD Security Clearance Investigation inquiry 
 
Mr. Petcher, 
 
This email will confirm the substance of my responses to your inquiry by 
phone today.  First, the only direct access of [CPO] resources and 
databases by [Applicant] was her use of [CPO] email to conduct personal 
business for profit.  This was confirmed by [CPO] and HR review of her 
[CPO] email account.  She did not personally or directly access any other 
databases or resources, or allow others to use her credentials for such 
access.  This investigation did not reveal direct access by [Applicant] of 
any other databases. I hope this helps clarify matters.20 
                                                          
18 Tr. 21; Exhibit C (same as Attachment to Answer).  
 
19 Exhibit B. 
 
20 Exhibit A at 1-2. Department Counsel did not object to the exhibits admission on authenticity grounds or 
raise a claim of privilege. The record is silent as to whether Department Counsel and the county 
 
6 
In preparation for the hearing, Applicant attempted to gather more information 
and evidence. The new county prosecutor’s chief of staff confided in Applicant that the 
proposed removal letter was mistakenly placed in her personnel file and forwarded to 
the federal government. He promised to contact the county prosecutor to see how they 
could remedy the situation. Shortly after this conversation, the CPO’s HR office refused 
to let Applicant see her employment records and her former colleagues and co-workers 
stopped returning her calls.21 Applicant unequivocally denies deliberately falsifying her 
declaration for federal employment.22  
 
Policies 
 
As established in HSPD-12, CAC “credentialing adjudication considers whether 
or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally controlled facilities and/or 
information systems.” Instruction, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1.a. The Instruction recognizes that 
each CAC case is unique and a fair and impartial overall commonsense decision should 
examine all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The “overriding factor” or standard in all CAC adjudications is “unacceptable 
risk.” Id. This term is specifically defined by the Instruction as follows: 
 
A threat to the life, safety, or health of employees, contractors, vendors, or 
visitors; to the U.S. Government physical assets or information systems; to 
personal property; to records, including classified, privileged, proprietary, 
financial, and medical records; or to the privacy rights established by The 
Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, or other law that is deemed 
unacceptable when making risk management determinations.23 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”24 An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Adjudicative factors to be applied consistently in all CAC cases include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
prosecutor discussed other key aspects of the case, including whether the new allegation that Applicant 
purportedly misused CPO information systems to conduct personal business for profit extended beyond 
the remodeling work she did for the deputy county prosecutor. Compulsory process is not available in 
DOHA proceedings and neither side called Mr. Petcher as a witness, which would have likely 
necessitated a different Department Counsel to be detailed to the matter to represent the Government.  
 
21 Tr. 24-25; Attachment to Answer.  
 
22 Tr. 26, 39-40. 
 
23 See Instruction, Glossary. See also CAC Case No. 15-00898 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2016) 
 
24 See also CAC Case No. 15-06091 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 10, 2017) (Board’s past decisions “interpreting 
and analyzing” procedural guidance in DoDD 5220.6 should be followed by DOHA judges in CAC cases). 
 
7 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. Instruction, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1.b. Any 
reasonable doubt concerning an applicant’s CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor 
of protecting the Government’s vital interests in making certain that only persons that do 
not pose an unacceptable risk are granted a CAC.  
 
Analysis 
 
Employment Misconduct or Negligence 
 
 SOR 1.a alleges that Applicant’s “employment with the CPO was terminated for 
abuse of [her] employer’s e-mail system and databases, to include [list of specific 
sensitive law enforcement databases.]” This allegation raises the CAC credentialing 
concern set forth in SAS ¶ 1: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe,25 based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in 
employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
 The following disqualifying and mitigating conditions were potentially raised by 
the evidence: 
 
1.b(1): A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, disruptive, 
violent, or other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to people, 
property, or information systems; 
 
1.b(2): A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations in the workplace which 
put people, property or information at risk; 
 
1.b(4): Violation of written or recorded commitments to protect 
information made to an employer, such as breach(es) of confidentiality or 
the release of proprietary or other information; 
 
1.b(5): Failure to comply with rules or regulations for the safeguarding of 
classified, sensitive, or other protected information; 
 
1.c(1): The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current trustworthiness or good judgment 
relating to the safety of people and proper safeguarding of property and 
information systems; 
 
                                                          
25 A reasonable basis to believe occurs when a disinterested observer, with knowledge of the same facts 
and circumstances, would reasonably reach the same conclusion. Instruction, Glossary. 
 
8 
1.c(2): The individual was not adequately warned that the conduct was 
unacceptable and could not reasonably be expected to know that the 
conduct was wrong; and 
 
1.c(4): The individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial 
training and has since demonstrated a positive attitude toward the 
discharge of information-handling or security responsibilities. 
 
 None of the disqualifying conditions apply. Applicant refuted the serious claim of 
employee misconduct alleged in the SOR, namely, that she had abused her position by 
directly or indirectly improperly accessing sensitive law-enforcement databases. 
Applicant provided documentation showing that a subsequent CPO investigation 
substantiated her statements during the May 2015 meeting and her testimony that she 
did not engage in such serious employee misconduct.26 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant did not resign because of the unfounded allegations of 
employee misconduct. Rather, she submitted her resignation after realizing that her 
relationship with the county prosecutor was irreversibly broken due to her support for his 
former political rival for judicial office and their disagreement over a sensitive case.  
 
 Additionally, in crediting Applicant’s testimony as to the true reasons surrounding 
her resignation from CPO, I not only took into account her demeanor, but also that she 
provided substantial documentation corroborating key aspects of her testimony. In 
short, her testimony was plausible, credible, and consistent with other record evidence. 
Contrast with, CAC Case No. 15-06091 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 10, 2017) (judge erred in 
relying on applicant’s uncorroborated claims). 
 
 In assessing the credentialing concern at issue, I did consider the information 
Applicant provided at hearing that tends to substantiate that portion of the allegation that 
she misused her work email. Specifically, Applicant admits she sent personal emails 
using her official CPO work email account and purchased furniture online using her 
CPO-provided computer.27 These past, relatively minor and common everyday 
(mis)uses of work email and information systems do not, at this point, raise a 
credentialing concern. Moreover, Applicant has clearly learned her lesson and now 
                                                          
26 Department Counsel should be commended for investigating this matter further and thereby generating 
the exculpatory evidence showing that Applicant did not engage in the serious alleged misconduct. 
However, the record is silent as to why in the five months between receiving the email from the county 
prosecutor and the hearing, he did not forward it to Applicant in discovery (Exhibit 5), or offer it during the 
Government’s case-in-chief, or amend the SOR allegations to remove the inaccurate information. 
 
27 It is unclear from the record whether the county prosecutor’s reference in Exhibit A to Applicant’s 
purported misuse of CPO information systems to carry on a personal business for profit exceeded the 
remodeling work she did for her former work friend, the deputy county prosecutor. Assuming arguendo 
the county prosecutor is now claiming a far more serious form of employee misconduct, I have given this 
new accusation little weight. It is an uncorroborated accusation that is being raised for the first time over a 
year after Applicant resigned and from a source who made similar unfounded claims of serious employee 
misconduct, which was later disproven by his own office. In addition, I have also considered the potential 
motive to fabricate, as the county prosecutor and his HR office may have violated the agreement under 
which Applicant submitted her resignation and exposed the CPO’s office to potential civil liability. 
 
9 
performs her duties, to include handling DoD IT systems, in a responsible fashion. In 
short, Applicant’s past conduct does not create a reasonable basis to believe that she 
would put people, property, or information systems at risk. Specifically, I find that the 
mitigating conditions listed at SAS ¶¶ 1.(c)(1), 1.(c)(2), and 1.(c)(4) apply.28 
 
Misuse of or Failure to Follow Rules Pertaining to Information Systems  
 
 SOR 2.a also alleges that Applicant’s “employment with the CPO was terminated 
for abuse of [her] employer’s e-mail system and databases, to include [list of specific 
sensitive law enforcement databases.]” This allegation also raises the CAC 
credentialing concern set forth in BAS ¶ 6: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe the individual will use federally-controlled information systems 
unlawfully, make unauthorized modifications to such systems, corrupt or 
destroy such systems, or engage in inappropriate uses of such systems. 
 
Individuals must comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems and properly protect 
sensitive systems, networks, and information.  The individual should not 
attempt to use federally-controlled information systems unlawfully, make 
unauthorized modifications, corrupt or destroy, or engage in inappropriate 
uses of such systems. A CAC must not be issued to a person if there is a 
reasonable basis to believe the individual will do so or has done so in the 
past. 
 
 The following disqualifying and mitigating conditions were potentially raised by 
the evidence: 
 
6.b.(1): Illegal, unauthorized, or inappropriate use of an information 
technology system or component; 
 
6.b.(2): Unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation of 
information, software, firmware, or hardware to corrupt or destroy 
information technology systems or data; and 
 
6.c.:  Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk include that the 
behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s ability and willingness to conform to rules and 
regulations for use of information technology systems. 
 
                                                          
28 I also extended favorable consideration to several adjudicative factors in resolving this concern in 
Applicant’s favor. See Instruction, Enclosure 4, ¶¶ 1.b(1), 1.b(2), 1.b(3), 1.b(5), and 1.b(6). 
 
10 
 I hereby incorporate my above analysis in resolving SOR 1.a and for the same 
reasons find for Applicant as to the present allegation. Specifically, I find that Applicant 
fully established the mitigating condition quoted above.  
 
Falsification, Deception, or Fraud 
 
 SOR 3.a alleges that Applicant “falsified material facts” on her declaration for 
federal employment by answering “no” to Question 12. The allegation goes on to state 
that Applicant deliberately “failed to disclose and sought to conceal that [she was] 
terminated, quit after being told [she] would be fired, or left under mutual agreement 
because of specific problems” from her employment with the CPO, because of the 
(false) allegations of employee misconduct listed in the CPO removal letter.29  
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, 
deception, or fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.30  
 
 The following disqualifying and mitigating conditions were potentially raised: 
 
3.a: The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
3.b: Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material, 
intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or 
information provided during the employment process for the current or a 
prior federal or contract employment (e.g., on the employment application 
or other employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during 
interviews.)31 
 
3.c(1): The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor, 
or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. 
 
3.c(2): The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent 
and was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation. 
 
 The crux of the Government’s credentialing concern is that Applicant deliberately 
falsified her declaration for federal employment by failing to disclose the adverse or 
                                                          
29 During closing argument, Department Counsel moved to amend SOR 3.a to add the italicized words 
above. Applicant opposed the motion, noting that she was unfairly surprised. In light of my favorable 
findings for Applicant, this legal issue is moot and will not be further discussed.  
 
30 Instruction, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, ¶ 3. 
 
31 The SOR only alleges disqualifying condition 3.a. However, in resolving the credentialing concern 
raised by the allegation, I have also considered disqualifying condition 3.b.  
 
11 
derogatory circumstances that purportedly led to her to resign from the CPO. The 
omission of material, adverse information standing alone is not enough to establish that 
an applicant intentionally falsified a federal form used for CAC credentialing purposes. 
An omission is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot the information requested, 
inadvertently overlooked or misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the 
information did not need to be reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts 
and circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.32 
 
 Applicant submitted her resignation shortly after the May 2015 meeting where 
she was handed the letter proposing her removal. However, the timing of this 
occurrence alone is not dispositive in this case, because it was clear to all the 
participants at the meeting, including the county prosecutor who signed the letter, that 
the cited basis for Applicant’s proposed removal was untrue. The county prosecutor, 
five months before Applicant’s CAC hearing, retracted the claims of serious employee 
misconduct cited in the letter proposing her removal. Thus, Applicant did not resign from 
the CPO because of the false claims in the removal letter. 
 
 Instead, Applicant, who was an appointed, at-will employee whose continued 
employment was at the pleasure of the county prosecutor, resigned because her 
relationship with her boss was irreparably broken. The true triggering event or cause for 
her resignation was the county prosecutor showing Applicant the emails that she had 
sent to others making disparaging remarks about his handling of the sexual assault 
case involving the nine-year-old victim. At that point, a reasonable person in Applicant’s 
shoes would recognize that the proverbial writing was on the wall and the only way to 
save her untarnished 19-year career was to resign. She left the CPO with a clear 
understanding that her former employer would not repeat the false claims of misconduct 
in the letter proposing her removal or otherwise disparage her stellar record. 
 
 Therefore, Applicant was forced out from the CPO, but not for a reason that 
would raise a credentialing concern (i.e., serious employee misconduct or misuse of 
information systems, such as improperly accessing law enforcement databases). Her 
time at the CPO may not have ended as she would have liked, but the actual 
circumstances surrounding her resignation do not create a reasonable basis to believe 
that she would pose an unacceptable risk. Furthermore, when Applicant filled out the 
declaration for federal employment form, she genuinely believed that all the relevant 
parties clearly agreed that her resignation from CPO was a voluntary one, and would be 
considered favorable. This understanding was substantiated by documentation supplied 
by the Applicant and admitted into the record. See Exhibits A – C. 
 
 After a complete and thorough review of the record evidence and having had an 
opportunity to closely observe Applicant’s demeanor at hearing, I conclude that she did 
not deliberately falsify her declaration for federal employment. Her past conduct does 
not raise questions about her honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness, nor does it raise 
concerns she would place U.S. personnel, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
                                                          
32 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
12 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Employment Misconduct or Negligence:  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:       For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Information Systems:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:       For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Falsification, Deception, or Fraud:   FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 3.a:       For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, 
continuing Applicant’s CAC eligibility would not pose an unreasonable risk. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
     Administrative Judge 
