 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 16-01813 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns 
raised under supplemental adjudicative standards (SAS) for criminal or dishonest 
conduct. CAC eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 3, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility pursuant 
to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). The DOD was unable to 
find that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk.1 The 
concerns raised under the Adjudicative Standards of DODI 5200.46 are SAS ¶ 2.a, 
criminal or dishonest conduct. 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD 
Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014, and the 
procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). 
 
 
2 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 29, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was initially assigned to another Administrative Judge 
and was scheduled for hearing on January 26, 2017. The hearing was canceled 
indefinitely at Applicant’s request due to medical issues, and the case file was transferred 
to me. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a new notice of 
hearing on February 21, 2018, scheduling the hearing for March 13, 2018. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and after the hearing, submitted documents 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 19, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He has worked as a diesel mechanic for his current 
employer and previous contractors since 2008. He was first married in 2001 and divorced 
in 2002; next married in 2007 and divorced in 2008; and again married in 2010. He has 
four adult children. He graduated from high school and completed some college. He 
currently holds CAC eligibility for access to a government facility. 
 
 The SOR alleges 30 incidents of criminal conduct from 1987 to 2015. Charges 
include four domestic-violence incidents from 2010 to 2015; assault and battery in 2009 
and 1996; five arrests for driving while intoxicated (DUI) from 1989 to 2005; harassment, 
carrying a prohibited weapon and improperly discharging a firearm; various driving 
offenses and failure to comply with court orders; and two incidents of minor in possession. 
Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, with explanations. 
 
 Applicant was arrested in June 2009 for assault. He was convicted and sentenced 
to one year probation and ordered to complete an anger-management course. In July 
2010, he was arrested for fighting with his 30-year-old nephew after the nephew struck 
Applicant’s girlfriend. Applicant and the nephew were both intoxicated. Applicant was 
convicted, placed on probation for one year, and again required to attend anger 
management and individual counseling for alcohol abuse. Applicant was again arrested 
in July 2011 for domestic battery after he struck his spouse. This was another incident of 
criminal activity while intoxicated. Applicant was arrested in December 2011 for battery, 
but he does not recall the incident. Finally in March 2015, Applicant was arrested for 
domestic battery after fighting with his spouse and pushing past her to exit the home. He 
called the police on himself, and was intoxicated at the time. The charge was not 
prosecuted.  
 
 In 2015, Applicant self-referred to individual and couples counseling for alcohol 
abuse and anger management. Applicant diagnosed himself with an alcohol addiction, 
but since suffering a heart attack in 2016 and being diagnosed with liver failure in 2017, 
has abstained from alcohol. He returned to work six months after his heart attack and is 
the sole provider for his family. 
 
 Applicant testified that he changed his life since his diagnosis of liver failure and 
consults with his pastor for counseling for disputes with his spouse. He acknowledges 
 
3 
that all of his past criminal issues resulted from alcohol use. Applicant’s spouse noted in 
a letter of support, that they no longer have alcohol in the home, they attend church 
regularly, and they resolve their problems with rational discussion. Other letters of support 
attest to his change in lifestyle. 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the nature 
and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; (3) the 
recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of 
the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or presence of 
efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1)  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, SAS ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that issuance of a 
CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put people, 
property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or 
dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of people 
and proper protection of property or information systems, regardless of 
 
4 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or 
convicted; and 
 
(5) actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that 
poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled 
facilities and federally-controlled information systems. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of criminal conduct including violence and alcohol 
abuse. SAS ¶¶ 2.b (2) and (5) apply. 
 
 SAS ¶ 2.c provides circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there 
is a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. Relevant conditions 
include: 
 
(1) the behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
(2) charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; and 
 
(4) evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of violence, alcohol-related arrests, and rules 
violations. Since 2009, he has been involved in five incidents of violence and admits that 
alcohol was a contributing factor each time. In that period, he was required to attend anger 
management and alcohol counseling. He claimed to have stopped drinking following a 
diagnosis of liver failure in 2017Despite the dismissal of some charges and relatively 
minor charges in some circumstances, the totality of incidents over Applicant’s lifetime, 
including five arrests since 2009, and involvement of violence, danger to persons, and 
alcohol abuse, are difficult to overcome. Although his current medical condition may result 
in an end to his cycle of criminal activity, insufficient time has passed since his last incident 
and since abstaining from alcohol to determine that this activity will not recur and that his 
behavior is under control. Finally, Applicant did not provide medical or counseling records 
to show the extent and efficacy of anger or alcohol abuse counseling, or a future 
prognosis. I have insufficient evidence to apply any of the relevant mitigating conditions 
described above despite Applicant’s testimony and the heartfelt letters of support from 
his spouse and close family and friends. 
 
 Perhaps with evidence of professional counseling, a satisfactory prognosis, and a 
cessation of violence, alcohol abuse, and rules violations over another year, Applicant will 
be able to overcome his past conduct and again qualify for CAC eligibility. At this time, 
there is insufficient evidence that the behavior leading to the denial of his CAC eligibility 
have been overcome. 
 
5 
Whole-Person Assessment 
  
 DODI 5200.46, Encl. 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, ¶ 1, Guidance for Applying 
Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the following mitigating factors: 
 
As established in Reference (g),2 credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c).3  
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise an 
adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
(1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious the 
conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
(2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient information 
concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained to 
determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property, or information systems. 
 
(3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
(4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
(5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural conditions 
may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable 
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions are 
currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
(6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if relevant, 
to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
                                                          
2 Reference (g) is HSPD – 12. 
 
3 Reference (c) is U.S. Office of Personnel Management Memorandum, Final Credentialing Standards for 
Issuing Personal Identity Verification Cards under HSPD-12, July 31, 2008.  
 
6 
(a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following 
professional guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive 
changes in behavior and employment). 
  
(b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not just 
alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment 
record) may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
 I have carefully considered the facts of this case and applied the adjudicative and 
whole-person standards in DODI 5200.46. Based on the record and Applicant’s 
testimony, there is insufficient evidence to find that the SOR allegations have been 
mitigated. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
   Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
     Subparagraphs 1.a-1.dd:     Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, granting Applicant CAC eligibility poses an 
unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
 
      
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
