KEYWORD: CAC
DIGEST: The disposition of an arrest or a criminal charge in a manner that is favorable to an
applicant, such as the dropping or dismissal of a charge, does not preclude a Judge from finding
the applicant engaged in the underlying criminal conduct.  In cases of this nature, the key issue is
an applicant’s criminal or dishonest conduct, not what actions law enforcement authorities may
have taken regarding that conduct. Adverse decision affirmed. 
CASENO: 16-01524.a1
DATE: 04/19/2018
DATE: April 19, 2018  
In Re:
-----------------------
Applicant for CAC Eligibility
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
 CAC Case No. 16-01524
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman , Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Clarice Attaway Allen, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant eligibility for Common
Access Card (CAC) credentialing.  On May 16, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–criminal or dishonest conduct concerns raised
under the adjudicative standards in the appendices of DoD Instruction 5200.46 (Sep. 9, 2014)
(Instruction).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October 6, 2016, the Government amended the
SOR by adding another allegation.  On January 9, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran denied Applicant’s
request for CAC eligibility.  Applicant appealed the decision pursuant to Instruction, Enclosure 4
¶ 6.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Finding of Fact
Applicant, who is 47 years old, has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor,
since 2014.  He served in the military from 1991 to 1995 and received a general discharge under
honorable conditions.  He has been married and divorced twice.  After his latest divorce in 2005, he
continued to live with his ex-wife in a house that she was awarded in the divorce.   He considered
the ongoing relationship a common-law marriage that ended in 2013.   
In 2002, Applicant was arrested for assault causing bodily injury on a family member. 
Applicant’s second wife told a deputy that he pushed her onto a bed and held her down.  He later
shoved her out a door.  She also told the deputy that he broke her nose in the past.  Applicant
claimed she initiated the incident and he called the sheriff’s office after pushing her out the door. 
He admitted to breaking her nose in the past in self-defense.  A few days after the incident,
Applicant’s second wife advised the investigator she wanted the matter dropped.  The investigation
was terminated without charges being filed against Applicant.  At the hearing, Applicant testified
that he broke his second wife’s nose after she grabbed his wallet, and he punched her while they
struggled over the wallet.
In 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with criminal mischief.  While walking in a
crosswalk in a parking lot, a women bumped him with her car.  She addressed him using foul
language and drove off.  He ran after her, slammed into her car, and kicked her car.  He claimed the
damage to her car was caused when she hit him.  He paid the damages and the charges were
dropped.  
In 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony offenses, i.e., aggravated assault
with a deadly weapon and obstruction or retaliation.  His second wife told a deputy that he came
home drunk, told her she had five seconds to get out or he was going to kick her out, slapped and
hit her, and pulled her hair while holding her down.  At some point, she reached for a knife, but he
took it from her and hit her in the back of the head with its handle.   As the deputy was taking him
into custody, he told his wife, “*****, you had better be gone when I get out or they’re going to
2
need a body bag.”  Decision at 3.  He also told the deputy that he was going to batter his wife when
he was released.  The charges were later dismissed.  At the hearing, Applicant testified his second
wife was mentally unstable and he acted in self-defense.  
In June 2014, Applicant was living with a woman and her children.  Deputies were called
to the house when the woman’s pregnant daughter complained that Applicant pushed her in the
stomach following an argument he had with her sister.  The pregnant daughter, her fiancé, and her
sister also told a deputy that Applicant choked the pregnant daughter and punched the fiancé about
two or three months earlier.  The pregnant daughter told the deputy that she did not want charges
filed against Applicant, but wanted him to leave her alone.  An incident report was generated, but
no charges were filed.  At the hearing, Applicant admitted to drinking during the June incident,
claimed the two sisters assaulted him, and denied hitting the girl.  He moved out of the house that
night and ended his relationship with the family.
In 2017, Applicant completed an anger management program.  His daughter stated that his
second wife had to be institutionalized for a period.  In 2017, a court expunged his arrests in 2002,
2007, 2009 as well as the report for the 2014 incident.  He submitted numerous letter attesting to his
excellent job performance and praising his character.
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant has never been convicted of any offenses.  The incidents involving his interaction
with law enforcement have been expunged from his record.  He denied committing most of the
underlying offenses.  He attended an anger management program.  However, the Judge noted that
he did not find Applicant’s testimony credible and found sufficient evidence supported the
underlying offense without a conviction.  In concluding that Applicant did not mitigate his well-
established pattern of criminal conduct, the Judge also stated that he was not convinced that
Applicant was rehabilitated and that additional criminal conduct is unlikely to recur.   
  
Discussion
There is no presumption of error below, and the appealing party has the burden of raising
claims of harmful error with specificity and demonstrating factual or legal error that warrants
remand or reversal.  DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive)  ¶ E3.1.32.  See also CAC Case No. 15-02333 at
3 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017).1  In this case, Applicant emphasizes that he has no criminal convictions,
his criminal records have been expunged, and he has removed himself from contact with all persons
1 Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶ 6 provides that appeals to DOHA of CAC cases are accorded the established
administrative procedures set out in the Directive.  Since its inception, the Appeal Board has been issuing decisions that
interpret and analyze the administrative procedures set forth in the Directive.  Because those same administrative
procedures are used in appeals of CAC revocations, our decisions interpreting and analyzing those procedures apply
equally here for reviewing a judge’s actions, rulings, findings, and conclusions in CAC cases.  Decisions of the Appeal
Board are available to the public at DOHA’s website: http://www.dod.mil/dodgc/doha/.
3
involved in the alleged incidents.  He argues that the alleged criminal concerns are mitigated
because, among other matters, there has been a sufficient change in circumstances, he has attended
an anger management program, and he has an unblemished work record.   
The applicable Supplemental Adjudicative Standards for determining Applicant’s eligibility
for a CAC are set forth in Instruction, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2 ¶ 2, which provide:
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, based
on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that issuance of a CAC poses an
unacceptable risk.2
a.  An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put people, property, or
information systems at risk.  An individual’s past criminal or dishonest conduct may
put people, property, or information systems at risk.
b.  Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include:
     (1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety of
people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. . . . 
        (2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of people
and proper protection of property or information systems, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.
* * *
      (5) Actions involving violence . . . that pose an unacceptable risk if access is
granted to federally-controlled facilities and federally-controlled information 
systems. . . .
To the extent that Applicant is arguing that Judge erred in considering his expunged criminal
record, we do not find that argument persuasive.  It is well-settled that officers of the Federal
Government are not bound by state law when carrying out their official duties unless there is a
specific act of Congress that expressly indicates otherwise, and the Federal Government is not bound
2 In a CAC adjudication, “the overriding factor . . . is unacceptable risk.”  Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶ 1(b). 
“Unacceptable risk” is defined as “[a] threat to life, safety, or health of employees, contractors, vendors, or visitors; to
the U.S. Government[‘s] physical assets or information systems; to personal property; to records, including classified,
privileged, proprietary, financial, and medical records; or to the privacy rights established by The Privacy Act of 1974,
as amended, or other law that is deemed unacceptable when making risk management determinations.”  Instruction,
Glossary, Part II Definitions.
4
by state law concerning the expungement of state criminal records.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-
22563 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006).   
 
To the extent that Applicant is arguing that a criminal conviction is required to establish
criminal or dishonest conduct disqualifying conditions, we do not find that argument persuasive. 
The disposition of an arrest or a criminal charge in a manner that is favorable to an applicant, such
as the dropping or dismissal of a charge, does not preclude a Judge from finding the applicant
engaged in the underlying criminal conduct.  See subparagraph 2.b., above.  In cases of this nature,
the key issue is an applicant’s criminal or dishonest conduct, not what actions law enforcement
authorities may have taken regarding that conduct.
Applicant’s remaining arguments, such as there has been a sufficient change in his
circumstances, amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence.  The presence
of some mitigating evidence, however, does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable CAC
determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide
whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., CAC
Case No. 16-00427 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 11, 2017).
Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of the case.  The
Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision. 
The decision is sustainable on this record.
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy           
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
