 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 16-00427 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns 
raised under the criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. 
CAC eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility pursuant 
to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). The DOD was unable to 
find that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk. The action 
was taken under the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, 
DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 
2014, and the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive). The concerns raised under the Adjudicative Standards of DODI 
5200.46 are criminal or dishonest conduct.  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 17, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2016. On 
 
2 
December 8, 2016, Department Counsel amended SOR ¶ 1.c by deleting the language 
“of a Peace Officer or Fireman (Capital Felony).” The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 20, 2016, scheduling the 
hearing for January 24, 2017. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 3, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He has worked for his current employer since 2011. He 
attended community college, but he did not earn a degree. He is married with a child 
from a previous relationship (discussed below), two children with his wife, and his wife 
was pregnant as of the date of the hearing.1  
 
 Applicant was arrested in February 2000 and charged with attempted burglary of 
a vehicle and evading arrest. He was 18 years old at the time. In March 2000, he was 
arrested and charged with theft. The charges from February and March 2000 are 
related as they involve Applicant breaking into, or attempting to beak into, two cars on 
the same day in February 2000. Applicant does not deny committing the offenses.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested in March 2004 and charged with capital murder. He was 
held on $1 million bail. He was released about four months later on a reduced bail.3 In 
2009, the District Attorney notified Applicant through his attorney: 
 
The [County] District Attorney’s Office had declined prosecution of [Applicant] on 
the capital murder charge he has pending. The case has insufficient evidence to 
indict and/or prosecute [Applicant].4 
 
 The deceased was the eight-month-old child of Applicant’s girlfriend at the time. 
Applicant was not the father of the child, but his girlfriend was pregnant with Applicant’s 
oldest child. In December 2003, about two and a half months before the child’s death, 
the child’s right femur and top of the right tibia were fractured, consistent with spiral 
fractures. The treating doctor indicated that the injuries would have required a lot of 
force, like a twist or a direct blow. The girlfriend reported that four days before the child 
was treated for her fractures, the child was playing with a baby mobile at the girlfriend’s 
mother’s house when the child fell off a couch. The police took pictures of the couch 
and the mobile, which was at Applicant’s home. No charges were filed. In February 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14, 62, 66, 72-73; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 5, 6. 
 
3 Tr. at 13, 59; GE 4-6. 
 
4 AE A. 
 
 
3 
2003, the girlfriend was arrested for an unrelated felony charge of possession of a 
controlled substance.5 
 
 Applicant went to his girlfriend’s mother’s house after work for a family get 
together on the day of the child’s death. Several people in the house were playing cards 
and involved in other activities. Individuals at the house reported that the child seemed 
happy and normal, except she cried for a period while Applicant held her.6  
 
 Applicant left the house with the child between about 7:00 and 7:30 p.m., and 
went to a friend’s house to drop off a DVD he had borrowed. He then went to his house 
to pick up some items for the get together. He stated that he fed the child a “chewed up” 
Girl Scout cookie at his house, when the child started choking. He stated that he lifted 
the child’s arm and patted her on the back until she stopped choking. The police 
detective who interviewed Applicant at the hospital wrote that Applicant stated the child 
spit out the cookie. Applicant’s written statement does not state that the child spit out 
the cookie, it simply states that “[s]he stopped choking.” Applicant testified that the child 
did not spit out the cookie, that she either swallowed part of it or had only sucked on the 
cookie. The police later searched the house and discovered an opened box of Girl 
Scout cookies on the kitchen counter. There was a single partially eaten cookie beside 
the box of cookies. The detective “searched the kitchen area, but did not find any 
evidence that the child ‘spit-up’ the cookie.”7 
 
 Applicant returned with the child to his girlfriend’s mother’s house. While there he 
and the mother changed the child’s diaper. He stated that the child was not out of his 
sight after he returned to the house, and he did not notice anything wrong with the child 
as they changed her diaper. When Applicant, the girlfriend, and the child were leaving 
the house, the child had a seizure. They took the child to the hospital. It was noted that 
the child had bruising throughout the body, abrasions, what appeared to be human bite-
marks on the right arm and chest, and massive bleeding in the head. The doctor opined 
that the injuries were caused by the child being shaken excessively. The child died five 
days later.8 
 
 The autopsy revealed that the child “died as the result of blunt force injuries.” The 
blunt force injuries were: 
 
a. Contusions of the head, trunk, and extremities. 
b. Crusted abrasions of the trunk. 
c. Subscapular hemorrhages of the right frontal and left frontolateral areas. 
d. Subdural and subarachnoid hemorrhages. 
e. Retinal and perioptic hemorrhages. 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 14-17, 22, 62; GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. at 15, 18-19, 25-26, 69-70; GE 4. 
 
7 Tr. at 15, 29-47, 71-72; GE 4. 
 
8 Tr. at 15, 47-54, 58-62; GE 4. 
 
4 
f. Diffuse axonal injury. 
g. Healing left rib fractures. 
h. Healing fracture of the right femur. 
i. Healing fracture of the right tibia and fibula. 
j. Deep muscular hemorrhages surrounding the right humerus. 
 
The autopsy also revealed: 
 
[A] 2 inch by 1/8 inch crescentic contusion on the right upper chest which 
is consistent with a bite mark. A ¾ inch by ¾ inch contusion is on the left 
upper abdomen. A ½ inch by 3/8 inch, roughly crescentic contusion is on 
the right upper abdomen. A ¾ inch by 1/16 inch crusted abrasion is on the 
left posterior shoulder. A 3/16 inch by less than 1/6 inch crusted abrasion 
is on the left upper back. A 1/4 inch by 1/4 inch crusted abrasion is on the 
right posterior shoulder. A 3/8 inch by 1/4 inch crusted abrasion is on the 
right midback. A 1/2 inch by 1/4 inch crusted abrasion is on the right 
midback.  
 
A 1-1/8 inch by 7/8 inch irregular contusion is on the right forearm. A 1 
inch by 3/4 inch contusion is on the right forearm. A 1-1/4 inch by 7/8 inch 
contusion is on the right thigh.9  
 
 After the autopsy, the pathologist opined to the police detective that the child’s 
injuries were most likely inflicted a short time before she was taken to the hospital, but 
an exact dating of the injuries would require further testing.10 
 
 A forensic analysis was conducted of the bite-marks on the child’s arm and chest 
and compared them with Applicant’s teeth. The forensic dentist who conducted the 
analysis concluded: 
 
1. The pattern injury has all the characteristics seen in a typical single 
arch bite-mark. 
2. It is possible that [Applicant] could have generated the bite-mark but 
there is insufficient individual characteristics in the bite-mark itself to 
say to any degree of medical certainty that [Applicant] was the only 
person who could have generated this bite-mark. 
 
Note: The definition as stated in the guidelines used by the American 
Board of Forensic Odontology describes the use of “possible” when: 
 
Suspect could have done it; may or may not have. Teeth like the 
suspect’s could be expected to create a mark like the one 
examined but so could other dentitions. 
                                                          
9 GE 4. 
 
10 GE 4. 
 
 
5 
The criterion for this term is explained by the ABFO as: Criteria: there is a 
nonspecific similarity or a similarity of class characteristics; match points 
are general and/or few, and there is no incompatible inconsistencies that 
would serve to exclude.11 
 
 Applicant denied killing the child. He stated that he believes his ex-girlfriend killed 
her child or she knows who did. Nobody else was ever charged with the crime. He 
testified that he could not have broken the child’s ribs because the autopsy report 
showed that the fractured ribs had been healing for “over six to eight weeks” and that 
was “before he was even in the picture.” That testimony is contradicted by the police 
report of the leg fractures, which shows that in December 2003, about two and a half 
months before the child’s death, the child’s mobile was at Applicant’s home. He later 
admitted that he was involved with the mother when the fractures occurred. Applicant 
and his ex-girlfriend did not remain together after he was arrested. Their child was 
placed in Applicant’s mother’s custody. Applicant went to court in 2014 and obtained 
joint custody of the child.12 
 
 Applicant has had steady employment since 2011. He has not been arrested for 
any offense since the 2004 arrest for murder.13  
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1)  
 
 
                                                          
11 GE 4. 
 
12 Tr. at 13-15, 19-22, 62-69; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4. 
 
13 Tr. at 72-73; GE 1. 
 
 
6 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(3) Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, perjury, 
forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation without proper 
authorization). 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history is sufficient to establish all of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur;  
 
7 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant admittedly committed the car-burglary offenses. He denied killing the 
baby in 2004. The state had sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case against 
him, but insufficient evidence to continue the case. Criminal cases have the beyond a 
reasonable doubt standard, and it is possible that someone else killed the baby. 
Nonetheless, I find there is substantial evidence14 that Applicant killed the baby. He has 
not convinced me of his innocence. I base that on all the evidence, including: 
 
 Applicant was the only one alone with the baby after he left the house. 
 People at the house reported that the child seemed happy and normal before 
leaving with Applicant, except she cried for a period while Applicant held her. 
 The forensic dentist could not positively identify Applicant as leaving the bite-
marks, but “[t]eeth like the [Applicant’s] could be expected to create a mark like 
the one examined but so could other dentitions.” 
 Applicant’s inconsistent statements. (e.g., when he stated that he could not have 
fractured the child’s ribs because he was not with the ex-girlfriend at the time, 
and whether the child spit out the cookie.)  
 
The above mitigating circumstances are not established. I also considered the 
factors in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
14 Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” ISCR Case No. 10-09035 at 
5 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014) (citing Directive ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the 
weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence 
does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal 
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than 
a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994); ISCR 
Case No. 04-07187 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2006). 
 
8 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility poses an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
 
      
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
