 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 16-03838 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC 
eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility under 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). The DOD was unable to find 
that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk. The action was 
taken under the adjudicative standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD 
Investigative and Adjudicative Guidance for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014, 
and the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive). The concerns raised under the adjudicative standards of DODI 5200.46 are 
criminal or dishonest conduct.  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 27, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2017. The 
 
2 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 16, 
2017, scheduling the hearing for June 28, 2017. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through E, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on July 7, 2017.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He has worked for his current employer, or a 
predecessor defense contractor, for more than four years. He attended college for about 
two years without earning a degree. He married in 1999 and divorced in 2003. He has a 
teenage child from the marriage.1  
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2003 and charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI), 
first offense, and refusal to submit to chemical test. Applicant’s attorney pleaded no 
contest on Applicant’s behalf to DWI, first offense, in 2007. The remaining charge was 
dismissed. Applicant was sentenced to one day in jail with credit for time served, $805 
in fines and costs, probation for one year, and completion of a DWI education class.2   
 
 Applicant’s attorney did not inform him of all the terms of his probation. Applicant 
was arrested in 2008 and charged with criminal contempt. He completed all the terms of 
his DWI conviction, and the criminal contempt charge was dismissed.3   
 
 Applicant was arrested in January 2016 and charged with DWI and refusal to 
submit to chemical test. He pleaded guilty to DWI, first offense, in January 2017. He 
was sentenced to one day in jail with credit for time served, $850 in fines and costs, 
probation for one year, and completion of a DWI education class. Applicant completed 
the DWI education class in August 2016, before he pleaded guilty. In June 2017, the 
court clerk certified that Applicant completed all the terms of his sentence and 
probation, and he was no longer on probation.4 
 
 Applicant thought he was capable of driving when he was arrested in 2016. He 
stated that his blood alcohol concentration (BAC) was .07% and .08% on the two tests 
he took. He is appropriately remorseful for his actions. He credibly testified that he 
learned his lesson and he will never drink and drive again. He is aware that repeating 
the conduct could result in harming himself or others, going to jail, and losing his job.5   
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 15-16, 19, 39; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 22-30; GE 5; AE A. 
 
4 Tr. at 31-37; GE 3, 5; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, E. 
 
5 Tr. at 14, 37-41. 
 
 
3 
Applicant submitted letters attesting to his excellent job performance, work ethic, 
honesty, leadership, dedication, motivation, dependability, positive attitude, reliability, 
and integrity.6 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1)  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
 
                                                          
6 AE C. 
 
4 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC eligibility concern and 
may be disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; and 
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history is sufficient to establish the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur;  
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant’s explanation for the criminal contempt charge is credible and 
accepted. The charge was dismissed. The mitigating circumstance in ¶ 2.c(2) is 
applicable to SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 Applicant is highly regarded at work. He is remorseful for his DWIs. He credibly 
testified that he learned his lesson and he will never drink and drive again. He is aware 
that repeating the conduct could result in harming himself or others, going to jail, and 
losing his job. I find evidence of successful rehabilitation and that criminal conduct is 
unlikely to recur. The mitigating circumstances in ¶¶ 2.c(1) and 2.c(3) are established. I 
also considered the factors in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1. 
 
 
 
5 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility does not pose an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is granted. 
 
 
      
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
