 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 16-00116 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the criminal or dishonest conduct supplemental adjudicative standards, but failed 
to mitigate the concerns raised under the material, false statement, deception, or fraud 
supplemental adjudication standards. CAC eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 21, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing criminal or dishonest conduct eligibility concerns, 
and material, false statement, deception, or fraud eligibility concerns. The DOD was 
unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
CAC eligibility. The action was taken under Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 
12 (HSPD-12); the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, 
DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 
2014; and the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive).  
 
 
2 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 4, 2016, and requested an 
administrative determination, in lieu of a hearing. Applicant was sent the government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) on August 17, 2016. The evidence included in the 
FORM is identified as Items 4-7 (Items 1-3 include pleadings and transmittal 
information). Applicant received the FORM on August 25, 2016. He was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
He did not submit a response to the FORM in the time allotted to do so. Items 4-7 are 
admitted in evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2017. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He has worked as a volunteer fireman since December 
2005. He was married in 2011. No further information is available about his current 
marital status. The record contains no educational information for Applicant.1  
 
 In November 2008, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI). 
He was convicted and his sentence included 36 months of probation. In February 2009, 
he was arrested for DUI. No disposition is contained in the record. In April 2009, he was 
charged with a probation violation. No disposition is contained in the record. In October 
2009, he was charged with driving on a suspended license, a guilty finding was entered, 
and he was sentenced to 24 months’ probation. In December 2009, he was arrested for 
DUI and a probation violation. No disposition is contained in the record. In September 
2011, he was charged with corporal injury to a spouse. A guilty finding was entered, but 
no sentencing information is contained in the record.2 
 
 In June 2015, Applicant completed a Declaration of Federal Employment form. 
Question number 9 of the form asked Applicant, “During the last 7 years, have you been 
convicted, been imprisoned, been on probation, or been on parole? (Includes felonies, 
firearms or explosives violations, misdemeanors, and all other offenses)” Applicant 
answered “no” to this question. In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted being on 
probation concerning SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d and not putting that information down on the 
form. The record contains no additional arrest or conviction information after September 
2011.3 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 7 
 
2 Items 6-7. 
 
3 Items 3, 5. 
 
 
3 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1) In all 
adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
4 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; 
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(5) Actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that 
poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled 
facilities and federally-controlled information systems. For example, 
convictions for sexual assault may indicate that granting a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk to the life and safety of persons on U.S. Government 
facilities. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history is sufficient to establish all of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. 
 
Five of six of Applicant’s criminal events occurred when he was 20 or 21 years 
old. The most recent event occurred in 2011 and there is no evidence of recurrence 
since then. The above mitigating circumstance is established. 
 
Material False Statements 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 3 provides: 
 
 A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the individual’s material, intentional, false statement, deception, or fraud in 
connection with federal or contract employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an 
unacceptable security risk.   
  
3.a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
put people, property, or information systems at risk.  
 
5 
3.b. Therefore, the conditions that may be disqualifying include material, 
intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or 
information provided during the employment process for the current or a 
prior federal or contract employment (e.g. on the employment application 
or other employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during 
interviews). 
 
3.c. Circumstances relevant to a determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable security risk include: 
 
(1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances it is unlikely to recur. 
        
(2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent and 
was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation.  
 
 Applicant’s failure to list his convictions that resulted in his probationary status 
was material information that was reasonably known to him at the time. His action 
qualifies as disqualifying under ¶ 3.b. Applicant did not present sufficient information to 
establish either mitigating circumstance listed in ¶ 3.c (1) or (2). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
  Paragraph 2, Material False Statements:  Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraph   2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
