 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
             )  CAC Case No. 16-02664 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
April 19, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 5, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access Card 
(CAC) issuance pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive–12 (HSPD-12). 
DOD was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant CAC eligibility. The action is based on the Adjudicative Standards found in 
DoD Instruction (DoDI) 5200.46, DoD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Issuing the Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and made pursuant to the 
procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive). The concerns raised under the Adjudicative Standards of DoDI 5200.46 are: 
Paragraph 1.a.-Misconduct or Negligence in Employment; Paragraph 2.a.-Criminal or 
Dishonest Conduct; and Paragraph 3.a.-Material, Intentional False Statement, 
Deception or Fraud in Connection with Federal or Contract Employment.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 2, 2017 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 3, 
 
2 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on April 18, 2017, scheduling the hearing for May 8, 2017. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf, as did her fiancé and her 
father. The record was left open until June 8, 2017, for Applicant to submit additional 
exhibits. After her hearing, on May 8, 2017, Applicant submitted an email, with 
attachments, which was marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AppX) A. Department Counsel had 
no objections to AppX A, and it was admitted into evidence. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (TR) on May 16, 2017. Based on the record evidence and 
testimony presented in this case, Common Access Card eligibility is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s employment misconduct or negligence, 
dishonest or criminal conduct, and intentional false statement raised concerns under 
DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. 
Specifically, it alleged that Applicant was fired by her fiancé, from working at his 
restaurant, in July of 2014; and that she failed to disclose this firing when she applied 
for her CAC. Applicant denies both allegations (subparagraphs 1.a. and 3.a). However, 
Applicant admits subparagraph 2.b. that she was arrested in March of 2009, as a 
teenager for shoplifting.  
 
Misconduct or Negligence in Employment & Material, Intentional False Statement   
 
 1.a. and 3.a. In July of 2014, Applicant was working at her fiancé’s restaurant, 
waiting on customers. (TR at page 19 line 6 to page 22 line 24, at page 25 line 26 to 
page 27 line 5, at page 27 lines 12~20, and at page 24 line 23 to page 27 line 24.)  
Unbeknownst to her fiancé, however, Applicant left the restaurant to go home to watch 
their children. (Id.) As a result, thinking she walked off the job without any notice, her 
fiancé filled out paperwork terminating Applicant’s employment at his restaurant. (TR at 
page 19 line 6 to page 22 line 24, at page 25 line 26 to page 27 line 5, at page 27 lines 
12~20, and at page 24 line 23 to page 27 line 24.) When her fiancé returned to their 
home and discovered the reason for Applicant’s departure; he simply filed the 
paperwork in her employment file, a mistake he now regrets. (TR at page 24 line 23 to 
page 27 line 24.) The paperwork was later discovered, by investigators, in the course of 
their investigation. Applicant’s fiancé did not consider her to be fired. (Id.) Furthermore, 
Applicant had no knowledge of the alleged firing. She, in fact, went to work the very next 
day, handling the paperwork for running the restaurant, which she still did as of the date 
of her hearing. (TR at page 19 line 6 to page 22 line 24, at page 25 line 26 to page 27 
line 5, at page 27 lines 12~20, and at page 24 line 23 to page 27 line 24.)  
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 2.a. In March of 2009, Applicant’s father was on active duty with the U.S. Army. 
(TR at page 29 line 10 to page 30 line 21.) Applicant, a 19 year-old teenager, shoplifted 
about $100 worth of cosmetics from the Post Exchange (PX). (TR at page 16 line 1 to 
 
3 
page 19 line 5.) She was arrested and subsequently fined about $250 for the admitted 
larceny. 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The HSPD-12 
credentialing standards are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic 
Adjudicative Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The 
overriding factor for all of these eligibility criteria is unacceptable risk. The decision must 
be arrived at by applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly 
consistent with the national interest.    
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1.) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 1.a 
 
 DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
expresses concerns pertaining to misconduct or negligence in employment. Paragraph 
1 of this section states: 
  
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in 
employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.   
 
 
4 
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s 
honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and put people, property, 
or information systems at risk. 
 
Conduct raising concerns under this paragraph includes: 
 
(1) A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, disruptive, 
violent , or other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to people, 
property, or information systems, and 
 
(2) A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations in the workplace which put 
people, property or information at risk. 
 
 The disqualifying conditions set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, 
Subparagraph1.b are raised by Appellant’s alleged firing for insubordination. However, 
as set forth above, there was no termination of employment here. As such, there is no 
need to examine the mitigating conditions are set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, 
Appendix 2, Subparagraph 1.c.  
 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 2.a 
 
 DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
expresses concerns pertaining to criminal or dishonest conduct. Paragraph 2 of this 
section states: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.   
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack 
of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about his or her reliability or 
trustworthiness and may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or dishonest 
conduct may put people, property, or information systems at 
risk. 
 
 The disqualifying conditions set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, 
Subparagraph 2.b. that is raised by Applicant’s conduct in being arrested for shoplifting 
in 2009 as set out in the SOR is: 
 
(2) Charges or admissions of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
5 
 
 Potentially mitigating conditions are set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, 
Appendix 2, Subparagraph 2.c. The conditions that could apply to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by the evidence in this case are: 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant’s one-time arrest for shoplifting occurred when she was a teenager 
nearly nine years ago. There is absolutely no evidence of any such recurrence. 
Applicant met her burden to establish mitigation under the conditions in DoDI 5200.46, 
Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Subparagraph 2.c. 
 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 3.a 
 
In Applicant’s case, overall CAC eligibility concerns are raised under DoDI 5200.46, 
Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, paragraph 3:  
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s material, intentional, false statement, 
deception, or fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable security risk.  
 
3.a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
put people, property, or information systems at risk; and 
 
3.b. Therefore, the conditions that may be disqualifying include material, 
intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or 
information provided during the employment process for the current or a 
prior federal or contract employment (e.g. on the employment application 
or other employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during 
interviews).  
 
 I find neither of these applicable here. Simply stated, there was no willful 
falsification, since there was no termination of employment. As such, there is no need to 
examine the mitigating conditions are set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 
2, Subparagraph 3.c.  
 
 
 
 
6 
Further Mitigation 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, Paragraph 1, 
Guidance For Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the 
following: 
 
a. As established in Reference (g), credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c).  
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious 
the conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient 
information concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained 
to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property or information systems. 
 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural 
conditions may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions 
are currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
     (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
 
7 
    (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not 
just alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
 As noted above, there was no job termination; and as such, no requirement for 
disclosure. She has acknowledged her improper behavior as a teenager involved with 
shoplifting. She has now matured and has demonstrated positive behavior in her current 
position, as documented in her letters of support. (AppX A.) She demonstrated sufficient 
rehabilitation. For these reasons, Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility should be 
granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Misconduct or Negligence in Employment: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Material, Intentional False Statement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
 
8 
 
