 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 16-03332 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under supplemental adjudicative standards (SAS) for criminal or dishonest conduct and 
Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception or Fraud. CAC eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility under 
Homeland Security Presidential Directive-12 (HSPD-12). The DOD was unable to find 
that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk.1 The concerns 
raised under the Adjudicative Standards of DODI 5200.46 are SAS ¶ 2.a, criminal or 
dishonest conduct; and SAS ¶ 3.a, material, intentional false statement, deception or 
fraud. 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD 
Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014, and the 
procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). 
 
 
2 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 2, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 20, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 22, 2018, scheduling the hearing for March 14, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and Applicant Exhibit 
(AE) A were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and after the 
hearing, submitted AE B, containing several documents attached to an e-mail, which was 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 20, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He worked as a motor-vehicle mechanic and fork-lift 
operator from 2014 to May 2018. He was first married in 2009. The marriage was 
annulled. He then remarried in 2016. He has two young children. He graduated from high 
school in 2006 and completed some college. He served in the U.S. Army on active duty 
from 2006 to 2009 when he received an honorable discharge. He reenlisted in 2009 and 
was administratively discharged in April 2010 with a general discharge under honorable 
conditions. He currently holds CAC eligibility for access to a government facility. 
 
 The SOR alleges five incidents of misdemeanor criminal conduct from 2006 to 
2012. Applicant admitted the allegations with explanations. Applicant was arrested for 
fighting while he was in high school. The charge was dismissed. He was arrested for 
reckless driving and not having an operator license in 2009. Applicant was fined. In 
January 2010, Applicant was charged with disorderly conduct because of a confrontation 
with a person following too close to his vehicle. He was fined. In March 2010, Applicant 
was charged with having loud music and disorderly conduct after he yelled a comment 
out his window to the officer. He pleaded no contest and was fined. He was again arrested 
in 2012 for stealing games from a department store. He received a deferred adjudication 
to include one year of probation, restitution, a fine, and 80 hours of community service. 
He completed his sentence and the charge was dismissed. 
 
 Applicant completed a Federal Declaration of Employment (FORM 306) in August 
2015 by hand. In it, he noted his traffic violations, loud music offense, and 2012 theft 
charge. He was instructed by his employer to sign a typed version of the FORM 306 and 
to remove the minor offenses because the employer believed they were not necessary to 
report. He signed the new Form 306 in February 2016, and listed only his 2012 theft 
offense. The SOR alleges he failed to report the March 2010 incident on his February 
2016 FORM 306. Applicant testified that he did intentionally falsify the form as he did not 
recall the 2010 misdemeanor disorderly conduct incidents when he completed the forms, 
likely because they dated back five years, were minor incidents, and he was in the Army 
at the time. He did report the more recent and egregious misdemeanor theft offense from 
2012. 
 
 After the 2012 charge, Applicant realized he had to change his life. He considers 
himself to have been a naive young man when his past offenses occurred, and that he 
no longer displays such behavior. He has not had any interaction with the police since 
2012. He began a job with a government contractor in 2014, and has had no safety or 
 
3 
security violations. He married in 2016 and has two children for whom he is responsible. 
He has returned to college and believes his troubled past is permanently behind him. His 
direct supervisor described Applicant as a “good, dependable employee with no 
disciplinary action.” He does not view him as a risk of any type. While employed, Applicant 
was awarded a certificate of outstanding service in recognition of his high standards of 
excellence. He testified credibly to his change in lifestyle, was remorseful, completed 
community service and restitution for his theft offense, and showed that he is dedicated 
to staying out of trouble. 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the nature 
and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; (3) the 
recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of 
the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or presence of 
efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1)  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, SAS ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that issuance of a 
CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put people, 
property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or 
dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
4 
 
(1) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety of 
people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information;  
 
(2) charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of people 
and proper protection of property or information systems, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or 
convicted; and  
 
(3) dishonest acts (e.g. theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, perjury, 
forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation without proper 
authorization).  
 
 Applicant has a history of minor criminal conduct involving safety of people and 
theft. SAS ¶¶ 2.b (1)-(3) apply. 
 
 SAS ¶ 2.c provides circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there 
is a reasonable basis to believe Applicant poses an unacceptable risk. Relevant 
conditions include: 
 
(1) the behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
(2) charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; and 
 
(4) evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant has not had a recurrence of criminal conduct since 2012. His history of 
minor offenses when he was young has not been repeated. He has matured and changed 
his lifestyle, returned to school, and was a trusted, highly valued employee from 2014 to 
2018. He married and is raising a family. He has shown remorse for his past conduct, and 
paid restitution and community service for his theft offense resulting in the dismissal of 
the charge. There is sufficient evidence that Applicant’s past criminal conduct has been 
mitigated. SAS ¶¶ 2.c (1), (2) and (4) apply. 
 
Material, Intentional Falsification, Deception or Fraud 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, SAS ¶ 3 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, deception, or 
 
5 
fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that issuance of a 
CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and put people, 
property, or information systems at risk. 
 
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material, 
intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or information 
provided during the employment process for the current or a prior federal or 
contract employment (e.g., on the employment application or other 
employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during interviews.) 
 
 Applicant completed a handwritten Form 306 in August 2015, and generally 
disclosed traffic and some past criminal offenses. He was then requested by his employer 
to sign a revised, typed form, eliminating all criminal conduct except for the 2012 theft 
offense. When he completed the forms, Applicant did not recall two minor five-year-old 
misdemeanor disorderly conduct offenses from 2010. He testified that they were minor, 
occurred while he was in the Army, and that he did not remember them when he 
completed the forms. He did not intentionally leave them off and did report the more 
egregious theft offense from 2012. 
 
 SAS ¶ 3.c provides circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there 
is a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk include:  
 
(1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent and was 
followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation. 
 
 I find insufficient evidence of intentional falsification of the federal form. I also find 
that based on Applicant’s testimony, he was confused over what was to be included in 
the form, and did not recall the incidents due to their minor nature and passage of time. 
Mitigating conditions ¶¶ 3.c (1) and (2) are applicable. Issuance of a CAC to Applicant no 
longer poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
Whole-Person Assessment 
  
 DODI 5200.46, Encl. 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, ¶ 1, Guidance for Applying 
Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the following mitigating factors: 
 
As established in Reference (g),2 credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
                                                          
2 Reference (g) is HSPD–12. 
 
6 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c).3  
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise an 
adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
(1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious the 
conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
(2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient information 
concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained to 
determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property, or information systems. 
 
(3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
(4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
(5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural conditions 
may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable 
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions are 
currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
(6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if relevant, 
to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
(a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following 
professional guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive 
changes in behavior and employment). 
  
(b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not just 
alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment 
record) may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
                                                          
 
3 Reference (c) is U.S. Office of Personnel Management Memorandum, Final Credentialing Standards for 
Issuing Personal Identity Verification Cards under HSPD-12, July 31, 2008.  
 
7 
 
 I have carefully considered the facts of this case and applied the adjudicative and 
whole-person standards in DODI 5200.46. Based on the record and Applicant’s 
testimony, there is sufficient evidence to find that the SOR allegations have been 
mitigated and granting CAC eligibility does not pose an unacceptable risk. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
   Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT  
 
       Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Material, Intentional False Statement,  
Deception or Fraud:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, granting Applicant CAC eligibility does not pose 
an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is granted. 
 
 
      
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
