1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
  ) CAC Case No. 17-01990 
  ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility             ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns 
raised under the criminal or dishonest conduct and intentional false statement 
supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC eligibility is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On December 29, 2016, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive 
Positions (SF 85). On November 9, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing concerns for CAC eligibility pursuant 
to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12, Policy for Common Identification 
Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors, dated August 27, 2004 (HSPD-12). 
DOD was unable to find that granting Applicant CAC eligibility posed an acceptable risk.  
The action is based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards found in DOD 
Instruction 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the 
Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The concerns raised under 
the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards of DODI 5200.46 are criminal or dishonest 
conduct and material, intentional false statement. 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 13, 2017, and follow-up email dated 
January 26, 2018, and requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and 
10/11/2018
 
2 
Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the 
SOR and stated that she wanted “to discuss further in court.” The case was forwarded 
to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on March 8, 2018. On August 22, 2018, a 
Notice of Hearing was sent out scheduling the hearing for April 12, 2018. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government’s Exhibits (GE) were not available for the hearing.1 I left the 
record open until April 26, 2018, for Department Counsel to provide the GEs to 
Applicant. She did not object and GE 1 through 4 were later admitted into evidence 
without objection. After the hearing, Applicant also submitted a one-page document 
entitled closing statement that was marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE A) and admitted 
without objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified on her own behalf. Based on the 
record evidence and testimony presented in this case, CAC eligibility was denied.  
 
I issued my original decision on June 15, 2018, denying Applicant’s CAC 
eligibility. Applicant appealed that decision. On September 19, 2018, the Appeal Board 
remanded the case for a new decision based on the fact that I applied the wrong 
standard for adjudicating CAC eligibility. I erroneously stated that “any doubt concerning 
personnel being adjudicated for CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor of the 
national interest.” (Policies section of original decision) In the Conclusion section, I 
stated that “it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC 
eligibility.” The correct standard is set forth in Paragraph 4 of the CAC Adjudicative 
Procedures (DOD Instruction 5200.46, Encl. 4 ¶ 4), which states “The determination will 
be unfavorable . . . when there is a reasonable basis to conclude that derogatory 
information or conduct relating to the supplemental CAC credentialing standards 
presents an unacceptable risk for the U.S. Government [,]” and is repeated in the initial 
paragraph of each supplemental adjudicative standard. Although the correct 
“unacceptable risk” standard was repeatedly referenced in the original decision, the 
erroneous references to “consistent with the national interest” left confusion. I have now 
applied the correct standard and reach the same result for the same reasons.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. Her SOR answer is incorporated in my 
findings of fact. She contends that she would not deliberately or intentionally falsify a 
government form, and she has not been arrested for over five years, and has worked on 
a military installation with a CAC credential for over one year.  
 
Background Information 
 
  Applicant is 40 years old. She has been employed - using her CAC since 
December 12, 2016 by a federal contractor, aboard a military installation. (AE B, Tr. 24) 
Applicant graduated high school in 1996 and had some college courses. She was 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel’s briefcase was sidetracked en route to the hearing. I left the record open for him to 
submit the GEs, which had already been provided in discovery, to Applicant. I also allowed time for 
Applicant to object. She did not raise an objection.  
 
 
3 
married in 2004, and recently separated in 2015. She had no children by that marriage, 
but she has a 25-year old son who still lives with her. (Tr. 24-25) She is profoundly 
disabled. She seeks CAC eligibility as a condition of her continued employment. (GE 1; 
Tr. 10) 
 
 The SOR alleges in ¶ 1 several minor offenses or infractions committed by 
Applicant between 2008 and 2013. SOR ¶ 1.a alleges she was charged with reckless 
driving on March 29, 2013. Applicant admitted this and testified that she drove off at a 
high rate of speed after a dispute with her husband. (Tr. 24) SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c allege 
Applicant was arrested on April 27, 2012, for theft by deception for passing bad checks 
under $50, and other bad checks under $10. She admitted to both and testified that it 
was one arrest but she was subsequently found guilty on all counts. (Tr. 15-16) SOR ¶ 
1.d alleges that on January 14, 2011, Applicant gave a false name to a police officer, 
and she was also charged with possession of marijuana (MJ) and drug paraphernalia. 
She admitted these allegations and she was sentenced to 20 days (served over 10 
weekends) in jail. (Tr. 28) Applicant testified that she went out to walk her dog in the 
middle of the night and discovered a police officer hiding in her bushes. She was scared 
and refused to provide her correct name and address. (Tr. 29) Within minutes, several 
police officers showed up and entered her home to find a remnants of an MJ cigarette, 
and MJ residue in an ashtray. (Tr. 31) She claimed that the MJ belonged to her 
husband and cousin. I did not find this testimony to be credible. She pled guilty to all 
charges. (Tr. 31-32)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges Applicant was arrested for cruelty to animals on May 21, 2010. 
She testified that she came home from work to discover her dog missing. She conferred 
with her son and they determined that the dog was mysteriously taken by animal control 
officers, from inside the home, because it was deprived of water. (Tr. 33-34) Applicant 
offered few details of this taking, and I did not find her to be complete or credible. 
 
 Applicant’s earliest arrests were for harassing communications on April 14, 2008, 
and again on April 30, 2008. (SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g) She testified that both arrests 
stemmed from a dispute with another woman with whom Applicant’s husband was 
cheating. (Tr. 36) This interloper supposedly followed Applicant everywhere. So, 
Applicant threatened to beat her up and the woman reported this to police. (Tr. 37-38) 
Applicant testified that a restraining order was entered mandating that she stay away 
from the woman for six months and then the charges were dismissed. (Tr. 38). 
Applicant has no additional arrests since 2013. Applicant provided two positive 
character-reference letters attesting to her hard work and kindness. (AE A and B) She 
notes that she is in good standing with her employer, which made special 
accommodations for her. 
 
 When Applicant completed her Declaration for Federal Employment (Form 306) 
on December 12, 2016, she answered yes to item 9, which asked “During the last 7 
years, have you been convicted, been imprisoned, been on probation, or been on 
parole?” (GE 2, Tr. 40) However, she only disclosed the 2012 check offenses and the 
2011 arrest for providing false information to a policeman. She filled out the Form 306 in 
a classroom setting. She testified that it was not her intent to falsify a government form. 
 
4 
(Tr. 19-20) She simply forgot about all the various misdemeanors. In particular, she 
forgot to list the only offense for which she went to jail at SOR 1.d. The only reason 
Applicant could ascribe for her omissions was “simple forgetfulness.” (Tr. 42)  
 
    Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. “The determination made will be 
unfavorable . . . when there is a reasonable basis to conclude that derogatory 
information or conduct relating to the supplemental CAC credentialing standards 
presents an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government.”2    
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the avoidance of unacceptable risk is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved against the Applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraphs 2.a., and 2.b(1)(3)(4) and (7) articulate the CAC concern: 
 
                                                          
2 DOD Instruction 5200.46, Enclosure 4 ¶ 4 (Sep. 9, 2014). 
 
5 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.  
 
 DODI Instruction 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards lists the following conditions that raises a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
2.a An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may 
put people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk.  
 
2.b Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include: 
 
           (1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety  
 of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information; 
 
(3) Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying claims, perjury,     
forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation without proper 
authorization); and 
 
(4) Deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, or other intentional financial breaches of 
trust. 
 
 The Government established this disqualifying condition through Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented in the criminal history reports (GE 4).  
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraph 2.c provides a list of circumstances relevant to the determination 
of whether there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. In 
particular, Paragraph 2.c.(1) is applicable: 
 
2.c.(1) – The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.  
 
           The allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g concern a minor personal dispute that 
occurred over 10 years ago, and the charges were dismissed. I find that these 
allegations have been mitigated by the passage of time and are not likely to recur. 
However, SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f have not been mitigated.  
 
 
 
 
6 
Intentional False Statement, Deception or Fraud 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraphs 3, 3.a., and 3.b. articulate the CAC concern: 
 
 3. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe,  
based on the individual’s material, intentional, false statement, deception, or  
fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that issuance of a CAC  
poses an unacceptable risk.  
 
 DODI Instruction 5200.46, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists the following conditions that raise a CAC concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
3.a The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
put people, property, or information systems at risk; and 
 
3.b Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material, 
intentional falsification, deception, or fraud related to answers or 
information provided during the employment process for the current or a 
prior federal or contract employment (e.g., on the employment application, 
or other employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during 
interviews). 
 
3.c Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk include: 
 
    (1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor,   
     or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to  
     recur; and 
 
    (2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent  
    and was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation.  
 
 Applicant answered yes to a question in section 9 of her Declaration for Federal 
Employment (Form 306) that asked about any convictions during the last seven years. 
However, she only listed two of her misdemeanor arrests, for check fraud and providing 
false information to a police officer. She omitted the most serious offenses, for 
possession of MJ and drug paraphernalia and cruelty to animals. Applicant’s only 
explanation was that she forgot to list these offenses. I did not find her explanation to be 
forthright or candid in this regard. The disqualifying condition in ¶ 3.b above is 
applicable. She did not provide sufficient information to mitigate her lack of complete 
disclosure on her Declaration for Federal Employment.  
 
 
7 
 DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, Paragraph 1, 
Guidance For Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the 
following factors: 
 
a. As established in Reference (g), credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c); and 
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious 
the conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient 
information concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained 
to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property, or information systems. 
 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural 
conditions may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions 
are currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
    (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
  
 
8 
    (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not 
just alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
   Applicant has overcome tremendous physical challenges and disadvantages. 
Her last offense was committed in 2013, so her misconduct has been partially mitigated 
by the passage of time. However, she has established a pattern of minor violations of 
the law. This undermines any assurance that she will be trustworthy and reliable in 
complying with responsibilities of her fiduciary relationship with the government. Her 
failure to provide a completely honest response to item 9 of her Form 306 occurred 
recently in December 2016. It is hard to imagine how she could forget about the animal 
cruelty conviction and drug possession arrest – for which she spent 20 days in jail. 
These were her most significant offenses. Applicant provided no explanation other than 
her forgetfulness for this glaring omission. She provided no evidence of restitution for 
the cold checks, and her explanation for the MJ possession conviction is unavailing.  
 
 Having carefully considered the facts of this case, I find ¶¶ 2.b. (1), (4) and (7) of 
the credentialing standards are applicable. Applicant’s minor violations were frequent, 
and her falsification of the Form 306 was recent. Even making allowances for her 
disability and economic circumstances, Applicant has not met her burden in mitigating 
the Government’s concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:                    Against APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a  - 1.e                              Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.g              For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Intentional False Statement:                         Against APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:              Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, issuance 
of a CAC card would present an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                 
__________________________ 
ROBERT J. KILMARTIN 
Administrative Judge 
