1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 17-00458 
  )  
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan J. Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under supplemental adjudicative standards (SAS) for criminal or dishonest conduct and 
alcohol abuse. The concern for misconduct or negligence in employment was unfounded. 
CAC eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 31, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility under Homeland 
Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). The DOD was unable to find that granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk.1 The concerns raised under the 
Adjudicative Standards of DODI 5200.46 are SAS ¶ 2.a, criminal or dishonest conduct; ¶ 
4.a, alcohol abuse; and ¶ 1.a, misconduct or negligence in employment. 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD 
Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014, and the 
procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 23, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 20, 2017. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 22, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for March 14, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and after the hearing, submitted documents marked as Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A-D, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on March 22, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old military-vehicle mechanic for a government contractor 
since 2014. In 2013, Applicant was terminated from a previous job as a result of a 2013 
driving while intoxicated (DWI) conviction. He graduated from high school in 2001. He was 
married in 2010 and divorced in 2013. He has three children, two of whom currently live with 
him. He lives with his girlfriend and cares for her three children as well. He currently holds 
CAC eligibility for access to a government facility. 
 
 The SOR alleges a 2001 arrest and conviction for DWI; a 2002 arrest for possession 
of a controlled substance that was not prosecuted; a 2010 arrest and conviction for drunk 
in public; a 2011 arrest for assault by physical contact; a 2013 DWI arrest and conviction; 
and a 2013 citation for driving on an invalid license. The alcohol-related allegations were 
cross-alleged under the standard for alcohol abuse, and Applicant’s job loss due to his 2013 
DWI was alleged under the standard for misconduct or negligence in employment. Applicant 
admitted all of the allegations except he noted that his 2002 possession charge was “no 
billed” by the grand jury. 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2001 for DWI when he was 18 years old. He attended 
Alcoholics Anonymous meetings and a Mothers Against Drunk Driving course mandated by 
his terms of probation. In 2002, he was arrested for possession of cocaine, but the case 
was “no billed” and he was not prosecuted. He admitted first using marijuana while in 
seventh grade, and he stopped in 2010. He also used cocaine once when he was 15 years 
old. 
 
 In 2010, Applicant was arrested at a resort for public intoxication after getting into a 
dispute with another person. In 2011, Applicant was arrested for assault after a dispute with 
his mother’s boyfriend. 
 
 In 2013, Applicant was arrested on New Year’s Day for his second DWI. Applicant 
was convicted and served 15 days in jail. As a result of his conviction, he was terminated 
from a job he held since graduating from high school because he was required to install an 
alcohol-interlock device on his work vehicle. His wife divorced him and he lost the home he 
was renting because of his unemployment. While moving from his home, he was cited for 
driving on a suspended driver’s license. While serving his sentence in jail, Applicant came 
to the realization that his drinking had led to serious consequences during his life. He vowed 
to stop drinking and has remained abstinent since 2013. 
  
3 
 
 Applicant was evaluated for substance abuse counseling on March 23, 2018, using 
the Substance Abuse Screening Inventory (SASSI-4). Based on his history of alcohol use, 
he was assessed as having a high probability of a substance-use disorder. However, the 
licensed evaluator noted that the SASSI does not yield a clinical diagnosis, but rather a 
screening result that can be used as one piece of information when conducting clinical 
diagnostic evaluations. Based on the DSM-V Diagnostic Criteria for Substance Use 
Disorders, Applicant does not display any symptoms of having a substance-use disorder. 
The evaluator recommended that Applicant need not seek counseling unless he is unable 
to maintain abstinence. To date, he remains abstinent. 
 
 Applicant no longer stays at events where alcohol is present. He expressed shame 
for his past behavior and acknowledged how it adversely affected him and his family. He 
submitted character letters that generally support his abstinence from alcohol, renewed 
lifestyle, honesty, work ethic, responsible behavior at work and home, and sincere remorse 
for his past behavior. Applicant’s work site manager has known him for several years and 
noted that he is a reliable employee who does not pose a threat to anyone. 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor for 
all of these conditions is unacceptable risk.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the nature 
and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; (3) the 
recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of 
the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or presence of efforts 
towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1)  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, SAS ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that issuance of a 
CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
4 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put people, 
property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or 
dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(2) charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of people 
and proper protection of property or information systems, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
(5) actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal nature that 
poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-controlled facilities 
and federally-controlled information systems. 
 
 Applicant has a history of criminal conduct including assault and DWI. SAS ¶¶ 2.b 
(2) and (5) apply. 
 
 SAS ¶ 2.c provides circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is 
a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. Relevant conditions include: 
 
(1) the behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
 
(2) charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did not 
commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her innocence; and 
 
(4) evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but not 
limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of time 
without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant’s last criminal offense was in 2013. At that time, he contemplated how 
continued abuse of alcohol adversely affected him and his future. He acknowledged his past 
behavior and took action to avoid future problems. He stopped drinking in 2013. His 
testimony and those of his character references support his sobriety and changed behavior. 
He has a good work history, and but for his 2013 DWI, he would likely still be employed with 
the same employer since graduating from high school. However, as a result of his DWI and 
the need for an alcohol-interlock device on a company vehicle, he lost his long-held job. In 
2014, he found a new position that he has since held without incident. 
 
 Applicant was evaluated for a substance-use disorder and advised to continue his 
abstinence and only seek counseling if he had difficulty complying. Applicant has remained 
sober for over five years and has not had a recurrence of criminal or alcohol-related 
5 
 
incidents. I have sufficient evidence to determine that Applicant’s criminal and alcohol-
related misconduct is unlikely to recur and that his alcohol use is now under control. 
Applicant provided sufficient documentary evidence showing that he does not display any 
symptoms of having a substance-use disorder and that counseling is not recommended 
unless he is unable to maintain abstinence. 
 
Alcohol Abuse 
 
DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 4 describes the concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe, based 
on the nature or duration of the individual’s alcohol abuse without evidence of substantial 
rehabilitation, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
An individual’s abuse of alcohol may put people, property, or information systems at 
risk. Alcohol abuse can lead to the exercise of questionable judgment or failure to control 
impulses, and may put people, property, or information systems at risk, regardless of 
whether he or she is diagnosed as an abuser of alcohol or alcohol dependent. A person’s 
long-term abuse of alcohol without evidence of substantial rehabilitation may indicate that 
granting a CAC poses an unacceptable safety risk in a U.S. Government facility. 
 
DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 4b, lists conditions that raise a CAC concern 
and may be disqualifying: 
 
(1) A pattern of alcohol-related arrests. 
 
As described above, Applicant has a history of alcohol-related incidents resulting in 
criminal conduct. SAS ¶ 4b(1) applies because Applicant has a pattern of alcohol-related 
arrests. 
 
DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 4c, lists three conditions that could mitigate 
concerns about “whether there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable 
risk”: 
 
(1) The individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an abuser of alcohol);
 
(2) The individual is participating in counseling or treatment programs, has 
no history of previous treatment or relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress; and 
 
(3) The individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare. He or she has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
 
6 
participation in an alcohol treatment program. The individual has received a 
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
Applicant has acknowledged his alcohol problems and testified to self-abstaining 
from alcohol use since 2013. His character letters, medical evaluation, and testimony 
support his abstinence for over five years, remorse for his past behavior, and a change 
in lifestyle. As stated above, Applicant was evaluated for a substance-use disorder and 
advised to continue his abstinence from alcohol and to seek counseling only if he had 
difficulty complying. I find that SAS ¶¶ 4c(1) and (2) apply, and 4c(3) partially applies. 
 
Misconduct or Negligence in Employment 
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 1 describes concerns that arise from 
misconduct or negligence in employment. The SOR allegations raise criminal and alcohol 
related issues that resulted in termination from employment, but did not arise while at 
work nor were they directly related to actions during work. Based on the facts of this case, 
I determine that Applicant’s conduct resulted in his termination, but did not directly 
implicate standards described under SAS ¶ 1. Therefore, SOR ¶ 3.a is unfounded.  
 
 I have carefully considered all of the facts of this case and applied the adjudicative 
and whole-person standards in DODI 5200.46. Based on the record and Applicant’s 
testimony, there is sufficient evidence to find that the behavior leading to the denial of 
Applicant’s CAC eligibility has been overcome and that he no longer poses an 
unacceptable risk. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:      For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Alcohol Abuse:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:       For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Misconduct or Negligence in Employment: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:       For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, granting Applicant CAC eligibility does not pose 
an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is granted. 
   
 
    
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
