KEYWORD: CAC
DIGEST: We conclude that application of the wrong standard raises due process concerns and
warrants corrective action.  Given these circumstances, the best resolution is to remand the case
to the Judge for correction of the identified error and issuance of a new decision consistent with
the requirements of the Instruction. Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 17-01990.a1
DATE: 09/19/2018
DATE: September 19, 2018
In Re:
--------------------
 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
CAC Case No. 17-01990
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant eligibility for Common
Access Card (CAC) credentialing.  On November 9, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–Criminal, Dishonest Conduct, or Financial
Irresponsibility concerns and Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud concerns,
raised under the adjudicative standards in the appendices of DoD Instruction 5200.46 (Sep. 9, 2014)
(Instruction).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 15, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert J. Kilmartin denied Applicant’s
request for CAC eligibility.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶ 6.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we remand the Judge’s
decision.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant is a 40-year-old disabled employee of a Federal contractor.  She has been working
for her current employer at a military installation since late 2016.  The SOR alleges several minor
offenses or infractions, including that Applicant was charged with reckless driving in 2013; arrested
for theft by deception - passing two bad checks in 2012; arrested for giving a false name to a police
officer and possession of marijuana in 2011; and arrested for cruelty to animals in 2010.  She
admitted the reckless driving allegation, was found guilty of the bad check offenses, and was
sentenced to serve 20 days in jail for the false name and drug offenses.  The Judge found portions
of her testimony to be not credible.  She has not been arrested since 2013.  
In completing a Declaration for Federal Employment (Form 306) in 2016, Applicant
answered “Yes” to the question that asked if she had been convicted, imprisoned, on probation, or
on parole in the last seven years.  She only disclosed the 2012 check offenses and 2011 arrest for
providing false information to a policeman.  She attributed her Form 306 omissions to “simple
forgetfulness.”  Decision at 3.  She provided character reference letters attesting to her hard work
and kindness. 
With the exception of two minor charges,1 the Judge found that Applicant had not mitigated
the criminal and dishonest conduct concerns.  She omitted information about the most serious
offenses from her Form 306.  The Judge did not find her explanation for the omissions to be
forthright or candid.  She did not mitigate the material, intentional, false statement, deception, or
fraud concerns. 
Discussion
1 The Judge found in favor of Applicant on two harassing communication charges from 2008.  
2
In this case, the Judge applied the wrong standard for adjudicating CAC eligibility.2  In the
Policies Section of the decision, the Judge stated, “The decision must be arrived at by applying the
standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the national interest.”  Decision
at 3.  The Judge further stated, “Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for
CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor of the national interest.”  Decision at 4.   In his
conclusion, the Judge found, “it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant
CAC eligibility.”  Decision at 8.  The “clearly consistent with national interest” standard is not
applicable in CAC adjudications.3  
In a CAC adjudication, “the overriding factor . . . is unacceptable risk.”4  Instruction,
Enclosure 4 ¶ 1(b).  In this case, the SOR alleged CAC eligibility concerns under Paragraphs 2.a and
3.a of the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards (Instruction, App. 2 to Encl. 4).  Consequently, the
correct adjudication standard is generally set out in Paragraph 4 of the CAC Adjudicative Procedures
(Instruction, Encl. 4 ¶ 4), which  states: “The determination will be unfavorable . . . when there is
a reasonable basis to conclude that derogatory information or conduct relating to the supplemental
CAC credentialing standards presents an unacceptable risk for the U.S. Government[,]” and is more
specifically set out in the initial paragraph of each supplemental adjudicative standard.
  
We conclude that application of the wrong standard raises due process concerns and warrants
corrective action.  Given these circumstances, the best resolution is to remand the case to the Judge
for correction of the identified error and issuance of a new decision consistent with the requirements
of the Instruction.  Applicant raised other issues on appeal that are not ripe for discussion at this
time.
2 Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶ 6 provides that appeals to DOHA of CAC cases are accorded the established
administrative procedures set out in DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 1991, as amended)(Directive).  Appeal Board security clearance decisions interpreting and analyzing
the administrative procedures in the Directive apply equally in our review of CAC adjudications under the Instruction. 
See, e.g., CAC Case No. 15-00895 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 16, 2016). 
3 The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard applies to security clearance adjudications.  See,
Exec. Order No. 10865 ¶ 2 (1960, as amended); Directive ¶¶ 2.3; 3.2; and Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(c).  See also, Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  
4 “Unacceptable risk” is defined as “[a] threat to life, safety, or health of employees, contractors, vendors, or
visitors; to the U.S. Government[’s] physical assets or information systems; to personal property; to records, including
classified, privileged, proprietary, financial, and medical records; or to the privacy rights established by The Privacy Act
of 1974, as amended, or other law that is deemed unacceptable when making risk management determinations.” 
Instruction, Glossary, Part II, Definitions.  
3
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
