KEYWORD: CAC
DIGEST: The application of the wrong standard raises due process concerns and warrants
corrective action.  Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 17-01992.a1
DATE: 10/29/2018
DATE: October 29, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
CAC Case No. 17-01992
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant eligibility for Common
Access Card (CAC) credentialing.  On November 8, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–Criminal, Dishonest Conduct, or Financial
Irresponsibility concerns and Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud concerns,
raised under the adjudicative standards in the appendices of DoD Instruction 5200.46 (Sep. 9, 2014)
(Instruction).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On August 10, 2018, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶ 6.
In analyzing the concerns in Applicant’s case, the Judge applied the wrong standard. Both 
in the Policies section of the Decision as well as in the Conclusion, the Judge cited to the “clearly
consistent with the national interest” standard required for security clearance determinations.1  Also,
the Policies section contains the following language: “In all adjudications, the protection of the
national security is the paramount consideration. Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being
considered for CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor of the national interest.”  In a CAC case,
however, the appropriate standard is whether the applicant’s conduct poses an “unacceptable risk.”2 
The application of the wrong standard raises due process concerns and warrants corrective action. 
Given these circumstances, the best resolution is to remand the case to the Judge for correction of
the identified error and issuance of a new decision consistent with the requirements of the
Instruction.
1 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  
2 “[T]he overriding factor . . . is unacceptable risk.”  Instruction, Encl. 4 ¶ 1(b).  “The determination will be
unfavorable . . . when there is a reasonable basis to conclude that derogatory information or conduct relating to the    
. . . CAC credentialing standards presents an unacceptable risk for the U.S. Government.”  Id. at ¶ 4.
2
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy          
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
