KEYWORD: CAC
DIGEST: The application of the wrong standard raises due process concerns and warrants
corrective action. Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 17-01458.a1
DATE: 10/29/2018
DATE: October 29, 2018
In Re:
-----------------------
 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
CAC Case No. 17-01458
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant eligibility for Common
Access Card (CAC) credentialing.  On November 9, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–Criminal or Dishonest Conduct concerns, raised
under the adjudicative standards in the appendices of DoD Instruction 5200.46 (Sep. 9, 2014)
(Instruction).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On June 28, 2018, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Matthew E. Malone denied Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility. Applicant appealed pursuant
to Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶ 6.
In analyzing the concerns in Applicant’s case, the Judge applied the wrong standard.  Both
in the Policies section of the Decision as well as in the Conclusion, the Judge cited to the “clearly
consistent with the national interest” standard required for security clearance determinations.1  Also,
the Policies section contains the following language: “In all adjudications, the protection of the
national interest is the paramount consideration.  Therefore, any doubt concerning an applicant’s
CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor of the national interest.” In a CAC case, however, the
appropriate standard is whether the applicant’s conduct poses an “unacceptable risk.”2  The
application of the wrong standard raises due process concerns and warrants corrective action.  Given
these circumstances, the best resolution is to remand the case to the Judge for correction of the
identified error and issuance of a new decision consistent with the requirements of the Instruction.
1Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
2“[T]he overriding factor . . . is unacceptable risk.”  Instruction, Encl. 4 ¶ 1(b).  “The determination will be
unfavorable . . . when there is a reasonable basis to conclude that derogatory information or conduct relating to the    
. . . CAC credentialing standards presents an unacceptable risk for the U.S. Government.”  Id. at ¶ 4.  
2
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                   
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
