 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
            )    CAC Case No. 17-00069 
   ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility                            ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under misconduct or negligence in employment supplemental adjudicative standards. 
CAC eligibility is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 11, 2016, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for non-sensitive 
positions (SF 85). On May 12, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing concerns for Common Access Card 
eligibility pursuant to  Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). DOD 
was unable to find that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable 
risk.  
 
The action is based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards found in DoD 
Instruction 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the 
Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  The concern raised under 
the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards of DoDI 5200.46 is employment negligence or 
misconduct.   
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 9, 2017, and requested a hearing before a 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. The case was 
forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on August 7, 2017. On August 22, 
2017, a Notice of Hearing was sent out scheduling the hearing for September 26, 2017. 
The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
 Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 5, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, 
which was received without objection. It included a statement of earnings, two character 
reference letters, and 3 performance evaluations. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
October 4, 2017. Based on the record evidence and testimony presented in this case, 
CAC eligibility is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the single SOR allegation with explanations. His SOR answer is 
incorporated in my findings of fact. He contends that he was not involuntarily terminated 
from employment with the Kentucky Department of Juvenile Justice (DJJ) for 
misconduct. Instead, Applicant’s attorney negotiated an agreement in March 2016 
allowing him to resign his position and retire with a neutral reference. (Answer, GE 5, Tr. 
55-56). He was paid for all of his accrued annual leave, and he is eligible to be re-hired 
by any state agency except the Kentucky DJJ. The evidence substantiated his 
contentions.  
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old. He has been unemployed since March 2016 pending 
employment by a defense contractor at a call center located aboard a large military 
installation. He was allowed to resign from Kentucky DJJ in the face of allegations of 
impropriety during his employment there. (Tr. 51 - 56) He receives a pension from DJJ 
presently. He seeks CAC eligibility as a condition of his continued employment. (GE 1; 
Tr. 53) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 1977 and obtained a bachelor’s degree 
in 2006. Applicant is married and he has five children and 13 grandchildren. He served 
honorably in the armed forces reserve for 20 years, retiring as an Staff Sergeant from 
the National Guard in 2008. (GE 1) Applicant is a 100% disabled veteran. He receives 
$3,182 each month from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) in addition to his 
pension from the Kentucky DJJ in the amount of $815 each month.  
 
 Applicant previously worked as a corrections officer and supervisor in the 
Maryland Department of Corrections (DOC) from 1984 – 1994, including seven years at 
Baltimore City Jail. He moved to Kentucky in 1994. (GE 1, Tr. 29) He worked in a 
factory for a few years, then as a truck driver, before working with the Kentucky DJJ 
from 1999 to 2016.  
 
 
 
3 
Misconduct or Negligence in Employment 
 
 CAC credentialing concerns were identified when Applicant disclosed that he left 
his job with DJJ in March 2016 by mutual agreement because of specific problems, in 
response to question 12 on a Declaration for Federal Employment signed on August 29, 
2016. (GE 2) At that time, Applicant’s appeal of his recommended termination from DJJ 
was pending. It was resolved by a Settlement Agreement entered into in January 2017, 
wherein the state capitulated and he was allowed to resign and retire. (AE A)  
 
Applicant was alleged to have, on multiple occasions between May 2015 and 
February 2016, used his position at DJJ to obtain and secure information from a 
secured database about a client of DJJ, who was not under his assigned supervision. 
He passed that information to the client’s incarcerated mother, with whom he was 
engaged in an intimate relationship. (GE 5, Appendix A, Count 1) Employees of DJJ 
routinely shared such information with the parents of detainees. (Tr. 44) No evidence of 
a quid pro quo arrangement was developed. Applicant testified that he worked for seven 
years in DJJ counseling youth offenders. He has an unblemished record working a total 
of 27 years in the criminal justice system in two states. (Tr. 31-32) 
 
Between May 2015 and February 2016, Applicant used his private e-mail 
account on a state computer to send approximately 118 e-mails to Ms. L., who was 
incarcerated from March 2014 to February 2015. (Tr. 40) Applicant also received 27 
phone calls from Ms. L. while he was at work. She was the mother of two juvenile 
detainees. One had been Applicant’s client a few years before Applicant started a 
carnal relationship with the mother. Applicant admitted that it was a mistake to use the 
state computer to send e-mails that often contained off-color, racy language, to his 
lover. He was fully aware that his e-mails might be monitored but he was under the 
mistaken impression that it was permissible because it was a private e-mail account, 
albeit on a state computer. (Tr. 25, 36) He was not trying to hide this relationship from 
DJJ. (Tr. 49) His mistake cost him his career as he was terminated on March 18, 2016 
from DJJ. (GE 2, GE 5, AE A) 
 
Applicant’s wife became aware of his affair after he was forced to resign. (Tr. 38, 
42) Applicant fully disclosed his employment problems at DJJ in his Declaration for 
Federal Employment. (Tr. 56) He has cooperated fully in the DJJ investigation and the 
ensuing background investigation. He recognizes his mistakes and maintains that this 
was an isolated incident in an otherwise unblemished career. Applicant provided two 
character reference letters and several performance evaluations showing that he is well 
respected, and he was a highly effective employee of DJJ. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
 
4 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Misconduct or Negligence in Employment 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraphs 1, 1.a., and 1.b.(1) articulate the CAC concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in 
employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.  
 
 DODI Instruction 5200.46, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists the following condition that raises a CAC concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
1.b.(1) – A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, 
disruptive, violent, or other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to 
people, property, or information systems.  
 
 The Government established this disqualifying condition through Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented as a result of his resignation under pressure from 
DJJ. 
 
 
5 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraph 1.c provides a list of circumstances relevant to the determination 
of whether there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. In 
particular, Paragraph 1.c.(1) is applicable: 
 
1.c.(1) – The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under  
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current trustworthiness or good judgment relating to the safety of 
people and proper safeguarding of property and information systems.  
 
 DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, Paragraph 1, 
Guidance For Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the 
following factors to be considered in each case: 
 
a. As established in Reference (g), credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c).  
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious 
the conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient 
information concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained 
to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property, or information systems. 
 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural 
conditions may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions 
are currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
6 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
     (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
  
    (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not 
just alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
  When Applicant was forced to resign from DJJ, he was involved in an 
extramarital affair, which he doesn’t deny. His wife and former employer are fully aware 
of the offense. Previously, he served 20 years in the military reserve, and 27 years in 
corrections, without any issues. It is unlikely that all of the circumstances surrounding 
this affair will ever be determined with certainty. What is noteworthy is that Applicant 
disclosed this on his Declaration for Federal Employment, and he has cooperated fully 
in the investigation. Applicant’s former employer considered him to be a highly effective 
employee and he has a long career in public service. Having carefully considered the 
facts of this case, I find ¶¶ 1.b. (1) and (3) of the credentialing standards are applicable. 
This use of state resources to perpetuate an affair was an isolated incident and not 
serious in nature. It happened nearly two years ago and is not likely to recur.  
 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility should be 
granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Misconduct - Negligence in Employment:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a                                  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
ROBERT J. KILMARTIN 
Administrative Judge 
