 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )   
  )  CAC Case No. 17-01632 
  )   
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the intentional false statement supplemental adjudicative standards, but he did 
not mitigate the credentialing concerns raised under the criminal or dishonest conduct 
supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC eligibility is denied.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing credentialing concerns for CAC eligibility under 
the adjudicative standards of criminal or dishonest conduct and intentional false 
statement. Applicant responded to the SOR on October 9, 2017, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
The Government’s written case was submitted on January 12, 2018. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the credentialing concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 25, 2018. 
 
2 
As of March 27, 2018, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on June 6, 
2018. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2015.1  
 
 Applicant was arrested in December 2012 and charged with aggravated driving 
under the influence (DUI), defective vehicle, and failure to maintain lane. He pleaded 
guilty to the aggravated DUI charge, and he received a deferred adjudication with a 
sentence that included a fine and attendance at a victim impact panel and a DUI class. 
Applicant completed the terms of the deferred adjudication, and the charge was 
dismissed and expunged from his record in April 2014.2 
 
 Applicant was charged in October 2016 with felony value-false pretense/bogus 
check/con game. He pleaded guilty the same month to the misdemeanor charge of 
bogus check. He received a two-year deferred adjudication, which included a fine of 
$1,442 and unsupervised probation during the duration of the deferred adjudication.3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Declaration for Federal Employment in May 2016. He 
answered “No” to Section 9, which asked: “During the last 7 years, have you been 
convicted, been imprisoned, been on probation, or been on parole?” The instructions 
stated that “any conviction for which the record was expunged under Federal or state 
law” should be omitted. Because the 2012 charge was expunged in 2014, that charge 
did not have to be reported. Applicant was not sentenced and placed on probation for 
the 2016 offense until five months after the declaration was submitted, so that did not 
have to be reported.4 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Homeland Security Presidential Directive - 12 
(HSPD-12); DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative 
Guidance for Issuing the CAC, dated September 9, 2014; and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Items 2, 6. 
 
3 Items 2, 7. 
 
4 Item 5. 
 
 
3 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1)  
 
Analysis 
 
Intentional False Statement 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 3 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, 
deception or fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.  
 
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material, 
intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or 
information provided during the employment process for the current or a 
prior federal or contract employment (e.g., on the employment application 
or other employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during 
interviews.) 
 
Applicant did not intentionally falsify the Declaration for Federal Employment. 
There are no applicable disqualifying conditions. Intentional false statement 
credentialing concerns are concluded for Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.b lists several conditions that could raise a CAC eligibility concern and 
may be disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(1) A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put the safety 
of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or information. A 
person’s convictions for burglary may indicate that granting a CAC poses 
an unacceptable risk to the U.S. Government’s physical assets and to 
employees’ personal property on a U.S. Government facility; and 
 
(2) Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal history is sufficient to establish the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, ¶ 2.c lists circumstances relevant to the determination whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. The following may be 
relevant:  
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur;  
 
(2) Charges were dismissed or evidence was provided that the person did 
not commit the offense and details and reasons support his or her 
innocence; and 
 
 
5 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 The 2012 aggravated DUI charge was dismissed and expunged in 2014. Under 
the circumstances of the deferred adjudication, that is insufficient to establish that 
Applicant was innocent of the charge. Applicant is still on unsupervised probation for the 
2016 bogus check charge.  
 
I am unable to determine that criminal behavior is unlikely to recur. There is 
some mitigation, but the limited information in the FORM has not convinced me that 
Applicant does not pose an unacceptable risk. I also considered the factors in DODI 
5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:   Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Intentional False Statement:   For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility poses an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
 
      
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
