 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:   ) 
   ) 
             )    CAC Case No. 17-00922 
   ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility                             ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under misconduct or negligence in employment, and material, intentional false 
statement, deception or fraud supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC eligibility is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 16, 2016, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive 
Positions (SF 85). On May 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing concerns for CAC eligibility pursuant 
to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12, Policy for Common Identification 
Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors, dated August 27, 2004 (HSPD-12). 
DOD was unable to find that granting Applicant CAC eligibility posed an acceptable risk.  
 
The action is based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards found in DOD 
Instruction 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the 
Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set out in 
Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The concerns raised under 
 
2 
the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards of DoDI 5200.46 are employment misconduct 
and material, intentional false statement, deception or fraud. 
   
Applicant answered the SOR on June 28, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. Applicant 
attached a letter from the Department of the Army Medical Activity, dated October 2, 
2016, reflecting his diagnoses of PTSD, sleep apnea, and a chipped bone in his foot. 
The case was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on August 7, 2017. 
On August 22, 2017, a Notice of Hearing was sent out scheduling the hearing for 
September 27, 2017. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
 Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 4, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. Based on the 
record evidence and testimony presented in this case, CAC eligibility is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the two SOR allegations with explanations. His SOR answer is 
incorporated in my findings of fact. He contends that he was not involuntarily terminated 
from employment with the [a] glass company (company) for violation of the company’s 
attendance policy. Instead, he chose to voluntarily quit due to his PTSD condition, when 
the adverse work conditions, pressure and stress became too much. (Answer, Tr. 32) 
Since it was Applicant’s reasonable understanding that he voluntarily ended 
employment at company, there was no adverse employment action to report on his 
subsequent Declaration of Federal Service Form. The evidence substantiated his 
contentions.  
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old. He has been employed since November 7, 2016, by a 
federal contractor. Applicant graduated high school in 2001 and enlisted in the Army. He 
was deployed to Iraq in 2003 – 2004, where he chipped a bone in his foot jumping off a 
five-ton truck. Applicant received numerous decorations and awards for his service and 
he received an honorable discharge when he left active duty as an E-4 Specialist in 
2004. (Tr. 22) Applicant met his wife, a Sergeant First Class, while he was in Iraq. They 
married in 2004, and have three children. He is rated by the Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) as 70% disabled. (Tr. 25) He seeks CAC eligibility as a condition of his 
continued employment. (GE 1; Tr. 23) 
 
 Applicant worked as a furnace operator creating windshields at a company from 
February 1, 2016, to September 28, 2016, when he quit due to the work conditions. (Tr. 
13, 31) The company notified Applicant three weeks later, by letter dated September 28, 
2016, that his employment ended that day due to violations of the attendance policy. 
(GE 3) It states: “You were scheduled to work on September 8, 2016, but you did not 
report to work or call your coordinator to report your absence . . . Not calling in will be 
considered a no call/ no show . . . If an associate does not give notification of absence 
 
3 
for 24 consecutive scheduled work hours it will be considered a voluntary quit.” (GE 3) 
Applicant testified credibly that this is exactly what happened. (Tr. 19) He quit. 
 
Applicant testified credibly that he notified his supervisor and human resources 
(HR) manager beforehand that he was a disabled veteran. (Tr. 20) He told the HR 
manager “I can’t do it no more. I can’t. I was working at 100 degree plus temperatures, I 
would have, you know, just the feeling of being in Iraq once again. Or I would be under 
so much pressure, and I was not in a happy place in my life.” (Tr. 20 -21, 32) He could 
not work 12 hour-shifts anymore. (Tr. 34) He discussed his medical conditions with the 
HR manager during the first week of September 2016. (Tr. 35) He agreed to provide 
medical documentation from the Army. Somehow, due to miscommunications from his 
supervisor about his scheduled shifts, Applicant missed work on September 8–9, 2016. 
(Tr. 34-36) He disputes that he was ever scheduled to work those two days. (Tr. 42-43) 
This misunderstanding resulted in the September 28, 2016, letter ending Applicant’s 
employment. (GE 3) I find that the letter, sent three weeks after the fact, is confusing, 
opportunistic, and easily misunderstood. Applicant did not interpret it to say he was 
terminated. (Tr. 38) It does not expressly use the word “terminated”. (GE 3, Tr. 52) 
 
 When Applicant completed his Declaration for Federal Employment on 
November 4, 2016, he answered no to the salient questions because he reasonably 
believed he was not fired by the company. (Tr. 37) He quit. It was not his intent to falsify 
a government form. (Tr. 40)  
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. The decision must be arrived at by 
applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility is clearly consistent with the 
national interest.    
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
 
4 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1) In 
all adjudications, the protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  
Therefore, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should 
be resolved in favor of the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Misconduct or Negligence in Employment 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraphs 1, 1.a., and 1.b.(1) articulate the CAC concern: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in 
employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.  
 
 DODI Instruction 5200.46, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists the following conditions that raises a CAC concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
1.b.(1) – A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, 
disruptive, violent, or other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to 
people, property, or information systems.  
 
 The Government established this disqualifying condition through evidence 
presented as a result of his departure from the company (GE 2, GE 3, and GE 4). 
Although it is patently obvious that the company had a struggling combat veteran who 
was confused, the company nonetheless wrote him up for a putative violation of the 
attendance policy.  
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraph 1.c provides a list of circumstances relevant to the determination 
of whether there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk. In 
particular, Paragraph 1.c.(1) is applicable: 
 
1.c.(1) – The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under  
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current trustworthiness or good judgment relating to the safety of 
people and proper safeguarding of property and information systems.  
 
Material, Intentional, or False Statement, Deception or Fraud 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative 
Standards, Paragraphs 3, 3.a., and 3.b. articulate the CAC concern: 
 
 3. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to believe,  
 
5 
based on the individual’s material, intentional, false statement, deception, or  
fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that issuance of a CAC  
poses an unacceptable risk.  
 
 DODI Instruction 5200.46, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
lists the following conditions that raises a CAC concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
3.a The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and put people, property, or 
information systems at risk;  
 
3.b Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material, intentional 
falsification, deception, or fraud related to answers or information provided during 
the employment process for the current or a prior federal or contract employment 
(e.g., on the employment application, or other employment, appointment or 
investigative documents, or during interviews). 
 
3.c Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable 
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk include: 
 
     (1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor, or  
     happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. 
 
     (2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent and was    
      followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation.  
 
 Applicant reasonably believed that he quit the company. There was no reason for 
him to list any issues with his employment history on his Declaration for Federal 
Employment. None of the disqualifying conditions above apply.  
 
 DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, Paragraph 1, 
Guidance For Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the 
following factors to be considered in each case: 
 
a. As established in Reference (g), credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c); and 
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 
6 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious 
the conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient 
information concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained 
to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property, or information systems. 
 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural 
conditions may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions 
are currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
    (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
  
    (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not 
just alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
  When Applicant resigned from the company, he was experiencing duress, which 
he doesn’t deny. He asked his supervisor and HR manager for help and explained that 
he couldn’t work 12-hour shifts anymore. He is a disabled combat veteran who served 
honorably in the Army. It is clear that the company knew this and made no 
accommodations. It is unlikely that all of the circumstances surrounding this resignation 
will ever be determined with certainty. What is noteworthy is that Applicant had asked 
his employer for help before he quit. Many weeks later, the company created GE 3. 
There was no reason for Applicant to disclose an adverse employment event on his 
Declaration for Federal Employment, and he has cooperated fully in the investigation. 
Having carefully considered the facts of this case, I find ¶¶ 1.b. (1), (2) and (3) of the 
credentialing standards are applicable. This sudden departure from the company was 
 
7 
an isolated incident and not serious in nature. It happened more than one year ago and 
is not likely to recur.  
 
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility should be 
granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Misconduct - Negligence in Employment:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a                                 For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Material Intentional False Statement:            FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:               For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
ROBERT J. KILMARTIN 
Administrative Judge 
