 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  CAC Case No. 17-01634 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Goldstein, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access Card 
(CAC) issuance pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive–12 (HSPD-12). 
The action is based on the Adjudicative Standards found in DoD Instruction 5200.46, 
DoD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the Common Access Card, 
dated September 9, 2014, and made pursuant to the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 
of DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The concerns raised under the 
Adjudicative Standards of DoDI 5200.46 are: Paragraph 2.a (Criminal or Dishonest 
Conduct).   
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 1, 2017 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 
29, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on January 8, 2018, scheduling the hearing for February 22, 2018. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which 
 
2 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The record was left open until March 23, 2018, for receipt of 
additional documentation. On March 23, 2018, Applicant presented AE B through AE D, 
which were admitted over Department Counsel’s objections. The record then closed. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 1, 2018. Based on the 
record evidence and testimony presented in this case, Common Access Card eligibility 
is denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He works as an aircraft mechanic and has been with 
his current employer, a government contractor, for two-and-a-half years. He is married 
and has one child. (Tr. 13-15; AE B; AE C.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s criminal or dishonest conduct raised concerns 
under DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. 
Specifically, it alleged that Applicant was arrested on January 22, 2015, and charged 
with Hit/Run. He pled guilty and was sentenced to one year probation and five days 
community service. He was required to pay restitution to the victim of his crime. 
 
 Applicant explained that he was driving around a community looking for a 
recycling center to recycle items like cans and cardboard for money. He testified:  
 
So, I'm looking and scouting around to see where I can recycle my, you 
know, materials from. And I'm going the speed limit, and this guy is 
rushing to get somewhere. And, so, we both stopped at a stoplight after he 
zooms across me or whatever. I look at him momentarily just to see what 
his intentions were. And then, after that, he started following me. (Tr. 17-
18.) 
  
 The other driver allegedly followed Applicant for 15 minutes. Applicant claimed 
he was fearful that the driver of the other car might have a weapon, despite not seeing a 
weapon. Applicant accelerated. He had two cell phones in his vehicle, but did not call 
the police. He was traveling northbound in a business district, and decided to make a U-
turn to get away from the person that was following him, instead of pulling into a 
business lot to seek help. Applicant accelerated to approximately 50 mph. As Applicant 
made the U-Turn, he struck two vehicles. However, he feared for his life because he 
believed the other driver was still following him, so he did not stop. Applicant also 
confessed to the police that he had an unconsumed open container of alcohol in his 
vehicle, which also contributed to his decision not to stop at the scene of the accident. 
About ten minutes later, when Applicant no longer believed he was being followed, he 
flagged down a police officer. (GE 3; Tr. 17-47.) 
 
 The police report of the accident, which referred to Applicant as “D-1,” reflected: 
D-1 stated that the traffic light turned yellow and he attempted to beat the 
light by accelerating. The traffic light turned red prior to V-1 entering the 
intersection and D-1 applied the breaks causing the vehicle to skid into the 
 
3 
intersection. D-1 lost control of the vehicle and went into the northbound 
lanes. D-1 stated he accelerated in an attempt to regain control of V-1. 
The rear of V-1 collided into V-2 and the front of V-1 collided into V-3. D1 
stated he fled the scene because he was scared and he had an open 
container in the vehicle. D-1 stated he knew he was supposed to stop but 
was scared and in shock. (GE 3.) 
 
The report further reflected: 
 
I was parked at [location omitted], when I saw a vehicle matching the 
description of the hit and run vehicle traveling westbound on [omitted] St. 
in the number two lane. The vehicle had front end damage and rear end 
damage. As I drove [omitted] to follow the vehicle, I saw it stopped along 
the curb and I saw the driver exit the vehicle. The male driver, flagged me 
down, stating someone was chasing him. The male was the vehicle’s sole 
occupant. I identified him by his [state] driver’s license as [Applicant]. 
 
[Applicant] told me he was involved in a traffic collision and left the scene 
because he was “scared.” Later it was determined that no one was 
“chasing” him. [Applicant performed the SFST’s and provided a breath 
sample of .02% BAC. I determined alcohol impairment was not a factor in 
the collision. He did not display symptoms of being under the influence of 
a controlled substance. (GE 3.)  
 
 Applicant was charged with misdemeanor hit and run. On October 22, 2016, he 
pled guilty to that charge. He was sentenced to unsupervised probation for one year 
and required to perform five days of community service. His insurance paid restitution to 
the victims. (AE A.)  
 
 Applicant presented two character reference letters from his safety manager and 
a coworker. Both attest that Applicant is a good worker. (AE D.) 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The HSPD-12 
credentialing standards are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic 
Adjudicative Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The 
overriding factor for all of these eligibility criteria is unacceptable risk.  
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
 
4 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1.)  
 
Analysis 
 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 2.a 
 
 DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
expresses concerns pertaining to criminal or dishonest conduct. Paragraph 2 of this 
section states: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest conduct, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.   
 
a. An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack 
of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about his or her reliability or 
trustworthiness and may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. An individual’s past criminal or dishonest 
conduct may put people, property, or information systems at 
risk. 
 
 The disqualifying condition set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, 
Subparagraph 2.b that is raised by Applicant’s conduct as set out in the SOR is: 
 
(2) Charges or admissions of criminal conduct relating to the safety of 
people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with misdemeanor hit and run. He admitted 
engaging in this conduct, which placed the safety of people at risk. He pled guilty to this 
charge and was sentenced to probation for one year. The above disqualifying condition 
in Subparagraph 2.b(2) applies. 
 
 
5 
 Potentially mitigating conditions are set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, 
Appendix 2, Subparagraph 2.c. The conditions that could apply to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by the evidence in this case are: 
 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(4) Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, including but 
not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, constructive community involvement, or passage of 
time without recurrence. 
 
 Applicant’s choice to flee the scene of the accident reflects poorly on his 
judgment. He has produced no evidence to show that similar conduct is unlikely in the 
future or that he has been rehabilitated. He vehemently justified his actions and showed 
little remorse for his choices. Applicant failed to meet his burden to establish mitigation 
under the conditions in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Subparagraph 2.c. 
 
Further Mitigation 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, Paragraph 1, 
Guidance For Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the 
following: 
 
a. As established in Reference (g), credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c).  
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious 
the conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient 
information concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained 
to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property or information systems. 
 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
 
6 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural 
conditions may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions 
are currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
     (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
  
    (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not 
just alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
 As noted above, Applicant has not shown he has matured or documented 
sufficient rehabilitation. He did not take responsibility for his actions. For these reasons, 
Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, CAC 
eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
