1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  
          [REDACTED] )  CAC Case No. 17-01101 
  )   
  ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Common Access Card (CAC) credentialing concerns raised 
under the misconduct or negligence of employment and intentional false statement 
standards set forth in the supplemental adjudicative standards. CAC eligibility is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access Card (CAC) 
eligibility pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 12 (HSPD-12). DOD was 
unable to find that granting Applicant CAC eligibility did not pose an unacceptable risk. 
The action is based on the Adjudicative Standards found in DOD Instruction (DODI) 
5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the Common Access 
Card, and made pursuant to the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive).  The concerns raised under the Adjudicative Standards 
2 
 
of DODI 5200.46 are:  misconduct or negligence in employment and material, intentional 
false statement, deception, or fraud. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 28, 2017, and requested a decision based 
on the administrative record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on September 29, 2017. On October 3, 2017, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM,) which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5, was sent to 
Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on October 
11, 2017, and his Response was received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) within the allotted 30 days. Department Counsel made no objections to 
Applicant’s Response. The case was assigned to me on January 16, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old help desk technician employed by a federal contractor 
since March 2016. The SOR alleges that Applicant was fired from his employment in 
December 2014 after an unsatisfactory review and that he intentionally failed to disclose 
this information as required on a declaration for federal employment form in March 2016. 
Applicant admits that he was fired from the job at a call center but denies that he received 
an unsatisfactory review. Applicant states that his supervisor told Applicant that he was 
not performing at the requisite high standard of performance the job required and that 
Applicant was not a good fit for the position. He was fired after four weeks of training and 
one week in the position. Applicant denies that he intentionally failed to list that he was 
fired, and states that his failure to accurately disclose this information was unintentional. 
 
 In his Response, Applicant again denies that he intentionally falsified the form he 
submitted and states that it was a clerical error. Applicant attached an e-QIP certified in 
March 2017 wherein he disclosed having been fired for not performing up to the customer 
service standards in December 2014. He also attached a November 2017 declaration for 
federal employment wherein he answered “yes” to Question 12 which asks if the Applicant 
has been fired from any employment in the last five years. Additionally, Applicant attached 
a letter from November 2017 from his former employer which states that Applicant “was 
terminated due to an unsatisfactory performance.”   
   
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative 
Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The overriding factor 
for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
3 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility. 
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the nature 
and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; (3) the 
recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of 
the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or presence of 
efforts towards rehabilitation. (DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, ¶ 1.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Misconduct or Negligence in Employment 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 1 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in employment, 
that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s employment misconduct or negligent may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 1.b lists conditions that may be disqualifying. None of the conditions are applicable in 
this case. 
 
Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud 
 
DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 3 provides: 
 
A CAC will not be issued to person if there’s a reasonable basis to believe, 
based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, deception, or 
fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that issuance of a 
CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 3.b states: 
 
4 
 
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include material, 
intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to answers or information 
provided during the employment process for the current or prior federal or 
contract employment (e.g., on the employment application or other 
employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during interviews.) 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Appendix 2 to Enclosure 4, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, 
¶ 3.c states: 
 
Circumstances relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk include: 
 
 (2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent 
and was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation. 
 
 Applicant was terminated from his employment in December 2014 for 
unsatisfactory performance which did not rise to the level of negligence or misconduct set 
forth in the disqualifying conditions. Applicant emphatically stated that he did not 
intentionally fail to disclose his termination from employment. He provided a copy of an 
e-QIP certified in March 2017, five months before he received the SOR, where he fully 
disclosed the termination and the reason for it. ¶ 3.c(2) applies. Applicant has mitigated 
the concerns raised by the conduct alleged in the SOR. I also considered the factors in 
DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4 ¶ 1. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Misconduct or Negligence in Employment FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Intentional False Statement   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, granting 
Applicant CAC eligibility does not pose an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
