 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
         )    CAC Case No. 17-04072 
 ) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Misconduct or negligence in employment concerns are mitigated because 
Applicant’s rule violations did not pose an unacceptable risk to people, property, or 
information systems. Material, intentional false statement, deception, or fraud in 
connection with federal or contract employment concerns are not mitigated. Common 
access card (CAC) credentialing eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 25, 2017, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive 
Positions (SF 85). (Government Exhibit 1) On January 19, 2018, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility 
concerns for CAC credentialing pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive – 
12, Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal Employees and 
Contractors, August 27, 2004 (HSPD-12). DOD was unable to find that it was clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility.  
 
This action is based on the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards (SAS) found in 
DOD Instruction (DODI) 5200.46, DOD Investigative and Adjudicative Guidance for 
Issuing the Common Access Card, dated September 9, 2014, and the procedures set 
forth in Enclosure (Encl.) 3 of DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The 
 
2 
concerns raised under DODI 5200.46 are “misconduct or negligence in employment,” 
and “material, intentional false statement, deception, or fraud in connection with federal 
or contract employment” in DODI 5200.46, Appendix (App.) 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶¶ 1 and 
3.    
 
On February 16, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR. Department Counsel was 
ready to proceed on April 23, 2018. The case was forwarded to the hearing office and 
assigned to me on April 26, 2018. On May 23, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for July 14, 
2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered five documents 
and Applicant offered one exhibit. (Transcript (Tr.) 14, 16; Government Exhibit (GE) 1-5; 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A) Applicant did not object to the government’s documents; 
however, he noted that he objected to some of the information in the documents his 
former employer provided. (Tr. 14) All proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. 
(Tr. 15-17) Applicant made a statement on his own behalf. The transcript was received 
on June 25, 2018. No post-hearing documents were received.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a. He also provided 
extenuating and mitigating information. His SOR admissions are incorporated in the 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old controls technician employed at a DOD hospital for the 
previous six months. (Tr. 7) He seeks continued CAC eligibility as a condition of his 
employment. (Tr. 38) In 2003, he graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) In 2004, he 
married, and in 2007, he divorced. (Tr. 6) In 2014, he married. (Tr. 6) His children are 
ages 13 and 16. (Tr. 7) He has never served in the military. (Tr. 7; GE 1) There is no 
evidence of security violations, felony convictions, or illegal drug abuse. 
 
 In 2016, Applicant’s employer, E, authorized him to use E’s truck for business 
purposes. (Tr. 18) E authorized him to use the truck to drive from home to construction 
work sites. (Tr. 19) Applicant said a GPS in E’s truck that Applicant was assigned 
incorrectly indicated the truck was being used at 1:00 am. (Tr. 20) E also accused 
Applicant of using E’s truck on a Sunday in a city on a day when E did not have an 
active construction site. (Tr. 21) Applicant denied driving E’s truck on the weekend and 
at 1:00 am. (Tr. 20, 26) On December 16, 2016, Applicant ended his employment with  
E. (Tr. 18) Applicant said he quit because he was not going to be allowed to drive E’s 
truck from home to work, and he was unhappy about the way E was conducting 
operations. (Tr. 27, 30) He contended that he left employment with E voluntarily. (Tr. 30) 
He did not provide two weeks of notice before leaving employment with E. (Tr. 30) 
 
 In response to a DOD request for information, E said Applicant was “fired for 
work-related misconduct,” including “falsifying company documents and misuse of 
company credit cards.” (Tr. 23-24; GE 3) In response to a state request for information, 
E said Applicant was “[f]ired for work-related misconduct” and explained that he 
“falsif[ied] company documents and misue[d] company credit cards.” (GE 5) According 
 
3 
to a state document, Applicant told the state in his request for unemployment benefits 
that he was “fired” and “I was terminated for taking my work truck home.” (GE 4)  
 
At his hearing, Applicant said he was supposed to use the company credit card 
for ice, water, and fuel. (Tr. 24) Applicant asserted the credit card was misused by 
someone other than himself or maybe the credit card account was “hacked.” (Tr. 24) He 
said someone improperly charged about $80 at a grocery store on his assigned credit 
card. (Tr. 35-36) He denied that he falsified any company documents. (Tr. 25)   
  
Applicant received unemployment benefits from the state for about three weeks 
after leaving his employment from E. (Tr. 29) In order to receive unemployment benefits 
from the state, he told the state that he was terminated for taking his truck home. (Tr. 
33) He denied that he lied to the state to get money, and he said the truth was he and E 
“just parted ways.” (Tr. 33-34) He explained that he did not really lie to the state 
because E said he was fired, and he said, “[b]asically, I guess, I was terminated, but I 
left, because I never went back.” (Tr. 34-35)  
 
On September 13, 2017, Applicant completed and signed an OF 306. (GE 2) He 
answered, “no” to question 12, which asked, “During the last 5 years, have you been 
fired from any job for any reason, did you quit after being told that you would be fired, 
did you leave any job by mutual agreement because of specific problems, . . . ?”    
 
Applicant said that at the time he completed his September 13, 2017 OF 306 he 
did not fully read question 12. (Tr. 36-37) At his hearing, he was asked to explain the 
inconsistency between his statement to the state that he was fired and his statement to 
the federal government on his OF 306 that he was not fired. He explained that his 
statement to the state related to his desire for unemployment benefits. The error on his 
OF 306 was because he filled out his OF 306 quickly, and “he was trying to get back to 
work.” (Tr. 37)  
  
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
issues raised are listed in DODI 5200.46, Encl. 4, App. 1, Basic Adjudicative Standards, 
and App. 2, SAS. The overriding factor for all of these conditions is unacceptable risk. 
The decision must be arrived at by applying the standard that the grant of CAC eligibility 
is clearly consistent with the national interest.    
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
4 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility. In all adjudications, the 
protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration.  Therefore, any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for CAC eligibility should be resolved in favor of 
the national interest.  
 
Analysis 
 
Misconduct or Negligence in Employment 
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 1 describes the concern: 
 
1. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in 
employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
a. An individual’s employment misconduct or negligence may put people, 
property, or information systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS ¶ 1.b. indicates a condition that may be 
disqualifying in this case is “(2) A pattern of dishonesty or rule violations in the 
workplace which put people, property or information at risk.” 
 
 The record does not establish SAS ¶ 1.b(2). The SOR alleges, and the record 
establishes that Applicant was terminated from his employment at E because he 
committed work-related misconduct, including falsifying company documents and 
misuse of company credit cards. This conduct showed poor judgment and incorporated 
deception and dishonesty. An employee who uses dishonesty in the workplace in 
connection with employer documents and credit cards does not without more evidence 
pose an unacceptable risk to people, property, or information systems. The scope of his 
dishonesty and magnitude of his misuse of the truck and credit card were not 
established because his employer did not provide specific information about what 
Applicant did to merit termination. See CAC Case No. 15-02333 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 
16, 2016) (discussing CAC issues and focusing on causing risk to people, property, or 
information systems).  Misconduct or negligence in employment concerns are refuted. 
 
Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud in Connection with 
Federal or Contract Employment 
 
 DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS, ¶ 3 articulates the CAC concern: 
 
3. A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, 
deception, or fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. 
 
 
5 
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS, ¶ 3.b indicates a condition that “may be 
disqualifying include[s] material, intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to 
answers or information provided during the employment process for the current or a 
prior federal or contract employment (e.g., on the employment application or other 
employment, appointment or investigative documents, or during interviews.).” 
 
DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS, ¶ 3.c describes “[c]ircumstances relevant 
to the determination of whether there is a reasonable basis to believe there is an 
unacceptable risk include[ing]: (1) The misstated or omitted information was so long 
ago, was minor, or happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur”; and “(2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent and was 
followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation.” 
 
 The evidence establishes DODI 5200.46, App. 2 to Encl. 4, SAS, ¶ 3.b because 
the documents showed that after Applicant was terminated from employment with E, he 
told the state that he was terminated from employment with E. Nevertheless, he denied 
that he was terminated from employment in the past five years at the time he completed 
his September 13, 2017 OF 306. 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information on his September 13, 2017 OF 
306 about his employment history when he denied that he had been terminated from 
employment in the previous five years. This falsification is recent, intentional, and 
serious. He did not take responsibility for his intentional false statement on his OF 306 
at his hearing. Material, intentional false statement, deception, or fraud in connection 
with federal or contract employment concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Assessment 
  
 DODI 5200.46, Encl. 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, ¶ 1, Guidance For 
Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the following mitigating 
factors: 
 
As established in [HSPD-12] credentialing adjudication considers whether 
or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally controlled 
facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination to 
authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in [U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
Memorandum, Final Credentialing Standards for Issuing Personal Identity 
Verification Cards Under HSPD-12, July 31, 2008].  
 
 
6 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious the 
conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient information 
concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained to 
determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property, or information systems. 
 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural conditions 
may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a reasonable 
basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions are currently 
removed or countered (generally considered in cases with relatively minor 
issues). 
 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
 (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
  
 (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not just 
alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be a 
consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
  Applicant is a 33-year-old controls technician employed at a DOD hospital for the 
previous six months. In 2003, he graduated from high school. There is no evidence of 
security violations, felony convictions, or illegal drug abuse. 
 
 On September 13, 2017, Applicant completed and signed an OF 306. He 
answered “no” to question 12, which asked, “During the last 5 years, have you been 
fired from any job for any reason, did you quit after being told that you would be fired, 
 
7 
did you leave any job by mutual agreement because of specific problems, . . . ?”  
Applicant answered, no, despite being fired or terminated from E after an allegation of 
misconduct.  
 
 Applicant’s falsification raises a serious risk concerns. Applicant cannot be 
trusted to disclose potentially derogatory information. The protection of national 
interests relies on applicants to self-report conduct that poses a risk to people, property, 
or information systems even when that disclosure might damage the applicant’s career 
or economic interests.  
  
 I have carefully considered the facts of this case and applied the standards in 
DODI 5200.46. None of the mitigating conditions are sufficient to fully resolve CAC 
eligibility concerns because his submission of a false OF 306 on September 13, 2017, is 
recent, demonstrates a serious lapse in judgment, and was an intentional act of 
deception. Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility is denied.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Encl. 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Misconduct or  
    Negligence in Employment:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Material, Intentional False 
Statement, Deception, or Fraud in  
Connection with Federal or Contract  
Employment:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC 
eligibility is denied. 
                                     
   
__________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
