KEYWORD: CAC
DIGEST: Applicant has worked for her current employer, a Defense contractor, since 2017. 
Before taking this job, she worked in the private sector from 1999 to 2017, when she was fired
for misconduct.  Applicant was fired because she disclosed to a family member information that
Federal law requires be kept confidential.  Later, when completing a Form 306, she failed to
disclose her job termination.  Applicant admitted this failure but attributed it to having paid
insufficient attention to the question at hand because she was focused on other portions of the
form.  The Judge found this explanation to be implausible. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 18-00524.a1
DATE: 03/22/2019
DATE: March 22, 2019
In Re:
-----------------------------
 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
CAC Case No. 18-00524
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant eligibility for Common
Access Card (CAC) credentialing.  On July 20, 2018, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–Misconduct or Negligence in Employment
concerns and Material, Intentional False Statement, Deception, or Fraud concerns raised under the
adjudicative standards in the appendices of DoD Instruction 5200.46 (Sep. 9, 2014) (Instruction). 
Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On December 14, 2018, after considering the
record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert E. Coacher
denied Applicant’s request for CAC eligibility.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Instruction, Encl.
4 ¶ 6.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant has worked for her current employer, a Defense contractor, since 2017.  Before
taking this job, she worked in the private sector from 1999 to 2017, when she was fired for
misconduct.  Applicant was fired because she disclosed to a family member information that Federal
law requires be kept confidential.  Later, when completing a Form 306,1 she failed to disclose her
job termination.  Applicant admitted this failure but attributed it to having paid insufficient attention
to the question at hand because she was focused on other portions of the form.  The Judge found this
explanation to be implausible.
 
The Judge stated that Applicant’s misconduct at work was recent and significant enough to
cost her a job.  He concluded that Applicant had not mitigated the concerns arising from her job
termination.  He also stated that it was implausible that Applicant would not have remembered a
significant life event such as having been fired for misconduct.  He concluded that it was more
reasonable to believe that Applicant left her job termination off the Form 306 because she was afraid
that disclosure could cost her a job.  The Judge concluded that the false statement was recent and
intentional.  He stated that he was not able to determine that future misconduct or false statements
are unlikely to recur.  He concluded that granting Applicant CAC eligibility posed an unacceptable
risk as defined in the Instruction.
Discussion
Instruction, Enclosure 4 ¶ 6 provides that appeals to DOHA of CAC cases are accorded the
established administrative procedures set out in DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 1991, as amended).  Accordingly, our prior decisions
interpreting the Directive in industrial security cases are relevant in evaluating appeals of CAC
decisions.  See, e.g., CAC Case No. 15-02333 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 16, 2016).  
1Declaration for Federal Employment.
2
In a CAC adjudication, “the overriding factor . . . is unacceptable risk.”2  Instruction,
Enclosure 4 ¶ 1(b).  The Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, which apply in this case, are
designed to ensure that the issuance of a CAC does not pose such a risk.  See, e.g., CAC Case No.
16-03527 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2018).  
Applicant’s brief includes information from outside the record, including documents that
post-date the Judge’s decision.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
Applicant denies that she intentionally falsified her Form 306.  However, considering the Judge’s
finding of deliberate falsification in light of the record as a whole, we conclude that it is supported
by substantial evidence.  See, e.g., CAC Case No. 16-03527 at 3. Applicant cites to various aspects
of the record that she believes support her effort to obtain a favorable adjudication.  Applicant has
not  rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, nor has she
shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  Id.   
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s conclusion that granting Applicant CAC eligibility poses an unacceptable risk
is sustainable on this record.
2The Glossary to the Instruction provides that “unacceptable risk” includes, among numerous other things, a
“threat . . . to records, including classified, privileged, proprietary, financial, and medical records[.]” 
 
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.     
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
 
4
