1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) CAC Case No. 18-00533 
) 
Applicant for CAC Eligibility ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
Goldstein, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Statement of the Case 
On July 20, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing eligibility concerns for Common Access Card 
(CAC) issuance pursuant to Homeland Security Presidential Directive–12 (HSPD-12) 
because it found it was an unacceptable risk to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. The 
action is based on the Adjudicative Standards found in DoD Instruction 5200.46, DoD 
Investigative and Adjudicative Guidelines for Issuing the Common Access Card, dated 
September 9, 2014, and made pursuant to the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The concerns raised under the 
Adjudicative Standards of DoDI 5200.46 are: paragraph 1.a - misconduct or negligence 
in employment; and paragraph 3.a - material, intentional false statement, deception, or 
fraud.   
Applicant answered the SOR on July 18, 2018 (Answer), and requested a 
decision based on the record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 26, 2018. Applicant received it on October 1, 
2018. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 5. The FORM notified 
Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
02/13/2019
 
2 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. On November 14, 
2018, Applicant submitted a 4-page response to the FORM (Response). Items 1 
through 5 and the Response are admitted into the record without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on January 16, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old. She is a high school graduate. She has worked for her 
employer since August 2017. (Item 3.) 
 
 On June 8, 2017, Applicant was involuntarily terminated by her prior employer for 
stealing money from another employee’s purse. She indicated she “immediately 
regretted” her decision and “tried to put the money back” but was caught in the act. A 
disciplinary action form from Applicant’s former employer documents the theft. (Item 5; 
Answer.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s material, intentional false statement, deception, 
or fraud raised concerns under DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental 
Adjudicative Standards. Specifically, it alleged that Applicant falsified material facts on a 
Declaration for Federal Employment form (306), signed by Applicant on September 26, 
2017, when she failed to disclose she was discharged by her employer in June 2017. 
She answered “No” on that declaration to the question that asked whether in the past 
five years she had been fired, quit after being told she would be fired, or left a job by 
mutual agreement because of specific problems. She admitted that she “didn’t think 
[she] would get the job if [she] checked yes.” (Item 4; Answer.) 
 
 Applicant expressed remorse for being dishonest. She has worked hard to be a 
top performer for her current employer. (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant presented four letters of recommendation from supervisors and 
coworkers. The first letter indicated that Applicant was recognized as the employee of 
the month during her first 90 days of employment and is trustworthy. Her program 
manager believes she has dedication, character, and dependability required for the job. 
Her deputy program manager finds her character to be “beyond reproach.” Her team 
lead believes Applicant to be honest, hardworking, and a motivated team player. 
(Response.) 
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The HSPD-12 
credentialing standards are listed in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic 
Adjudicative Standards, and Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards. The 
overriding factor for all of these eligibility criteria is unacceptable risk.  
 
The objective of CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
 
3 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. Each case must be judged on its own merits, 
taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, 
mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1.)  
 
Analysis 
 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 1.a 
 
 DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
expresses concerns pertaining to misconduct or negligence in employment. Paragraph 
1 of this section states: 
  
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s misconduct or negligence in 
employment, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.   
 
a. An individual’s employment misconduct or negligence may 
put people, property, or information systems at risk. 
 
 The disqualifying condition set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, 
Subparagraph 1.b that is raised by Applicant’s misconduct or negligence in employment 
is: 
 
(1) A previous history of intentional wrongdoing on the job, disruptive, 
violent, or other acts that may pose an unacceptable risk to people, 
property, or information systems. 
 
 Applicant was terminated because she stole from another employee in June 
2017. Her conduct raises a significant concern because it is disruptive to the workplace. 
The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 Potentially mitigating conditions are set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, 
Appendix 2, Subparagraph 1.c. The conditions that could apply to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by the evidence in this case are: 
 
 
4 
(1) The behavior happened so long ago, was minor, or happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current trustworthiness or good judgment relating 
to the safety of people and proper safeguarding of property and 
information systems; 
 
(2) The individual was not adequately warned that the conduct was 
unacceptable and could not reasonably be expected to know that the 
conduct was wrong; 
 
(3) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the behavior; 
and 
 
(4) The individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial training 
and has since demonstrated a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
information-handling or security responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant’s decision to take money from the purse of a coworker was recent and 
no unusual circumstances surrounding her theft have been documented. Her 
misconduct casts doubt on her current trustworthiness or good judgment. While she has 
expressed remorse for her conduct, and has demonstrated trustworthiness in her 
current position, not enough time has passed since the theft to show rehabilitation, in 
light of her falsification discussed below. The concern is not mitigated. 
 
Supplemental Adjudicative Standards, Paragraph 3.a 
 
 DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards 
expresses concerns pertaining to misconduct or negligence in employment. Paragraph 
3 of this section states: 
  
A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable basis to 
believe, based on the individual’s material, intentional false statement, 
deception, or fraud in connection with federal or contract employment, that 
issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.   
 
a. The individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s 
honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and put people, property, 
or information systems at risk. 
 
b. Therefore, conditions that may be disqualifying include 
material, intentional falsification, deception or fraud related to 
answers or information provided during the employment 
process for the current or a prior federal or contract 
employment (e.g., on the employment application or other 
 
5 
employment, appointment or investigative documents, or 
during interviews.) 
 
 The disqualifying conditions set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, Appendix 2, 
Subparagraph 3.b are raised by Applicant’s falsification on her Declaration for Federal 
Employment form (306), signed on September 26, 2017. She admitted her falsification 
in her Answer.  
 
 Potentially mitigating conditions are set forth in DoDI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, 
Appendix 2, Subparagraph 3.c. The conditions that could apply to mitigate the 
unacceptable risk concerns raised by the evidence in this case are: 
 
(1) The misstated or omitted information was so long ago, was minor, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
and 
 
(2) The misstatement or omission was unintentional or inadvertent and 
was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in Subparagraph 3.c, it 
is apparent that neither of them were established in this case. Applicant’s falsification 
was recent. Falsifying material information raises serious concerns and Applicant has 
done little to show that similar dishonesty is unlikely to recur. While she has gained the 
trust of her supervisors and coworkers, there is no evidence that the authors of the 
letters knew of the allegations on the SOR. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith 
efforts to correct her falsification and concealment. She has not provided sufficient 
evidence to meet her burden of proof to overcome her material, intentional false 
statement in connection with her federal employment. 
 
Further Mitigation 
 
 DODI 5200.46, Enclosure 4, CAC Adjudicative Procedures, Paragraph 1, 
Guidance For Applying Credentialing Standards During Adjudication provides the 
following: 
 
a. As established in Reference (g), credentialing adjudication considers 
whether or not an individual is eligible for long-term access to federally 
controlled facilities and/or information systems. The ultimate determination 
to authorize, deny, or revoke the CAC based on a credentialing 
determination of the PSI must be made after consideration of applicable 
credentialing standards in Reference (c).  
 
b. Each case is unique. Adjudicators must examine conditions that raise 
an adjudicative concern, the overriding factor for all of these conditions is 
unacceptable risk. Factors to be applied consistently to all information 
available to the adjudicator are: 
 
 
6 
 (1) The nature and seriousness of the conduct. The more serious 
the conduct, the greater the potential for an adverse CAC determination. 
 
 (2) The circumstances surrounding the conduct. Sufficient 
information concerning the circumstances of the conduct must be obtained 
to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe the conduct 
poses a risk to people, property or information systems. 
 
 (3) The recency and frequency of the conduct. More recent or more 
frequent conduct is of greater concern.  
 
 (4) The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct. 
Offenses committed as a minor are usually treated as less serious than 
the same offenses committed as an adult, unless the offense is very 
recent, part of a pattern, or particularly heinous. 
 
 (5) Contributing external conditions. Economic and cultural 
conditions may be relevant to the determination of whether there is a 
reasonable basis to believe there is an unacceptable risk if the conditions 
are currently removed or countered (generally considered in cases with 
relatively minor issues). 
 
 (6) The absence or presence of efforts toward rehabilitation, if 
relevant, to address conduct adverse to CAC determinations. 
 
     (a) Clear, affirmative evidence of rehabilitation is required for a 
favorable adjudication (e.g., seeking assistance and following professional 
guidance, where appropriate; demonstrating positive changes in behavior 
and employment). 
 
    (b) Rehabilitation may be a consideration for most conduct, not 
just alcohol and drug abuse. While formal counseling or treatment may be 
a consideration, other factors (such as the individual’s employment record) 
may also be indications of rehabilitation. 
 
 Applicant presented evidence of recent good character at her present employer 
including being awarded employee of the month. While she offered four letters of 
support, they failed to acknowledge they knew about her prior criminal conduct. Her 
theft and her falsification were recent and material. She has not demonstrated she has 
the requisite judgment to have CAC eligibility. There is a reasonable basis to conclude 
that Applicant represents an unacceptable risk for the U.S. Government. Applicant’s 
request for CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  SOR Paragraph 1:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  SOR Paragraph 2:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is an 
unacceptable risk to grant Applicant CAC eligibility. CAC eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
__________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
