1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
[Redacted] ) CAC Case No. 18-00887 
)
Applicant for CAC Eligibility 
Appearances 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
Foreman, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has mitigated the eligibility concerns about his alcohol abuse. He has 
not mitigated the eligibility concerns raised by his criminal conduct. CAC eligibility is 
denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On July 20, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing concerns about his eligibility for a Common 
Access Card (CAC). The DOD acted under Homeland Security Presidential Directive 
12, Policy for a Common Identification Standard for Federal Employees and Contractors 
(August 27, 2004); the Adjudicative Standards in DoD Instruction 5200.46, DoD 
Investigative and Adjudicative Guidance for Issuing the Common Access Card 
(September 9, 2014) (Instruction); and the procedures set out in Enclosure 3 of DoD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The SOR alleges eligibility concerns under 
the Supplemental Adjudicative Standards (SAS) set out in Enclosure 4, Appendix 2 of 
the Instruction. The specific concerns were alleged under SAS 2 (Criminal or Dishonest 
Conduct or Financial Responsibility) and SAS 4 (Alcohol Abuse).  
02/25/2019
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 27, 2018, and requested a decision 
on the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on October 11, 2018. On October 12, 2018, a complete copy 
of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on October 23, 2018, and he did not 
respond. The case was assigned to me on February 12, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.g, 2.b, and 2.c, and he 
admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a in part. His admissions are incorporated 
in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old carpenter employed by a defense contractor since 
February 2017. He was unemployed from May 2015 until he began his current job. He 
did not complete high school, but he obtained his GED certificate in April 1983. 
 
 In October 1987, Applicant was convicted of receiving stolen property worth more 
than $100, a felony. The record does not reflect the sentence imposed. (FORM Item 4 
at 5.) 
 
 In January 1990, Applicant was charged with receiving stolen property worth 
more than $100. In July 1990, he was convicted of the lesser offense of receiving stolen 
property worth less than $100, a misdemeanor. He was sentenced to confinement for 
90 days (suspended), and he was placed on probation for two years. (FORM Item 4 at 
7-8.) 
 
 In April 1990, Applicant was charged with two counts of 2nd degree assault 
(felonies), armed criminal action (a felony), damaging property, and resisting arrest. He 
was convicted of 2nd degree assault, and the remaining charges were dismissed. He 
was sentenced to confinement for three years (suspended), and placed on probation for 
five years. (FORM Item 4 at 8-9.) 
 
 In August 1990, Applicant was charged with stealing and 2nd degree assault 
(both felonies). In his answer to the SOR, he stated that these charges arose from the 
same incident as the April 1990 2nd degree assault and the October 1987 charge of 
receiving stolen property. (FORM Item 4 at 10-11.) The record contains insufficient 
evidence to determine if the August 1990 and April 1990 charges are duplicates.  
 
 In January 1996, Applicant was charged with possession of a controlled 
substance, a felony. He was convicted and sentenced to confinement for two years 
(suspended) and placed on probation for two years. (FORM Item 4 at 12-13.) In his 
answer to the SOR, he stated that he was walking through a bad part of town when a 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) (FORM Item 2) unless otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
 
3 
person who was “strung out” approached him and then ran away from an approaching 
police officer and threw a small quantity of crack cocaine onto the ground in front of him. 
The police charged Applicant with possession of cocaine, and he pleaded guilty to a 
misdemeanor drug offense.  
 
 In February 1997, Applicant was charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI). 
The police records do not reflect the disposition of this charge. (FORM Item 4 at 13.) In 
his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he pleaded guilty even though the 
breathalyzer was not administered properly, and the offense was expunged from his 
record after he attended the court-ordered classes and completed a period of 
unsupervised probation. 
 
 In November 2000. Applicant was charged with DWI. He was convicted and 
placed on probation for 24 months. (FORM Item 4 at 14.) In his answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated that he drove while intoxicated to leave a “violent atmosphere.” 
 
 In July 2014, Applicant was charged with assault and domestic violence. He was 
convicted of domestic violence. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that the incident 
occurred when an ex-girlfriend came to his home to retrieve her laptop and became 
verbally abusive. He ordered her to leave, and she continued to be loud and abusive 
outside the home. He “half punched” and slammed her car door and broke the glass in 
the door. After his ex-girlfriend left, the police came to his home and arrested him for 
domestic assault and malicious property damage. He pleaded guilty to domestic assault 
and paid for the damage to the car. 
 
 In July 2016, Applicant took his girlfriend’s car without her knowledge, ran off the 
road, and struck a concrete barrier, causing extensive damage. He drove it to another 
location in an effort to hide it. When he was interviewed by police several hours later, 
the police noticed an odor of alcohol. He pleaded guilty to leaving the scene of an 
accident with property damage exceeding $1,000. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
denied consuming alcohol before wrecking the car, but he admitted consuming alcohol 
afterwards.  
 
Policies 
 
Every CAC eligibility decision must be a fair and impartial overall commonsense 
decision based on all available evidence, both favorable and unfavorable. The specific 
concerns, standards, disqualifying conditions, and mitigating circumstances are listed in 
the Instruction, Enclosure 4, Appendix 1, Basic Adjudicative Standards (BAS), and 
Appendix 2, Supplemental Adjudicative Standards (SAS). The overriding factor for CAC 
eligibility decisions is “unacceptable risk,” which is defined as follows: 
 
A threat to the life, safety, or health of employees, contractors, vendors, or 
visitors; to the U.S. Government physical assets or information systems; to 
personal property; to records, including classified, privileged, proprietary, 
financial, and medical records, or to the privacy rights established by The 
 
4 
Privacy Act of 1974, as amended, or other law that is deemed 
unacceptable when making risk management determinations. 
 
(Instruction, Glossary, Part II at 28.) 
 
The objective of the CAC credentialing process is the fair-minded commonsense 
assessment of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an 
acceptable risk to have CAC eligibility. A CAC will not be issued if there is a reasonable 
basis to believe that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk. Each case must be 
judged on its own merits, taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and 
applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful analysis.  
 
Factors to be applied consistently to all information available include: (1) the 
nature and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(3) the recency and frequency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the 
time of the conduct; (5) contributing external conditions; and (6) the absence or 
presence of efforts towards rehabilitation. (Instruction, Enclosure 4, paragraph 1.b.)  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain CAC eligibility.  
 
Analysis 
 
SAS ¶ 2, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct 
 
 SAS ¶ 2 provides, “A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a 
reasonable basis to believe, based on the individual’s criminal or dishonest 
conduct, that issuance of a CAC poses an unacceptable risk.” The concern under 
this standard is set out in SAS ¶ 2.a:  
 
An individual’s conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about his or her reliability or trustworthiness and may put 
people, property, or information systems at risk. An individual’s past 
criminal or dishonest conduct may put people, property or information 
systems at risk.  
 
 The evidence is sufficient to establish the following disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(1): A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses which put 
the safety of people at risk or threaten the protection of property or 
information. . . ;  
 
5 
SAS ¶ 2.b(2): Charges or admission of criminal conduct relating to the 
safety of people and proper protection of property or information systems, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted; 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(3): Dishonest acts (e.g., theft, accepting bribes, falsifying 
claims, perjury, forgery, or attempting to obtain identity documentation 
without proper authorization); and 
 
SAS ¶ 2.b(5): Actions involving violence or sexual behavior of a criminal 
nature that poses an unacceptable risk if access is granted to federally-
controlled facilities and federally-controlled information systems. For 
example, convictions for sexual assault may indicate that granting a CAC 
poses an unacceptable risk to the life and safety of persons on U.S. 
Government facilities. 
 
 The following mitigating circumstances are potentially relevant: 
 
SAS ¶ 2.c(1): The behavior happened so long ago, was minor in nature, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur; 
and 
 
SAS ¶ 2.c(4): Evidence has been supplied of successful rehabilitation, 
including but not limited to remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, constructive community involvement, 
or passage of time without recurrence.  
 
 Neither mitigating condition is established. The offenses alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1-
1.g happened many years ago, but they reflect a pattern of criminal conduct from 1987 
until recently, in July 2016. Several were felonies, and they did not occur under unusual 
circumstances. Applicant submitted no evidence regarding his employment record or 
any community involvement. 
 
SAS 4, Alcohol Abuse 
 
 SAS 4 provides, “A CAC will not be issued to a person if there is a reasonable 
basis to believe, based on the nature or duration of the individual’s alcohol abuse 
without evidence of substantial rehabilitation, that issuance of a CAC poses an 
unacceptable risk.” The concern under this standard is set out in SAS 4a:  
 
An individual’s abuse of alcohol may put people, property, or information 
systems at risk. Alcohol abuse can lead to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or failure to control impulses, and may put people, property, or 
information systems at risk, regardless of whether he or she is diagnosed 
as an abuser of alcohol or alcohol dependent. A person’s long-term abuse 
of alcohol without evidence of substantial rehabilitation may indicate that 
granting a CAC poses an unacceptable risk in a U.S. Government facility. 
 
6 
 The disqualifying condition in SAS ¶ 4.b(1) (“A pattern of alcohol-related arrests”) 
is relevant. However, it is not established. Applicant was not charged with DWI after the 
accident in January 2016. While the police noticed an odor of alcohol when they 
interviewed him several hours after the accident, there is no evidence that he was 
intoxicated. The incidents in 1997 and 2000 happened three years apart, have not been 
repeated, and are insufficient to establish a “pattern” of alcohol-related arrests or “long-
term abuse of alcohol.” No other disqualifying conditions under this guideline are 
established by the evidence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 SAS ¶ 2, Criminal or Dishonest Conduct:  Against Applicant 
 
 SAS 4, Alcohol Abuse:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I 
conclude that issuing Applicant a CAC would pose an unacceptable risk. CAC eligibility 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
