1 
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 15-01624 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esq. 
__________ 
Decision 
__________ 
Curry, Marc, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns generated by his contacts and financial 
interests in the Philippines. The romantic relationship that he had with a Thai woman 
several years ago when he was working in Estonia generates no security concern. As 
for security concerns under the personal conduct guideline, Applicant did not falsify his 
2012 security clearance application, and his acquaintances who are Filipino natives and 
residents do not generate personal conduct security concerns. In sum, Applicant has 
mitigated all of the security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On March 9, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) and Guideline E (personal conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006. 
01/25/2019
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
Government, DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. It recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On March 29, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR, denying all of the 
allegations except 1.d and 1.e, and requested a hearing.1 The case was initially 
assigned to another administrative judge on June 13, 2018, before it was transferred to 
me on September 18, 2018. On September 21, 2018, the hearing was scheduled for 
October 5, 2018.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted five documents for admission that 
I marked as Government Exhibits (GEs) 1 through 5. Counsel for Applicant objected to 
the admission of GE 4 and GE 5. I sustained the objection, only admitting GEs 1 
through 3 into the record. Upon reconsideration, I have decided to admit GE 4. 
 
Counsel for Applicant proposed 26 exhibits for admission. (Applicant Exhibit (AE) 
A – AE Z) I admitted all of these exhibits into the record except AE O, which I excluded 
after considering Department Counsel’s objection. 
 
At the hearing, I also incorporated Department Counsel’s list of Government 
Exhibits (Hearing Exhibit (HE) I), and a copy of Department Counsel’s discovery letter 
(HE II). In addition, Department Counsel submitted a memo (HE III) requesting that I 
take administrative notice of the facts set forth in four U.S. Department of State 
documents regarding the Philippines (HE IV – HE VIII). Applicant’s counsel objected. I 
stayed my decision on the administrative notice request, leaving the record open 
through October 26, 2018 to allow Applicant’s counsel to respond to Department 
Counsel’s request, and to submit administrative notice documents, if desired. Within the 
time allotted, Applicant’s counsel submitted a memo (HE IX) requesting that I take 
administrative notice of the facts set forth in eight documents (HE X – XVIII). After 
considering all of the facts set forth in the exhibits provided by both parties, I have 
decided to take administrative notice of all of them except HE XV, Human Rights Watch 
2016—The United States, and HE XVI, Department of Justice Federal Bureau of 
Investigation: 2016 Crime in the United States.  
 
While my decision was pending, Security Executive Agent Directive 4 was issued 
establishing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information 
or eligibility to hold a sensitive position. The AG supersede the adjudicative guidelines 
                                            
1 There are six allegations under Paragraph 1 and five allegations under Paragraph 2. The Paragraph 1 
allegations are correctly annotated as subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f. The Paragraph 2 allegations are 
erroneously annotated as 2.g through 2.k rather than 2.a through 2.e. After Department Counsel identified 
this error at the hearing and discussed it with Applicant’s counsel, the parties suggested that, as a matter 
of judicial economy, I forego amending the SOR,and rule upon the allegations, as written. I concurred. 
(Tr. 7-8) 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
implemented in September 2006 and are effective for any adjudication made on or after 
June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have adjudicated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility 
under the new AG. The transcript was received on October 16, 2018. 
 
Preliminary Rulings 
 
 1. Section 19 of the security clearance application that Applicant completed in 
2012 contains the following question: 
 
Do you have, or have you had, close and/or continuing contact with a 
foreign national within the last seven (7) years with whom you, or your 
spouse, or cohabitant are bound by affection, influence, common 
interests, and/or obligation? . . .” 
 
Applicant answered “no,” elaborating as follows: 
 
I have several women that I have met in my foreign travels, but none that I 
would consider to be seriously bound by affection or obligatien [sic] with. 
 
SOR subparagraph 2.h alleges Applicant’s “no” answer constitutes a falsification. 
Counsel for Applicant filed a motion to dismiss this claim, arguing that the allegation, on 
its face, does not state a justiciable claim.  
 
 Whether the nature of Applicant’s relationships with these foreign women is as 
casual as he believes them to be is certainly an issue to be addressed under the 
Guideline B security concerns, as alleged in Paragraph 1. Similarly, the nature and 
appropriateness of these relationships raise a Guideline E issue, as alleged in 
subparagraph 2.g. However, Applicant’s negative response to Section 19, in conjunction 
with his disclosure that he has met several women over the years during his foreign 
travels whom he is not bound by affection or obligation is sufficiently candid and 
forthcoming, so as not to raise any issue of falsification, on its face. Applicant’s 
counsel’s motion to dismiss subparagraph 2.h is granted. (DoD Directive 5220.6, 
E3.1.10) 
 
 2. Section 20B of the 2012 security clearance application required Applicant to 
disclose if he had ever provided financial support for any foreign national. His negative 
answer, together with his detailed elaboration,2 is candid and forthcoming. 
Consequently, subparagraph 2.i, on its face, raises no issue of falsification. Applicant’s 
counsel’s motion to dismiss subparagraph 2.i is granted. (DoD Directive 5220.6, 
E3.1.10) 
 
                                            
2There have been several foreign women I have given money to via Western Union in the 
Philippines as gifts to help them, but I would not consider the gifts as long-term financial support. I 
do not know their addresses to be able to answer the questions properly if I answered ‘yes.’ 
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 3. Section 20A of the 2012 security clearance application required Applicant to 
disclose whether he had any additional foreign financial interests. Applicant’s negative 
response was not followed by any additional explanation. The issue of whether his 
response constitutes a falsification, as alleged in SOR subparagraph 2.j, must be 
evaluated through the record evidence developed at the hearing. Applicant’s counsel’s 
motion to dismiss subparagraph 2.j is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old single man who was married previously between 1987 
and 1995. The marriage ended in divorce. He has a high school diploma and has 
earned some college credits. (Tr. 231) After graduating from high school, he enlisted in 
the U.S. Air Force in 1982, serving through his retirement in 2003. (GE 2 at 13) Per a 
fellow Air Force veteran who served with him, he is an honest, trustworthy man who is 
hardworking and dependable. (AE W)  
 
After retirement, Applicant worked stateside for a defense contractor for a year, 
through approximately May 2004. Since then, he has lived and worked for contractors 
almost exclusively in combat zones. (Tr. 87; AE B) He is a radar technician who is 
responsible for the installation, upgrade, maintenance, and repair of radars and radios. 
(Tr. 89; AE B) He has held a security clearance since 1982. 
 
 Applicant’s work is extremely dangerous. He lives and works on base, embedded 
with the soldiers, and he frequently comes under enemy fire. (Tr. 80, 86) He typically 
works 12 hours per day for seven days a week. (Tr. 89) He shares his living space, a six 
foot by eight foot converted cargo container, with three roommates. (Tr. 91-92) Per 
Applicant’s employment contract, he is allowed to take vacation leave every six months. 
He does not always use his leave “because the needs of the military come first.” (Tr. 
125) As of the hearing date, he had been working continuously without break for more 
than 12 months. (Tr. 125)  
 
Per a coworker, Applicant is “the go-to guy whenever systems [go] down, and is 
one of the most talented technicians with whom he has ever worked.” (AE X). According 
to another coworker, whom Applicant trained, he is a highly talented individual who 
provided an unmatched level of support for the warfighters. (AE Y) Over the years, 
Applicant has won multiple awards for exceptional performance. (AE B, AE J, AE P; Tr. 
101-102) 
 
Applicant frequently vacations in the Philippines. During the course of his travels, 
he has become acquainted with many people including women he dated and families he 
helped financially. As a traveler who has visited and spent significant amounts of time in 
developing countries, Applicant has witnessed abject poverty. Believing that much 
foreign aid, either from the U.S. government or from international charities, is 
squandered by corrupt officials who govern many of these countries, Applicant finds it 
more gratifying to assist needy people directly rather than through charitable donations. 
(Tr. 132) He is particularly interested in helping people be more self-sufficient. (Tr. 173) 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Over the years, he has helped a family in the Philippines restore electric power 
that had been lost after a typhoon. (Tr. 136) On another occasion, he helped repair a 
home in the Philippines that had also been damaged in a typhoon. (AE Q at 3; AE T)   
 
Applicant is equally committed to humanitarian assistance in the United States. 
(AE U, AE V) Several years ago, he gave $1,000 to a charity to help flood victims after a 
hurricane. In addition, on one occasion, he donated $1,000 to a U.S.-based disaster 
relief charity. (AE U)  
 
 In approximately 2008, during a visit to the Philippines, Applicant, while 
shopping, noticed a teenage girl (Acquaintance (A) 1) who appeared to be “in a really 
bad way.” (Tr. 208)) When he asked her what was wrong, she told him that she had not 
eaten in three days. Applicant then took her to a fast-food restaurant. (GE 2 at 17)  After 
Applicant left the Philippines, he corresponded with her approximately two to three 
times a year via the internet.  
 
 Applicant returned to the Philippines in 2010. He had no contact with A1. In 2011, 
Applicant returned to the Philippines, staying approximately two to three weeks. He 
visited A1, meeting with her for 20 to 30 minutes. In 2013, when Applicant visited the 
Philippines, he met A1’s family. Noticing that they had no electricity, and a makeshift 
roof composed of tin and bamboo leaves, Applicant helped them install electric service 
and repair the roof. (Tr. 135) During the trip, Applicant also provided financial assistance 
to A1. He helped send her to sewing school, and he paid her $2,500 in five increments 
to help her start a 7-11 style market. Since 2013, Applicant and A1 have communicated 
sporadically by phone. (GE 2 at 18) He neither had sexual intercourse with A1, nor 
propositioned her for sex. (Tr. 207) 
 
 While on a vacation to the Philippines in early 2010, as referenced in the 
paragraph above, Applicant met A2. She worked at a moped rental shop and cleaned 
homes for a living. Shortly after meeting, they began dating and became intimately 
involved. Applicant saw her three times over the two weeks that he was in the 
Philippines. (Tr. 211) After leaving the Philippines, Applicant remained in touch with her 
daily via Skype between 2010 and 2012. (GE 2 at 14)  When Applicant was dating A2, 
he sent her approximately $300 to help pay for medical expenses. (Tr. 169)  By 2013, 
Applicant’s contact with A2 had become less frequent. He has had no contact with her 
since March 2016. (Tr. 212) 
 
 In either 2010 or 2011, Applicant met A3 while visiting the Philippines. She is a 
waitress. He dated her for three to four weeks. While dating, he gave her $1,500, 
including gifts, money to buy a bicycle, and sewing school tuition. After returning from 
vacation, he stayed in touch with her sporadically, but stopped after realizing that she 
was using him to get money for her family. (GE 2 at 4)  His last contact with her was in 
2011. (GE 2 at 18) 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant met A4, a prostitute, while on vacation in the Philippines in October 
2011. (Tr. 209) He paid her to have sex with him. (Tr. 209) Before leaving, he 
purchased her a refrigerator and helped her start a convenience store. (Tr. 168) After 
returning to work, he stayed in touch with her via Skype once or twice per week. (GE 2 
at 15; Tr. 207) Their last contact consisted of e-mail correspondence exchanged over 
the holidays in 2013. (GE 2 at 14) 
 
 Applicant met A5, a Filipino foreign national, on an airplane in 2011. She is the 
mother of four children and works as a house cleaner. Applicant gave her $1,700 to 
help her pay for a contracting agency that places clients, typically from developing 
countries, in housecleaning jobs in wealthier countries. (Tr. 168) They never had sexual 
intercourse.  
 
 Applicant met A6 online. They have never subsequently met in person. (Tr. 216) 
She has a bachelor’s degree in business. (GE 2 at 17) With Applicant’s help, she 
started a pig farming business. He invested $2,500 in the business. A6 paid him back in 
the amount of $2,800. Three hundred dollars constituted return on investment. Applicant 
entered into this arrangement approximately six to eight months after he completed the 
security clearance application. Their relationship was not intimate. 
 
 Applicant met A7 while visiting the Philippines in February 2013. They were 
intimately involved. For seven to ten days, he enjoyed his vacation with her, shopping 
and sightseeing. (Tr. 215) He gave her $4,500 to help her start a fried chicken stand. He 
gave her this money incrementally over a period of several months. (Tr. 168) Although 
they stay in touch periodically, they have not been romantically involved since Applicant 
first met her in 2013. His last contact with her was by phone in September 2018. (Tr. 
215) 
 
 Applicant met A8 on the same trip that he met A7. He stayed in touch with her 
twice per month electronically after returning from vacation. They have had no contact 
since the fall of 2013. (GE 2 at 19) Their relationship was not intimate. 
 
 Applicant met A9 while traveling to the Philippines in April 2013. She is a 
construction worker. Their relationship was not sexual. Applicant gave her between 
$800 and $1,600 to help pay for her diabetes treatment. (GE 2 at 17) After he returned 
from vacation, they initially stayed in touch several times per week via texting or Skype. 
Their contact gradually decreased to electronic communication twice per month.  They 
are not currently in touch. 
 
 Applicant met A10 on the same trip to the Philippines in 2013 that he met A9. 
She is a restaurant hostess. Applicant had an intimate relationship with her. They spent 
three days together dining out, shopping, and visiting her at her home. After Applicant 
returned to base from vacation, they communicated electronically approximately twice a 
month through January 2014. (GE 2 at 17) In approximately April 2014, Applicant gave 
her $500 to help her pay her rent. (GE 2 at 17-18) 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 In approximately 2014, Applicant purchased a condo in the Philippines for 
$34,000 USD. (Tr. 116) It is roughly the size of a hotel suite. (AE R) Applicant 
purchased it because, given the frequency that he visits the Philippines, it is cheaper to 
own a condo rather than to pay hotel costs for each trip. (Tr. 123) Also, the Philippines 
is “a great jumping off spot to travel to other locations” around the world. (Tr. 124) The 
condo’s current value is approximately $8,000 USD. (Tr. 123) Applicant does not rent it 
to anyone when he is not occupying it. (Tr. 125) 
 
 Applicant has money deposited in seven bank accounts. Five bank accounts are 
in the United States and two of the bank accounts are in the Philippines. (Tr. 107) 
Collectively, he has approximately $8,000 USD deposited in the Philippines accounts. 
He opened the first account to facilitate the purchase of his condo in 2014. (Tr. 111; AE 
D at 3) He uses it to pay condo fees, utilities, and property taxes. Now, he uses it for his 
vacation expenses. He opened the account, in part, to avoid exorbitant ATM conversion 
fees that his U.S. bank charges for foreign transactions. Applicant opened the second 
bank account in the Philippines to take advantage of a perk in which the bank waives 
the $100 USD fee that the country charges foreign visitors seeking to apply for visa 
extensions. (Tr. 112) 
 
 Applicant purchased his primary property in the United States in 2007. Because 
he is home only once every 18 to 24 months, he generally keeps it boarded. Applicant 
rents his other two U.S. properties.  (Tr. 118) Applicant’s combined annual salary and 
retirement income totals approximately $322,000.  (Tr. 103; AE D at 3) His net worth is 
1.7 million dollars. 
 
 For approximately four months in 2012, before taking his current job, and after 
finishing his previous job in a combat zone, Applicant performed contract work in 
Finland. (Tr. 87) While there, he became romantically involved with a waitress who was 
a citizen of Thailand. He had sex with her twice. Their relationship never became close 
because of their language barrier. 
 
 In the past, Applicant considered settling down, moving to the Philippines and 
pursuing a serious relationship with a Filipino woman. Now, he is no longer interested in 
marrying anyone from the Philippines because of the communication gap that he has 
found which often exists between him and the women he has dated over the years. He 
no longer visits his ex-girlfriends when he travels to the Philippines. He now 
understands that the only reason many of them want to “hang out” with him is because 
of the possibility that he may buy them good food and great gifts. (Tr. 140)  As for 
relocating to the Philippines, Applicant ruled this out because his condo is too small. 
After living for years in a cramped, Spartan space while working on base, he prefers to 
purchase a home where he can “spread his legs out.” (Tr. 231) Applicant occasionally 
“get[s] random contacts out of the clear blue, but there’s nothing close to close and 
continuing happening” with any of the women he has met while traveling to the 
Philippines. (Tr. 213) 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 While Applicant was working in Finland, he took a ferry boat ride to Estonia and 
stayed there for two to three days. He spent the time in Estonia sightseeing. (Tr. 86, 
177)  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in September 2012. He 
answered “no” in response to Section 20B, which required him to disclose foreign 
interests. (See Preliminary Ruling Section, supra) The SOR alleges that he failed to 
disclose business consulting and financial support he provided to several women who 
were citizens and residents of the Philippines. Applicant contends that whatever advice 
he gave to Filipino women that he helped start businesses was limited to basic 
common-sense suggestions such as reminding them not to forget to subtract inventory 
costs from sales revenue when calculating profit. (Tr. 173) Applicant also testified that 
any profit from their businesses was so small by U.S. standards that if he were to have 
requested a share, it “would [have] defeat[ed] the purpose . . . of trying to help them.” 
(Tr. 167)  
 
Applicant did receive a return on his investment in the pig farming business. 
Applicant helped the Filipino woman with the pig farming venture after he completed the 
security clearance application. He earned $300 from the investment. 
 
In response to Section 20C of Applicant’s security clearance application, 
regarding whether he had travelled outside of the United States in the past seven years, 
he answered, “yes.” In the second question under Section 20C, asking whether the 
foreign travel was solely for Government business, Applicant also answered “yes.” (GE 
1 at 28) The Government alleges in SOR subparagraph 2.k that Applicant’s failure to 
disclose trips to the Philippines in 2010 and 2011, a trip to Estonia in 2012, and a trip to 
Finland in July 2012 constitutes a falsification. Applicant testified that he always 
reported his foreign travel to his supervisor per company policy, and that his facility 
security officer (FSO) told him that he was only required to list travel to adversarial 
countries. (AE M; AE Q at 2; Tr. 174-175)  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 The Philippine government is a multi-party, constitutional republic with a 
bicameral legislature. (HE IV at 1) The relationship between the United States and the 
Philippines is based on a strong historical and cultural link. (HE XII) The United States 
and the Philippines maintain a robust relationship through several person-to-person 
cultural exchanges sponsored by both governments, as well as non-governmental 
organizations. (Id.) Approximately 220,000 U.S. citizens live in the Philippines. (Id.) 
Manila, the capital of the Philippines, is home to the only U.S. Bureau of Veterans 
Affairs office and health care clinic outside of the United States. (HE XI at 1-2) The 
largest U.S. cemetery outside of the United States is in the Philippines. 
 
 Manila is a high-threat location for crime directed at, or affecting U.S. government 
interests. (HE VII at 1) The U.S. Department of State advises all U.S. citizens 
contemplating travel to the Philippines to exercise increased caution due to crime, 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
terrorism, and civil unrest. (HE VIII) Certain regions of the Philippines have been acutely 
affected by Islamic State-sponsored terrorism.  (HE V) The Philippines government has 
consistently acknowledged the danger from such groups and has welcomed assistance 
from the United States. (HE V)  
 
 Although the Philippines is a democratic republic, its human rights record is poor. 
Over an 18-month period between July 2016 and October 2017, government agents 
and their informal allies arbitrarily and unlawfully killed thousands of people allegedly 
connected to the distribution of illegal drugs. (HE IV at 2) Other problems include torture 
of prisoners, life-threatening prison conditions, arbitrary jailing of political prisoners, and 
warrantless arrests by security forces. (HE IV at 1) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, 
business, financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance.” (AG ¶ 6) The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 7: 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a 
citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest.  
 
  The Philippines is an ally of the United States and is a partner in fighting 
terrorism. However, terrorism and civil unrest is pervasive in parts of the country, crime 
is rampant, and the government has a history of brutally disregarding the human rights 
of its citizens in enforcing the rule of law. Under these circumstances, Applicant’s 
relationship with girlfriends over the years and various other people whom he has 
helped financially, raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 7(a) applies, and Applicant’s 
property interest in the Philippines raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 7(f) applies. 
 
  None of Applicant’s romantic relationships were long-term or serious. Although 
Applicant spent thousands of dollars over the years helping Filipino citizens and 
residents, buying gifts for his then-girlfriends and helping them financially, this money 
was minimal in relation to his total net worth. The most recent evidence of a romantic 
relationship with a citizen and resident of the Philippines occurred approximately five 
years ago. Any residual contact with ex-girlfriends is casual and infrequent. 
Consequently, the casual, infrequent nature of Applicant’s relationship with his friends 
and acquaintances who are citizens and residents of the Philippines renders the 
possibility of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion 
minimal. AG ¶ 7(a) does not apply. Assuming for the sake of argument that the 
concerns about crime, terrorism, and human rights abuses in the Philippines were 
sufficient to trigger the application of AG ¶ 7(a), it is mitigated by AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” I resolve 
subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b in Applicant’s favor. 
 
  The value of Applicant’s condo and his bank accounts in the Philippines are 
minimal in relation to the value of his properties in the United States and to his total net 
worth. Consequently, the possibility that it could create the potential for coercion, 
influence, or exploitation is minimal. AG ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign 
business, financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a 
conflict and could not be used to effectively influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual,” applies. I resolve SOR subparagraph 1.d and 1.e in Applicant’s favor.  
 
  A clear and accurate assessment of a country’s geo-political position vis a vis the 
United States is crucial in a heightened risk analysis. (ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4, 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007) The Government presented no such evidence about either 
Thailand or Finland. Under these circumstances, Applicant’s past relationship with a 
Thai citizen residing in Finland does not generate a security concern. I resolve SOR 
subparagraph 1.c in Applicant’s favor. 
 
  Applicant disclosed that he has met several women during his foreign travels on 
his 2012 security clearance application. He identified and discussed his relationships 
with them comprehensively during the investigative process. Consequently, I resolve 
SOR subparagraph 1.f, alleging that he failed to report association with foreign 
nationals, in his favor. In sum, Applicant has mitigated the Guideline B security concern. 
   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information.” (AG ¶ 15) Moreover, “of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
or adjudicative processes.” (Id.) 
 
  The personal conduct security concern is not applicable to Applicant’s purchase 
of property in the Philippines to use during his occasional visits because it is not 
reflective of dishonesty, untrustworthiness, or bad judgment. Any security concerns 
regarding the property were addressed under the Guideline B section above. 
 
  Applicant is a single man who has lived nearly continuously in combat zones for 
the past 15 years, working seven days per week for his employer under extraordinarily 
stressful and austere conditions. These facts, together with his testimony, lead me to 
conclude that emotional fulfillment was not what Applicant was primarily seeking when 
he entered into romantic relationships with his various paramours in the Philippines 
during his brief vacation time over the years. Conversely, he was not intimately involved 
with every woman he met while vacationing in the Philippines, and he assisted them 
financially regardless of whether he was having sexual intercourse with them. Moreover, 
he has not had an intimate relationship with any citizens and residents of the Philippines 
in approximately five years. Applicant has a history of helping people in need, giving 
$2,000 over the years to U.S. charities to help flood victims. Under these 
circumstances, the altruism Applicant demonstrated by helping women when visiting the 
Philippines was not diminished by whether or not he was romantically involved with 
them. I conclude that SOR subparagraph 2.g generates no security concern. 
 
  As for Applicant’s response to Section 20B of his security clearance application 
regarding foreign interests in the Philippines, Applicant’s help to Philippine foreign 
nationals consisted of financial support to help them start businesses or attend trade 
school. The advice that he has occasionally provided to them over the years was limited 
to innocuous, common-sense suggestions. Under these circumstances, I conclude that 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant did not falsify Section 20B of his security clearance application, as alleged in 
SOR subparagraph 2.j.  
 
  Applicant’s FSO told him that he was only required to report foreign trips to 
adversarial countries. He always reported his foreign travel to his supervisor in advance 
of his trips. Under these circumstances, I conclude that his failure to disclose two trips to 
the Philippines, a trip to Finland, and a trip to Estonia,  when he answered “no” to 
Question 20C regarding foreign, non-work related travel over the past seven years, did 
not constitute a falsification, and at worst, constituted a careless, but honest mistake. In 
reaching this conclusion, I considered his explanation, together with his forthcoming 
responses to the other security clearance application questions, and his good character. 
I conclude Applicant has mitigated the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance for more than 35 years, and he has spent 
nearly his entire adult life serving the country, first as an enlisted Airman, and after 
retirement, as a contractor, working nearly year round in combat zones for the past 15 
years. While working abroad, Applicant has largely sacrificed a conventional, 
comfortable life stateside for an ascetic life with the near-constant threat of physical 
harm. I considered these facts in assessing his credibility, and in my disposition of the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions of the alleged guidelines.   
 
Formal Finding 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:     For Applicant 
     
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.g – 2.k:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the security interests of the United States to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Marc Curry 
Administrative Judge 
