1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
[Redacted]1 ) ADP Case No. 15-03696 
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted an application for a public trust position on September 29, 
2014. On September 17, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. DOD acted under 
DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016). 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 17, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Applicant was separated from employment on April 19, 2018, 
and processing of the case was terminated for lack of jurisdiction.  
1 Applicant married after the Statement of Reasons (SOR) was issued. This decision is captioned with her 
married name instead of the name reflected in the SOR. 
01/30/2019
2 
 
Applicant was employed by another defense contractor on November 7, 2018, and 
the case was reopened and assigned to me on November 15, 2018. The Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent her a notice of hearing on November 26, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for December 19, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without 
objection. I kept the record open until January 11, 2019, to enable her to submit additional 
documentary evidence. She timely submitted AX B through I, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 4, 2019. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f. 
She did not admit or deny the delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. Her admissions have 
been incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since November 2018. She has never held a security clearance or 
eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
 Applicant attended college from October 2000 to September 2001 and received a 
certificate of completion for training as a legal office assistant. She attended college from 
January 2006 to August 2007 and October 2009 to September 2011 but did not receive 
a degree. She has student loans totaling about $74,000, on which deferment ended in 
December 2018. (Tr. 69.) The student loans are not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 Applicant married in July 2011. (GX 1 at 6.) Around December 2011, her husband 
left her. She filed for divorce in 2012, and the divorce was final in May 2014. She has an 
11-year-old daughter from her previous marriage, for whom she receives child-support 
payments of $800 per month. She also has a 15-year-old son from a previous relationship, 
for whom she receives child support of $147 per month. She remarried in 2017 and has 
a 19-month-old daughter from this marriage. (GX 2 at 2-3; Tr. 30-31.) 
 
 Applicant has worked for federal contractors since at least February 2002 as a 
receptionist, technical assistant, executive assistant, administrative specialist, human-
resources specialist, performance-management analyst, and payroll time-and- 
attendance specialist. She was unemployed from June to November 2011, when her 
employer’s contract ended. Her previous jobs did not offer medical insurance, and she 
incurred debts for medical care. She had a full-time day job and worked at full-time night 
jobs at fast-food restaurants during the summer of 2012. She worked part time at a fast-
food restaurant for three months in 2012 or 2013. (GX 2 at 2.) In each case, she quit her 
night job because she was physically unable to work two jobs. 
 
 Applicant purchased a home in 2005 with an adjustable-rate mortgage. Her 
husband’s pay was reduced when he was moved from a supervisory position to a lower-
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her application for a public trust position (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
3 
 
paying non-supervisory position. (Tr. 46.) They filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
September 2007 because they could not afford to pay the mortgage loan and could not 
obtain a loan modification. The bankruptcy also included her then husband’s car loan, 
medical bills, and her then husband’s credit-card debt. They received a discharge in June 
2009. About $259,000-$280,000 was discharged. (GX 2 at 5; Tr. 32.) 
 
 After Applicant’s first husband left her, she remained in the marital home, which 
she had purchased in July 2010. Her mother, who has since passed away, also was living 
with and supported by her. Applicant stayed in the marital home for about two months, 
moved in with a friend, and then sold the marital home in a short sale. The credit report 
from April 2017 reflects that the mortgage loan was paid. (GX 4 at 1.) Her friend was 
retired military and employed full time. They agreed to split their living expenses, but 
Applicant found herself paying most of the expenses. She could not afford to move out, 
and so she continued to live with her friend for about two years. (Tr. 37-39.)  
 
Around 2015, Applicant began living with a co-worker, and they married in 2017. 
(Tr. 30.) Her current husband is retired military and she is entitled to military medical 
benefits as a military family member. Her current husband has given her financial 
guidance and has joined her in managing the family finances. (Tr. 40-41.) She testified 
that her husband has prepared a spreadsheet for her, setting out a plan to resolve her 
delinquent debts. It lists specific creditors and specific payment amounts to each creditor. 
She did not submit the spreadsheet at the hearing. She promised to submit a copy of it, 
but it was not included in her post-hearing submission. (Tr. 75-76.)  
 
 The SOR alleges the Chapter 7 bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.a), a delinquent car loan 
(SOR ¶ 1.b), and five medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.g). The bankruptcy and delinquent 
debts are reflected in credit reports from November 2018 (GX 3), April 2017 (GX 4), and 
October 2014 (GX 5.)  
 
The allegations of delinquent medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.g do not comply with 
the requirement for specificity in Directive ¶ E3.1.3, which requires that the SOR “shall be 
as detailed and comprehensive as the national security permits.” The SOR does not 
identify the creditors or collection agents and provides no account numbers. The April 
2017 credit report on which they are based lists only the date each account was opened. 
However, Applicant was able to track down each of these medical debts. The evidence 
concerning the delinquent debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: delinquent car loan charged off for $10,375. Applicant testified that 
this debt was jointly incurred during her previous marriage. (Tr. 47.) The account was 
opened in December 2011, and the debt was charged off in June 2014. (GX 3 at 5; GX 5 
at 3.) In a personal subject interview (PSI) in November 2014, Applicant told an 
investigator that she was negotiating with this creditor. She admitted this debt in her 
answer to the SOR and stated that she would resolve it after she resolved other smaller 
debts. At the hearing, she testified that she contacted the creditor and was offered a 
settlement for $8,000, but she could not afford to accept it. (Tr. 47-48.) She did not provide 
any documentary evidence of the settlement offer. In her post-hearing submission, she 
asserted that this creditor informed her that it would not attempt to collect this debt 
4 
 
because it is barred by the statute of limitations. (AX D.) She provided no documentary 
evidence to support her assertion regarding the statute of limitations.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: medical debt for eye surgery, past due for $172. This debt was 
incurred in December 2014, and the last payment was in March 2015. (GX 3 at 6; GX 4 
at 2.) The total amount due on this debt is $2,826. (GX 4 at 2.) Applicant underwent laser 
surgery after her vision declined and she began wearing glasses. She decided that the 
surgery made more financial sense than paying for new glasses whenever her vision 
changed. (Tr. 51.) Applicant has promised to make biweekly $75 payments beginning on 
January 19, 2019. (AX I.) As of the date the record closed, she had not made any 
payments.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d: medical debt for $651. This debt was incurred when Applicant went 
to an emergency room after an automobile accident in 2013. She testified that she 
disputed the amount of the debt because she left the emergency room for an unspecified 
personal emergency before being treated. She settled the debt for a lesser amount on 
November 30, 2018, after she received the SOR. (AX A; Tr. 53-54.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: medical debt for $331. This debt was paid in full on September 28, 
2017, after Applicant received the SOR. (AX H.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: medical debt for $156. This debt was paid in full in March 2016. (AX 
G.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: medical debt for $47. This debt was paid in full on January 9, 2017. 
(AX F.) 
  
 Applicant’s annual pay is about $96,000, which is a substantial increase from her 
previous job, which paid $65,000 per year. Her take-home pay ranges from about $2,000 
to $2,300. She has no savings. (Tr. 80.) Her husband is retired military, and his annual 
pay is about $104,000. (Tr. 80.) Applicant does not know how much he receives in military 
retired pay. Her husband has four children from his previous marriage and pays child 
support for two of them. He also is still jointly liable for the mortgage payments on his 
previous marital home. (Tr. 88.) Applicant’s rent is $2,700. She pays $1,700, and her 
husband pays $1,000, plus the utilities. They have a monthly car payment of $554. (Tr. 
67.) She did not provide any other information about her monthly living expenses. 
 
 Applicant testified that she did not contact the various creditors alleged in the SOR 
until recently, because she did not have sufficient income to make payments, and she did 
not want to make a payment agreement that she would be unable to afford. (Tr. 86.) Her 
current employment contract is for three years, and she is confident that her income will 
not decrease during the duration of the contract and may increase. (Tr. 83.) 
 
Policies 
 
ADP positions are sensitive positions, and applicants for ADP positions are entitled 
to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
5 
 
determination may be made. The standard for assignment to sensitive duties is that the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.   
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, 
by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
6 
 
classified or sensitive information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or 
sensitive information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability 
to satisfy debts”); AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to 
do so”); and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not fully established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous and 
recent, and the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c were not incurred under 
circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-
1.g are less likely to recur, because Applicant’s recent marriage entitles her to military 
medical benefits. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established for Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy. It was caused by 
her then husband’s pay reduction and upward adjustment in her mortgage-loan 
payments, which were conditions largely beyond her control. Under the circumstances, 
filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition was a prudent decision.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established for the debts incurred after Applicant’s bankruptcy. 
Her marital breakup and the resulting income reduction, unemployment from June to 
November 2011, unemployment from April to November 2018, and uninsured medical 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.g were conditions largely beyond her control. However, 
her medical debt for laser surgery alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was voluntarily incurred. The 
7 
 
record does not reflect why her employment was terminated in April 2018, but there is no 
evidence that it was voluntary or due to any misconduct.  
 
However, Applicant has not acted responsibly regarding the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e. The car loan in SOR ¶ 1.b was incurred in December 2011, while 
she was employed, and she acted responsibly for a while by working second jobs in 2012 
and 2013. However, she stopped making payments in June or July 2014, well before she 
lost her job in April 2018. She has provided no documentary evidence of any efforts to 
resolve the debt, except for her reliance on a statute of limitations. She provided no 
evidence of efforts to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c until after the hearing, and she has 
made no payments on the debt. She did not resolve the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.d and 1.e until after she received the SOR.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Other than the financial counseling required by the 
bankruptcy court in 2008, she presented no evidence of financial counseling, and her 
financial situation is not under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g, 
which Applicant resolved before she received the SOR. She claimed that the creditor 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b told her that it would not attempt to collect the debt because it was 
barred by the statute of limitations, but she submitted no evidence to support her claim. 
Furthermore, reliance on the non-collectability because of a statute of limitations does not 
constitute a good-faith effort to resolve that debt. ISCR Case No. 11-08274 (App. Bd. May 
2, 2013).  
 
Applicant submitted a specific plan to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, but she 
submitted no evidence that the creditor had agreed to the plan and no evidence of any 
payments under the plan. Her resolution of the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 
1.e after she received the SOR does not amount to a good-faith effort. Evidence of past 
irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under pressure of qualifying for 
a public trust position. An applicant who does not resolve debts until an application for a 
public trust position is in jeopardy may lack the good judgment expected of those with 
access to sensitive information. See ISCR Case No. 16-01211 (App. Bd. May 30, 2018) 
citing ISCR Case No. 15-03208 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 7, 2017).  
 
Applicant has made some progress in attaining financial stability, tracking down 
and resolving several medical debts. However, she has not established a track record of 
financial responsibility. She testified that she had a plan to resolve all her debts and that 
the plan was laid out in a detailed spreadsheet, but she did not submit it at the hearing or 
in her post-hearing submission.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant claimed that she disputed the amount of 
the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, but she provided no documentation to support her 
claim. However, she eventually settled the debt. She has not disputed any of the other 
debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
  
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a public 
trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns 
raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant her eligibility for a public 
trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
