1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--- ) ISCR Case No. 16-02978 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding personal conduct, 
criminal conduct, and financial considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and 
access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On May 15, 2015, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 23, 2016, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
(December 29, 2005) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive, effective September 1, 2006.1  
01/24/2019
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines E (Personal Conduct), J 
(Criminal Conduct), and F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD 
CAF was unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether such 
eligibility should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 10, 2017. In a sworn statement, dated 
January 30, 2017,2 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
prepared to proceed on March 8, 2017. The case was assigned to me on March 20, 2018. 
A Notice of Hearing was issued on August 28, 2018, scheduling the hearing for 
September 24, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
 
 During the hearing, Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 7 and Administrative 
Exhibit I were admitted into evidence without objection. No Applicant exhibits (AE) were 
offered. Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on January 17, 2019.3 I kept 
the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. He took advantage of that 
opportunity and timely submitted several documents, which were marked and admitted 
as AE A through AE O, without objection. The record closed on October 29, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with limited comments, nearly all of 
the factual allegations pertaining to personal conduct in the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.d., and 1.f.); he failed to admit or deny one allegation pertaining to personal conduct 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.), so a denial was registered for him; he admitted, with limited comments, 
nearly all of the factual allegations pertaining to criminal conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 
2.c.); he failed to admit or deny one allegation pertaining to criminal conduct (SOR ¶ 2.d.), 
so a denial was registered for him; and he admitted several allegations pertaining to 
financial considerations (SOR ¶¶ 3.i. through 3.n.). He denied, with limited comments, all 
of the remaining allegations.  
 During the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding 
eight additional factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations (SOR ¶¶ 3.o. 
                                                          
1 Effective June 8, 2017, by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated December 
10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, were 
established to supersede all previously issued national security adjudicative criteria or guidelines. 
Accordingly, those guidelines previously implemented on September 1, 2006, under which this security 
clearance review case was initiated, no longer apply. In comparing the two versions, there is no substantial 
difference that might have a negative effect on Applicant in this case. 
 
2 Although the pre-printed form upon which Applicant selected the chosen forum was dated 2016, 
it is clear that if the SOR was issued in December 2016, he could not have received it in January 2016. 
 
3 Although a copy of the purported transcript was received on October 2, 2018, while the cover of 
the transcript was the one for this case, the contents were associated with a different case. Upon 
determining the error, the correct transcript was electronically transmitted to me on January 17, 2019. 
 
3 
                                      
 
through 3.v.). There being no objection, the motion was granted.4 Applicant was afforded 
20 days to respond to the new allegations. He failed to admit or deny any of the added 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations, so denials were registered for him. 
 Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
as a missile assembler with his current employer since October 2004. Although he 
attended high school for six years, in 2000, he received a certificate of completion, but 
not a diploma. He has never served in the U.S. military. He was granted a secret 
clearance in 2004. Applicant has never married, but he has resided with a cohabitant for 
an unspecified period, and he had four children, born in 2002, 2004, 2008, and 2015, 
respectively. 
 
Personal Conduct and Criminal Conduct 
 
 Applicant has a lengthy history of disregarding laws, rules, and regulations. The 
SOR alleged nine incidents of criminality and personal conduct by Applicant commencing 
in 2006, and continuing until at least 2016.  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 3.n.): In June 2006, Applicant was charged with 1) Driving with 
Suspended License, 2) Operating a Vehicle without Insurance, and 3) Switched Tag. He 
was convicted and fined.5 He was granted a payment plan. While he paid $35 associated 
with the Switched Tag conviction, he failed to pay the remaining $256 for that charge, and 
the $306 and $356 for the other charges.6  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 3.n.): In July 2012, Applicant was charged with 1) Driving while 
License Suspended, and 2) Operating a Vehicle without Insurance. He was convicted 
and fined.7 He was granted a payment plan. While he paid $356 for the Insurance charge, 
and $244 associated with the Suspended License conviction, he failed to pay the 
remaining $62 for that charge.8  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 3.n.): In July 2013, Applicant was charged with 1) Driving with 
License Revoked, 2) Operating a Vehicle without Insurance, and 3) Expired Tag. He was 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 12-14. 
 
5 GE 6 (Municipal Record Search, dated October 21, 2016). 
 
6 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1.  
 
7 GE 6, supra note 5. 
 
8 GE 6, supra note 5. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
convicted and fined.9 He was granted a payment plan. His fines of $306 for the Revoked 
License, $356 for the Insurance, and $206 for the Expired Tag remain unpaid.10  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 3.n.): In October 2013, Applicant was charged with Contempt of 
Court associated with his failures to pay his outstanding fines. In March 2014, after he 
paid $35 in fees and court costs, the charge was nolle prossed.11  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.f., and 3.n.): In January 2014, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with 1) Driving with License Revoked, 2) Failure/Refusal to Display Insurance, and 
Expired Tag. He was convicted and fined.12 He was granted a payment plan. His $306 
fine for Revoked License, $356 fine for Insurance, and his $206 fine for Expired Tag 
remain unpaid.13 Applicant failed to self-report his arrest to his security manager of facility 
security office.14 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.b. and 3.n.): In September 2014, Applicant was again charged with 
Contempt of Court associated with his failures to pay his outstanding fines. In November 
2014, a warrant was issued for his arrest. He was eventually ordered to pay $303 in fees 
and court costs, but that amount remains unpaid.15  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.): In December 2015, a coworker brought a shocking pen into the work 
area. Applicant took the device from the coworker and entered another work area where 
he attempted to “prank” another employee. Human Resources determined that Applicant 
had conspired to be untruthful in an interview when he was questioned about his level of 
involvement in the incident. Applicant was subsequently issued a written warning for 
failure to comply with the company’s guidelines for professional conduct.16 Applicant 
denied both the allegation and taking the device into the work area, claiming the incident 
was incorrectly reported.17 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.c.): Although he is aware that it is illegal to operate a motor vehicle 
without a driver’s license, when he is unable to obtain transportation to and from work 
                                                          
9 GE 6, supra note 5. 
 
10 GE 6, supra note 5. 
 
11 GE 6, supra note 5. 
 
12 GE 6, supra note 5. 
 
13 GE 6, supra note 5. 
 
14 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1. 
 
15 GE 6, supra note 5. 
 
16 GE 5 (Incident History, dated September 29, 2016). 
 
17 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1; Tr. at 74-76. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
with a coworker, to avoid being fired from his job, Applicant admitted that he takes the 
risk and has continued to drive unlawfully since his 2014 arrest.18 
 
Financial Considerations19 
  
Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to several factors: he is a single father; 
he and his children reside with Applicant’s grandmother – the individual who raised him 
– in her house; his girlfriend refused to allow him to get a tag for the vehicle in her name 
for which he had cosigned; and in 2012, his girlfriend left him and the children. Although 
not cited by him as a contributing factor to his financial problems, three or four years ago, 
for Christmas, Applicant purchased an unspecified number of all-terrain-vehicles (ATVs) 
for his children, each costing $5,000 to $6,000.20 For reasons not explained other than 
experiencing “rough times,” in addition to the traffic fines and fees that remain unpaid, 
other accounts became delinquent.  
The SOR, as amended, identified 21 purportedly delinquent accounts, including 
unpaid court fines and fees, which had been placed for collection, charged off, or filed as 
judgments, as generally reflected by Applicant’s December 2010, June 2016, or 
September 2018 credit reports. Those debts total approximately $48,677. The current 
status of the non-court fines and fees accounts is as follows: 
There are six delinquent accounts that were placed for collection and filed as 
judgments that were eventually partially or fully satisfied by garnishments: $5,028 (SOR 
¶¶ 3.c. and 3.l.); $1,048 (SOR ¶ 3.d.); $1,400 (SOR ¶¶ 3.e. and 3.m.); $1,025 (SOR ¶ 
3.f.); $5,064 (SOR ¶¶ 3.g. and 3.i.); and $1,149 (SOR ¶ 3.h.).21 There has been no change 
in the status of a vast majority of Applicant’s accounts that were placed for collection, 
most of which were charged off with unpaid balances: $4,787 (SOR ¶ 3.a.); $374 (SOR 
¶ 3.b.); $2,167 (SOR ¶ 3.o.); $1,385 (SOR ¶ 3.p.); $2,088 (SOR ¶ 3.q.); $9,073 (SOR ¶ 
3.r.); $6,154 (SOR ¶ 3.s.); $418 (SOR ¶ 3.t.); $175 (SOR ¶ 3.u.); and $714 (SOR ¶ 3.v.).22 
                                                          
18 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated May 18, 2016), at 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, 
supra note 1; Tr. at 72. 
 
19 General source information pertaining to the financial issues discussed below can be found in 
the following exhibits: GE 2, supra note 18; GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit 
Report, dated December 30, 2010); GE 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated June 28, 2016); GE 7 (Equifax 
Credit Report, dated September 21, 2018); and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 1.   
  
20 Tr. at 56-57. 
 
21 GE 3, supra note 19; GE 4, supra note 19; GE 7, supra note 19; AE A (Garnishment File, various 
dates); AE B (Satisfaction of Judgment, dated October 16, 2018); AE C (Garnishment File, various dates); 
AE D Civil Fee Sheet, dated September 28, 2018); AE E (Garnishment File, various dates); AE F (Order, 
dated May 27, 2010); AE G (Order, dated June 9, 2009); AE H (Garnishment File, various dates); AE I (Civil 
Fee Sheet, dated September 28, 2018); AE J (Garnishment File, various dates). See also GE 5, supra note 
15. 
 
22 GE 7, supra note 19; Tr. at 55. 
 
6 
                                      
 
Applicant claimed he made some payments to creditors, and he contended that in 
March 2018 he engaged the professional services of a debt relief organization to resolve 
his delinquent accounts, and that he pays that organization $400 per month for their 
services.23 Although Applicant stated an intention to submit documentation regarding his 
relationship with the debt relief company; the status of all of his delinquent accounts; 
payment plans established with his creditors; and payments made to creditors by himself 
or in his behalf, no such documentation was submitted.  
Applicant submitted a Personal Financial Statement to reflect his monthly net 
income; monthly expenses; and a monthly remainder available for discretionary saving or 
spending. He reported that his monthly net salary was about $2,731.80, and his monthly 
expenses, including $500 child support, and $600 for debt relief and credit cards, was 
$2,450.24 That leaves him approximately $282 per month available for discretionary 
saving or spending. There is no evidence of financial counseling. 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”25 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”26   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
 
23 Tr. at 48-52. 
 
24 AE N (Personal Financial Statement, undated). 
 
25 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
26 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”27 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.28  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”29  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”30 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
27 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
28 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
29 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
30 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, including those in the DOD CAF 
case file, those submitted by Applicant, his testimony, as well as an assessment of 
Applicant=s demeanor and credibility, and after application of all appropriate legal 
precepts and factors, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in 
the SOR: 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes conditions under AG ¶ 31 that could raise security concerns: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.  
 
Between 2006 and 2014, Applicant established a lengthy pattern of criminality 
involving repeated traffic-related violations for which he was charged, convicted, and 
fined. His repeated failures to pay his court fines and costs resulted in two charges of 
contempt of court. Although he is aware that it is illegal to operate a motor vehicle without 
a driver’s license, Applicant admitted that he takes the risk and has continued to drive 
unlawfully since his 2014 arrest. Based on the actions described above, AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 
31(b) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 32 that could 
mitigate trustworthiness concerns arising from criminal conduct. They include: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the offense;  
and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
 
9 
                                      
 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s continuing unwillingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations is troubling, for he routinely ignores the law when 
he consistently drives a vehicle without a license, when it has been suspended or 
revoked, without insurance, or with an expired or switched tag. Under these 
circumstances, there is little, if any, evidence of rehabilitation. While a person should not 
be held forever accountable for misconduct from the past, in this instance, the criminal 
conduct is routinely continuing. Given his cavalier attitude towards laws, rules, and 
regulations, Applicant’s history of criminal conduct, under the circumstances, continues 
to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline also includes an example of a condition that could raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
 
10 
                                      
 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. 
 
My discussion related to Applicant’s criminal conduct is adopted herein. In addition, 
Applicant failed to self-report his 2014 arrest to his security manager or his facility security 
office. Applicant’s continuing unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations is 
troubling. With respect to the incidents of criminal-personal conduct discussed above, and 
Applicant’s failure to report his 2014 arrest, AG ¶ 16(c) has been established. As to the 
alleged conduct, denied by Applicant, regarding his failure to comply with the corporate 
guidelines for professional conduct in December 2015, while further commentary appears 
below, AG ¶ 16(c) has been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. They include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) The information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Because of Applicant’s continuing unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations, especially related to the unlawful driving issues, as well as his failures to pay 
the court-assessed fines and costs, AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. While Applicant failed to 
self-report his 2014 arrest, he claimed that he was unaware that the incident was 
supposed to be reported. There is no evidence that Applicant had been informed of his 
responsibility to report it.  
 
With respect to the alleged incident of Applicant’s failure to comply with the 
corporate guidelines for professional conduct, guidelines which were not entered into 
evidence, in December 2015, as noted above, Applicant denied the allegation and the 
facts underlying it. The only evidence of the alleged incident or the facts reported, are 
found in a Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) Person Summary, called an 
Incident History, written by an unidentified individual, with no indicia of accuracy or 
verification. It does not appear to be an investigative report, and is unverified hearsay. 
Given Applicant’s denial of the allegation in its entirety, acceptable evidence of the alleged 
incident, at least in the form of an official corporate incident report, report of inquiry, or 
some other verified document signed by a corporate executive or government official 
should have been submitted. In the absence of such evidence, as to this allegation, AG 
¶ 17(e) applies. Nevertheless, Applicant’s actions under the circumstances continue to 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
  
 
11 
                                      
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators. 
 
The SOR, as amended, identified 21 delinquent accounts, including unpaid court 
fines and fees, that had been placed for collection, charged off, or filed as judgments, 
totaling approximately $48,677. There is no evidence that he was unwilling to satisfy his 
debts or that he had the ability to do so, but with the purchase of one or more ATVs for 
his children, each costing $5,000 to $6,000, there is evidence of frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, or consistent spending beyond his means, especially when he had numerous 
delinquent accounts and unpaid court fines and fees. There has been no change in the 
status of a vast majority of Applicant’s delinquent accounts. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(e) 
have been established, but AG ¶ 19(b) has not been established.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;31 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;32 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigation conditions apply. The conditions that supposedly resulted in 
Applicant’s financial problems were of his own making, not the result of conditions that 
were largely beyond his control. The somewhat rare instances of his paying court fines 
and fees do not constitute a “good-faith” effort to resolve his debts, and neither does the 
resolution of judgments by garnishment. Applicant claimed he hired a debt relief 
organization to resolve his debts. But, as noted above, he failed to submit documentation 
                                                          
31 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
32 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
to support his claims. Although the record remained open, he also failed to furnish a 
requested updated status of his SOR-related accounts supported by receipts, checks, or 
letters related to those debts; and a copy of his repayment plan showing any priority for 
addressing his delinquent accounts.  
Applicant offered no documentation to indicate that he sought information from his 
creditors or collection agents,33 or by obtaining financial counseling and credit resolution 
guidance and assistance. He offered evidence to indicate that his annual income is 
sufficient to address at least some of his delinquent accounts, but little evidence to 
indicate that his financial situation is now under control. Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.34 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without 
further confirmed action, are insufficient. In this instance, Applicant’s promises have not 
transitioned into positive action. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of public trust by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
                                                          
33 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
34 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.35 
 
 There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 
38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving as a missile 
assembler with his current employer since October 2004. He was granted a secret 
clearance in 2004. 
 
 The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is an individual with a history of criminal conduct and personal conduct incidents 
taking place starting in 2006 and continuing through 2014. In fact, although he has not 
been caught by the police authorities since 2014, Applicant continues to show an 
unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations, for he routinely ignores the law 
when he consistently drives a vehicle without a license, when it has been suspended or 
revoked, without insurance, or with an expired or switched tag. Although he has been 
convicted of numerous traffic-related violations and fined and assessed court fees, he 
has generally ignored those fines and fees to the extent that he has twice been charged 
with contempt of court. Judgments have been satisfied only through garnishments of his 
wages, not by mutually-agreed repayment plans. Although Applicant claimed to have 
taken certain positive actions to address his creditors and delinquent accounts, he failed 
to submit requested documentation to support his various claims and contentions.  
 
 The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:36 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
                                                          
35 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
36 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a poor track record of debt reduction and elimination 
efforts, essentially failing to address nearly all of his SOR-related debts. Overall, the 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct, personal conduct, and 
financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f. and 1.g.:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.d.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a. and 3.b.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 3.c. through 3.m.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 3.n. through 3.v.:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
           ________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
