1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 16-03863 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has been married since March 2011 to a native of the Kyrgyz Republic 
(Kyrgyzstan) who became naturalized in the United States in June 2018. His spouse no 
longer owns any property in the foreign country, and her daughter, a Kyrgyz citizen, has 
U.S. permanent residency. However, foreign influence security concerns are not fully 
mitigated because of his spouse’s family ties to Kyrgyzstan, including a sibling who spent 
his career with the Kyrgyz government. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On April 4, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The SOR explained why the DOD CAF 
was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
01/31/2019
 
 
2 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 2, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On 
September 7, 2018, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. On October 5, 2018, I scheduled a hearing for November 15, 
2018. 
 
At the hearing, three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) were admitted. A May 30, 
2018 letter forwarding the proposed GEs to Applicant and a list of the GEs were marked 
as hearing exhibits (HEs I-II) for the record but not admitted in evidence. At the 
Government’s request and without objection from Applicant, I agreed to take 
administrative notice of several facts pertinent to the Kyrgyz Republic, as set forth in a 
May 30, 2018 Request for Administrative Notice-Kyrgyzstan (Kyrgyz Republic),1 which 
was entered in evidence as GE 3. Ten Applicant exhibits (AEs A-J) were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received 
on November 29, 2018. 
 
I held the record open for three weeks after the hearing for Applicant to respond to 
GE 3 and to submit facts for administrative notice. On November 28, 2018, Applicant 
submitted four U.S. State Department reports on human rights in the Kyrgyz Republic 
and a Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) article. The 
documents were admitted without objection as AE K. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline B that Applicant’s brother-in-law is a resident 
citizen of Kyrgyzstan employed by the Kyrgyz government (SOR ¶ 1.a); that Applicant’s 
spouse (SOR ¶ 1.b) and daughter-in-law (SOR ¶ 1.c) are Kyrgyz citizens; that Applicant’s 
father-in-law is a resident citizen of Kyrgyzstan (SOR ¶ 1.d); and that Applicant’s spouse 
owns an apartment in Kyrgyzstan valued at approximately $45,000 (SOR ¶ 1.e.). In a 
detailed response to the SOR, Applicant indicated that with a change in leadership in the 
Kyrgyz Republic following October 2017 elections, his brother-in-law has been removed 
from his government position, and his employment status was unclear. Applicant 
explained that his immediate family had no direct contact with him and so learned about 
his status from extended family members. Applicant admitted that his spouse and 
stepdaughter had Kyrgyz citizenship, but his spouse’s U.S. citizenship test was scheduled 
for May 30, 2018. His stepdaughter was employed in the United States and planned to 
apply for her U.S. citizenship at her earliest opportunity next year. Applicant admitted his 
father-in-law’s residency and citizenship in Kyrgyzstan. Regarding the apartment in the 
Kyrgyz Republic, Applicant explained that his spouse sold the apartment in June 2017 
after his stepdaughter graduated from college in Kyrgyzstan. 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
                                                 
1 The country is formally known as the Kyrgyz Republic, although the country is often referred to as 
Kyrgyzstan. The U.S. government uses the terms interchangeably when referring to the country. 
 
 
3 
Applicant is a 56-year-old global security specialist, who has worked for his current 
employer, a defense contractor, since December 2016. (GE 1; Tr. 48.) He attended 
college on a Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) scholarship, and earned a 
bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering. He entered on active duty in the U.S. military 
in April 1984. (GE 1.) He held a DOD security clearance throughout his active duty service 
and worked on several classified programs. (Tr. 26-27, 44.) Applicant married in 
December 1986, but he and his first wife divorced in August 1988. (GE 1; Tr. 49.) 
 
In April 1990, Applicant was granted an honorable discharge from active duty, and 
his clearance eligibility lapsed for about a year. (Tr. 47.) In February 1991, Applicant and 
his second wife married, and they had a son in March 1993. (GE 1.) From April 1993 to 
August 2004, Applicant worked as a civilian contractor with a clearance at a U.S. military 
research laboratory. After being in the inactive reserve for six years, he returned to the 
military as an active reservist in 1996. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 27, 47.)  
 
From August 2004 to December 2005, Applicant was employed as a program 
director for a federal contractor at a space center. In January 2006, he began teaching at 
a public university as a state employee. (GE 1.) He continued to maintain security 
clearance eligibility for his duties in his military reserve unit, and he was called to active 
duty during the summers. From June 2006 to September 2006, he was stationed in the 
Kyrgyz Republic as an active-duty reservist. Applicant became friends with his current 
wife, a native Kyrgyz resident citizen who worked as a contractor at the base’s exchange. 
(Tr. 51.) Applicant was stationed in the United States during the summer of 2007, and 
was deployed to Tajikistan in the summer of 2008. (GE 2; Tr. 45-46.) 
 
In June 2009, Applicant left his job as a university lecturer. He was recalled to 
active duty that summer and served in Europe. He and his current spouse began dating 
in July 2009. (Tr. 43, 51.) From November 2009 to May 2012, he was stationed in the 
Kyrgyz Republic as an active duty reservist for the U.S. military at the rank of lieutenant 
colonel. Applicant and his current spouse continued dating. In December 2010, 
Applicant’s divorce from his second wife was finalized. (GEs 1-2.) 
 
In March 2011, Applicant and his current spouse married in the Kyrgyz Republic. 
(GE 1; Tr. 52.) She had been previously married against her will, and had two children, 
including a daughter born in June 1995 who took Applicant’s surname on her mother’s 
marriage to Applicant.2 (GE 1; AE G.) Applicant met his spouse’s family members while 
he was stationed in Kyrgyzstan, and he asserts that he reported his foreign marriage and 
contacts as required to his command. (Tr. 27.) 
 
                                                 
2 Applicant’s spouse provided a statement in which she indicated that she was kidnapped and forced to 
marry. (AE G.) Applicant testified that his spouse was kidnapped when she was 19 or 20 (Tr. 81), although 
according to his SF 86 (GE 1), she retained the same name from her birth in January 1975 until January 
2006, when she was 30 years old. She indicated that after she left her first husband, she was forced out of 
her brother’s apartment when she had no income and two children to support. (AE G.) Applicant listed only 
his stepdaughter on his SF 86 (GE 1) and little to nothing is known about his spouse’s other child, including 
whether he or she is even alive. 
 
 
4 
Applicant maintained a legal permanent residence in the United States, and he 
and his spouse had a son born in the United States in October 2011 and baptized in the 
United States in early June 2012. (GEs 1-2; AE I.) After his active duty deployment ended 
in May 2012, Applicant resumed his weekend reservist status until he retired from the 
military as a colonel in May 2014. (Tr. 46.)  
 
In April 2012, Applicant’s spouse purchased an apartment in Kyrgyzstan for 
approximately $45,000 so that her daughter (then age 16) would have a place to live while 
in college in the country. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 34, 58.) In early June 2012, Applicant began 
working under a personal services contract as a member of the administrative and 
technical staff at a U.S. Embassy in Eastern Europe. Available records show that his DOD 
secret clearance was transferred to his new position through reciprocity and that his 
spouse, his son from his second marriage, his young son from his current marriage, and 
his stepdaughter were authorized to accompany him to his post in foreign country X. (AE 
J.) Applicant testified that his family accompanied him to live on the embassy compound.3 
(Tr. 27.) In August 2013, Applicant and his spouse had another son, who was born in the 
United States. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant’s stepdaughter finished high school in foreign country X and enrolled in 
engineering studies at a technical school. In the summer of 2013, she transferred to a 
university in the Kyrgyz Republic that then closed. She then attended a private university 
in Kyrgyzstan that was started with the financial assistance of a U.S. philanthropist. 
Classes were in English and Russian. (AE A; Tr. 52, 55-56, 79.) 
    
While working at the U.S. Embassy in foreign country X, Applicant started the 
process for his spouse and stepdaughter to legally immigrate to the United States. His 
spouse and stepdaughter became legal permanent residents in October 2014. (Tr. 28.) 
 
In September 2015, Applicant’s contract with the U.S. government ended. 
Applicant and his immediate family returned to the United States, and in November 2015, 
they moved into a condominium in the United States owned by his parents. (GE 1; Tr. 
28.) As of March 2016, Applicant had a job offer with a defense contractor (not his current 
employer) contingent on renewal of his security clearance eligibility. (Tr. 28.) He 
completed and certified to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86) on March 28, 2016. He disclosed the Kyrgyz citizenship of his spouse and his 
stepdaughter; his stepdaughter’s attendance at a university in Kyrgyzstan; and his father-
in-law’s Kyrgyz residency and citizenship. His mother-in-law was deceased. He indicated 
that he had weekly contact with his stepdaughter and annual in-person contact with his 
father-in-law, who is a retired. In response to any inquiry concerning foreign contacts, 
Applicant listed a brother-in-law, who works for a Kyrgyz police unit, with whom he had 
quarterly contact. In response to foreign government contacts, Applicant listed another 
brother-in-law (brother-in-law X) who has intelligence duties for the Kyrgyz government. 
They met occasionally at family events until as recently as October 2015. Applicant added 
                                                 
3 Applicant discrepantly told an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator in August 2016 that 
his family resided at his U.S. home of record while he was working abroad and that he visited them when 
on leave between October 2011 and September 2015. (GE 2.)  
 
 
5 
that he had reported the contacts to security personnel, but was advised “to report only if 
discussions stray from family activities,” which had not occurred. Applicant also disclosed 
that his spouse owned an apartment in the Kyrgyz Republic that she purchased for 
$45,000 in April 2012 after selling her previous home acquired in April 2006. Applicant 
listed travel to Kyrgyzstan in August 2008 for tourism, in March 2014 to visit family and 
friends, and in July 2015 and again from September 2015 to October 2015 for family 
reunions. He indicated that brother-in-law X attended the family reunions. (GE 1.) 
 
On August 2, 2016, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
OPM. Applicant related that his stepdaughter returns each year to Kyrgyzstan for college 
and that they have monthly contact when she is in Kyrgyzstan. Applicant denied any legal 
involvement in the purchase of his spouse’s apartment in Kyrgyzstan, which had declined 
in value to approximately $35,000. He explained that the property would be sold when his 
stepdaughter graduates from college, Applicant was unable to provide information about 
his father-in-law’s residence or previous employments. As for his relationship to brother-
in-law X, Applicant indicated that he had only incidental social contact with him in July 
2015 and October 2015 while visiting his spouse’s family, and that their conversations 
were limited to family matters. Applicant denied any vulnerability to foreign influence 
because of this family relationship and stated that he would immediately notify proper 
authorities of any contacts, requests, or threats by foreign persons or organizations. 
Applicant denied any improper contact or pressure by anyone seeking classified or 
sensitive information during any of his foreign travels, including to the Kyrgyz Republic. 
(GE 2.) 
 
In March 2016, Applicant’s spouse changed her first name to an English name so 
that her two young sons would not have to explain why their mother had a foreign name. 
(GE 1; AE G; Tr. 28, 82.) In December 2016, with his background investigation still 
pending to renew his clearance to work for another defense contractor, Applicant 
accepted a position with his current employer that did not require a security clearance. 
He withdrew his application to renew his security clearance on receipt of an SOR alleging 
foreign influence security concerns. (Tr. 28-29, 48.) 
 
In early June 2017, Applicant’s stepdaughter earned her bachelor’s degree in 
business from the university in the Kyrgyz Republic and returned to the United States. 
(AE B; Tr. 56.) Two weeks later, Applicant’s spouse sold her apartment in Kyrgyzstan, 
and sales proceeds of $35,435 were wired into Applicant’s checking account in the United 
States. (AE D; Tr. 35, 59.) In July 2017, they used $30,632 of the funds as the down-
payment for Applicant and his spouse’s current residence. (AE E; Tr. 37, 58-59.) They 
bought their home for $515,000 in part with a mortgage loan of $496,588. (AE C; Tr. 59.) 
 
About a year into his current employment, Applicant’s employer requested that he 
obtain a security clearance for some military programs. On April 4, 2018, the DOD CAF 
issued a SOR alleging foreign influence security concerns because of Applicant’s familial 
connections to the Kyrgyz Republic and his spouse’s apartment, which she no longer 
owned. (Tr. 29.) 
 
 
6 
Applicant’s spouse was interviewed for her U.S. naturalization in late May 2018. 
(AE A.) She took the oath of naturalization in June 2018, and within days she obtained 
her U.S. passport. (AEs G; H; Tr. 53.)  Applicant’s spouse asserts that her loyalty is “first 
and foremost to America and [her] American family.” Although she and all of her siblings 
graduated from college or took some advance coursework in the Kyrgyz Republic (Tr. 
84), Applicant’s spouse asserts that she came from a traditional family that did not treat 
daughters well. She was not allowed to return home after she was forced to marry, and 
after she left her ex-husband, her brother (brother-in-law X) forced her from his apartment 
when she had no income and two children to support. Her family would not take her in, 
and she asserts that it “hardened [her] to the reality of Kyrgyz tradition.” (AE G.) 
 
Applicant’s stepdaughter also maintains that her full loyalty is to her American 
family. She considers Applicant to be her father. She has no desire to return to the Kyrgyz 
Republic and intends to become a U.S. citizen when she is first eligible in October 2019. 
She lives with Applicant and her mother, has a full-time job as a health service 
coordinator, and pays taxes to the United States. Although she wishes her mother’s family 
in Kyrgyzstan no harm, they did not treat her or her mother well. (AE F.) 
 
Since May 2012, when he closed a bank account that he had previously held while 
serving in the Kyrgyz Republic, Applicant’s ties to Kyrgyzstan have been solely familial 
through his spouse. In addition to his father-in-law, six of his spouse’s siblings (four 
brothers and two sisters) live in the Kyrgyz Republic and speak Russian, which is still the 
business language in the region. At least five if not all six of the siblings has Kyrgyz 
citizenship.4 (Tr. 72-73, 80.) Applicant’s spouse and perhaps all but one of her siblings 
attended college, although all of them had some type of advanced schooling.5 (Tr. 84-
85.)  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law in Kyrgyzstan is now 80 years old and retired. Applicant 
denies knowing about his father-in-law’s previous occupation. He never asked his father-
                                                 
4 Four of the seven foreign contacts on Applicant’s SF 86 are native Kyrgyz citizens. Applicant did not clearly 
describe his relationship with them apart from the brother-in-law, who had worked as a fraud investigator. 
The foreign contacts include a 39-year-old working in Dubai who has the same surname as Applicant’s 
father-in-law; a 36-year-old married homemaker living in Australia; and a 32-year-old housekeeper (formerly 
an economics teacher) living in Kyrgyzstan. They may be siblings of Applicant’s spouse, given they were 
all born in the same city as his spouse. (GE 1.) Whether due to lack of contact with them or limited 
knowledge, Applicant has not fully disclosed the extent of his spouse’s family ties to Kyrgyzstan. 
 
5 Applicant testified, “I know the family emphasized everyone going to college.” (Tr. 84.) When confronted 
about the inconsistency between his spouse’s account that she came from such a traditional household 
that she was forced to marry (bride kidnapping) and the family’s emphasis on college for even the 
daughters, Applicant responded: 
 
The youngest [daughter] was the favorite, and so she went [to college]. The oldest one, I 
think it had to do with the Soviet system, the two older ones. I mean the Soviet system 
was—it was, they grew up—I don’t remember when the Soviet Union fell, but they went 
during the Soviet system, and so it was part of the process. And then my wife, she actually 
had to fight to go [to college]. She went, but had to really convince a brother to help her 
pay for school. (Tr. 85.) 
 
 
7 
in-law whether he ever had any affiliation with the Kyrgyz military or government. 
Applicant’s spouse calls her father once a month. To Applicant’s knowledge, she has not 
told her father that he is applying for a security clearance. (Tr. 61-62.) Applicant indicated 
on his SF 86 that he had in-person contact with his father-in-law annually between June 
2010 and October 2015 (GE 1), although he now asserts that he probably saw his father-
in-law during his trips to Kyrgyzstan. His spouse usually traveled to Kyrgyzstan before 
him so she could stay longer to visit her relatives, including her father. (Tr. 63.) Applicant’s 
father-in-law speaks both the Kyrgyz and Russian languages but not English. Their 
conversations were limited because of the language barrier. When they occurred they 
were in Russian because Applicant speaks a little Russian. (Tr. 37.) 
 
Applicant testified that he has heard that his spouse’s brother in Kyrgyzstan, who 
had worked in fraud investigations, is no longer so employed. He denies knowing about 
this brother-in-law’s current occupation. His spouse has contact with this brother on a 
monthly basis. Applicant believes this brother-in-law does not know that he has applied 
for a security clearance. (Tr. 71-72.) 
 
Regarding brother-in-law X, Applicant understands that he spent his entire career 
after college with the Kyrgyz government. Although Applicant indicated in response to the 
SOR that this brother-in-law had been removed from his position with the change in 
government in the country following the October 2017 elections, he testified there is no 
way of knowing for certain. Applicant had heard from his spouse through her sister that 
his brother-in-law moved to another city after the change in administration. (Tr. 64-65, 
78.) Applicant had in-person contact with this brother-in-law at family functions, about two 
or three times total when Applicant lived in Kyrgyzstan, and during his trips to the country 
in 2014 and 2015. This brother-in-law does not speak English, so Applicant relied on his 
wife, his stepdaughter, or one of his wife’s sisters to interpret. This brother-in-law knows 
that Applicant was in the U.S. military and also that he had worked in a U.S. embassy. 
Applicant does not believe that his stepdaughter had any contact with brother-in-law X 
while she was attending college in Kyrgyzstan because brother-in-law X is “estranged to 
our family.” After his spouse left her previous husband, she lived in an apartment owned 
by brother-in-law X, and he threw her out when she had two young children to support 
and no income. As the senior member of Applicant’s spouse’s siblings, he wanted to 
direct her life. (Tr. 67-68, 75.) Applicant believes his spouse had no current 
correspondence with this brother. Applicant has told his spouse that her brother’s 
occupation could impact his clearance. (Tr. 79.) 
 
As for any other family members or friends in the Kyrgyz Republic with whom his 
spouse maintains contact more often than every few years, Applicant responded that his 
spouse “might contact her older sister.” (Tr. 72.) As to whether Applicant had in-person 
contact with his spouse’s siblings during the family gatherings in Kyrgyzstan, he 
responded that he saw some of them (“I mean, it’s a hit or miss kind of thing. It depends 
on what the gathering is or where it is.”). (Tr. 73.)   
 
Applicant asserts that he would immediately report if he was approached for any 
classified or sensitive information. He has discussed with his spouse that he would have 
 
 
8 
to report if someone attempted to use her family in Kyrgyzstan because he does not want 
to risk jeopardizing their sons and daughter’s future. (Tr. 69-70.) Applicant and his spouse 
intend to raise their sons in the United States. They plan to have their younger son 
baptized in the United States. (AE G.) 
 
As of November 2018, Applicant’s spouse did not work outside the home. She had 
worked in retail in the United States for one year. (Tr. 54.) Applicant’s annual salary with 
a defense contractor was $124,000 although it was soon to be increased to $138,000. 
(Tr. 48.) In addition to the $65,000 in equity in their home, Applicant had $60,000 in 401(k) 
assets and $15,000 in combined checking and savings deposits. (Tr. 59-60.) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The Kyrgyz Republic (or Kyrgyzstan) is a landlocked, mountainous Central Asian 
country that became a Soviet republic in 1936. It achieved independence on August 31, 
1991, when the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics dissolved. Predominantly rural and 
Muslim, the country has a population of 5.8 million, of which 73.2% are native Kyrgyz. A 
parliamentary republic, it is governed by an elected president as head of state; by an 
appointed prime minister as head of the government; and by a Supreme Council of 120 
seats. The president holds substantial powers even though the prime minister oversees 
the Kyrgyz government and selects most cabinet members. The president represents the 
country internationally and can sign or veto laws, call for new elections, and nominate 
Supreme Court judges, cabinet members for posts related to security or defense, and 
numerous other high-level positions. 
 
Nationwide protests because of violations in parliamentary elections led to the 
overthrow of the country’s first president in March 2005. Under a new president elected 
in July 2005, the Kyrgyz Republic made tangible progress towards meeting international 
standards. The country’s human rights record improved considerably, although limitations 
on due process and other human rights problems persisted. Following a week of 
opposition-led street protests, the country adopted a new constitution on November 9, 
2006, which provided for greater checks and balances among the branches of 
government. On December 30, 2006, the parliament adopted a revised version of the 
constitution that restored many powers to the president but also a greater role for political 
parties. 
 
On April 7, 2010, the Kyrgyz Republic had a violent change of government and 
approved a new constitution and a temporary president in a June 27 national referendum. 
October 10, 2010 parliamentary elections were generally free and fair, and Almazbek 
Atambaev was sworn in as president in 2011. On October 15, 2017, former prime minister 
and ruling Social-Democratic Party of Kyrgyzstan member Sooronbai Jeenbekov was 
elected to succeed outgoing president Atambaev, who became the first Kyrgyz president 
to step down after serving one full six-year term as required in the country’s constitution. 
Kyrgyzstan's 2017 presidential election marked the first peaceful transfer of presidential 
power from one democratically-elected president to another in post-Soviet Central Asia. 
It was the most competitive in the country’s history, although international and local 
 
 
9 
election observers noted cases of vote buying and misuse of public resources. Prime 
minister Abyl-Gaziev took office on April 20, 2018 
 
Following independence, Kyrgyzstan rapidly implemented market reforms, such 
as improving the regulatory system and instituting land reform. In 1998, Kyrgyzstan was 
the first Commonwealth of Independent States country to be accepted into the World 
Trade Organization. The government has privatized much of its ownership shares 
in public enterprises. Significant impediments to Kyrgyzstan's development include 
endemic corruption, aging infrastructure, high unemployment, and endemic poverty. 
 
The United States established diplomatic relations with the Kyrgyz Republic on 
December 25, 1991, following the country’s independence from the Soviet Union. The 
United States supports the Kyrgyz Republic in its development of an inclusive democracy 
based upon the rule of law and respect for human rights. U.S. Government assistance 
goals in Kyrgyzstan are to strengthen democratic institutions, support broad-based 
economic opportunity, enhance regional security, promote greater respect for human 
rights and the rule of law, and address development challenges in health and education. 
The Kyrgyz Republic and the United States belong to a number of the same international 
organizations, including the United Nations, Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council, 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, International Monetary Fund, World 
Bank, and World Trade Organization. Kyrgyzstan also is a participant in the North Atlantic 
Treaty Organization's (NATO) Partnership for Peace program. The Kyrgyz Republic and 
the United States have a bilateral trade agreement. The Kyrgyz Republic also signed a 
trade and investment framework agreement with the United States and other Central 
Asian countries establishing a regional forum for addressing trade issues and enhancing 
trade and investment between the United States and Central Asia. 
 
At the same time, Manas Air Base in the Kyrgyz Republic, which had served as a 
transit and logistics base for U.S. troops heading to Afghanistan, was turned over to the 
Kyrgyz military in June 2014 after Kyrgyz’s parliament passed legislation to end the U.S.’ 
lease on the base. As of February 2018, the U.S. Defense Department was concerned 
about Russian influence in Central Asia and the Kyrgyz Republic’s increasing alliance 
with Russia and China.6 
 
                                                 
6 Pursuant to my obligation to take administrative notice of the most current political conditions in evaluating 
Guideline B concerns (see ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007)), I note that at a hearing 
before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee held on February 27, 2018, the Commander of the U.S. 
Central Command stated, in part: 
 
The Kyrgyz Republic has increasingly aligned its interests with Russia and China. The 
U.S.-Kyrgyz security relationship has declined since the closure of the Manas Transit 
Center and the termination of the bilateral Defense Cooperation Agreement in 2014. 
Despite the Kyrgyz armed forces’ desire to improve military-to-military cooperation with 
CENTCOM, Kyrgyz senior civilian leaders have shown little interest in improving military 
relations. 
 
See www.centcom.mil/ABOUT--US/POSTURE--STATEMENT/ 
 
 
10 
The Kyrgyz Republic benefits from a robust civil society, and the government 
generally respects laws providing for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association, 
internal movement, foreign travel, and emigration and repatriation. Continuing concerns 
for the country include the trajectory of democratization; endemic corruption; a history of 
tense, at times violent, inter-ethnic relations; border security vulnerabilities; and potential 
terrorist threats. 
  
Ethnic, political, and socio-economic tensions continue to simmer in the Kyrgyz 
Republic. During 2016, Kyrgyzstan remained vulnerable to transnational threats, 
especially in the remote south. The U.S. Embassy reviews travel of Embassy employees 
to Batken Oblast because ill-defined and porous borders allow for the relatively free 
movement of people and illicit goods, rendering the region vulnerable to transnational 
threats and could facilitate the establishment of terrorist safe havens. Rugged terrain and 
a lack of resources prevent authorities from adequately controlling the borders. Lack of 
economic opportunity was identified as a significant driver of violent extremism in the 
country, which forces a large portion of the population to seek employment opportunities 
in Russia, where they are particularly susceptible to recruitment. 
 
On August 30, 2016 a vehicle-borne explosive device was detonated at the 
Chinese Embassy located less than 300 meters from the U.S. Embassy in Bishkek, 
Kyrgyzstan’s capital city. Kyrgyz police located and detonated several explosive devices 
near downtown Bishkek in September 2016 and have since made several terrorism-
related arrests throughout the Kyrgyz Republic. Areas along the Kyrgyz-Uzbek and 
Kyrgyz-Tajik borders continue to have small, but sometimes violent and deadly, 
skirmishes between border guards on both sides, which have affected civilians. These 
skirmishes often result from land use disputes. Organized crime related to smuggling and 
narcotics trafficking are widespread in the southern corridors of the Kyrgyz Republic. Due 
to the exit of Coalition Forces from Afghanistan in 2014, the Kyrgyz government is 
concerned that terrorist and extremist groups may move north into Tajikistan and 
Kyrgyzstan. 
 
As of March 2018, the U.S. State Department’s Bureau of Diplomatic Security 
assessed Bishkek as a high-threat location for crime and political violence and as a 
medium-threat location for terrorist activity directed at or affecting official U.S. government 
interests. U.S. citizens visiting the country have been robbed by groups of young men 
who followed them back to their residences from hotels and bars. In addition, U.S. citizens 
have been victims of rape, assault, sexual harassment and kidnapping. Attackers do not 
always avoid violent confrontation with their victims. Harassment and extortion by people 
who purport to be Kyrgyz police officers has happened in local markets and in areas 
frequented by Westerners. Even so, the State Department’s travel advisory to the Kyrgyz 
Republic as of April 24, 2018, was Level I: Exercise Normal Precautions. 
 
Significant human rights issues persisted in the Kyrgyz Republic in 2017 involving 
law enforcement and security services officers’ use of torture and arbitrary arrest; 
increasing pressure on independent media; harassment of journalists; selective and 
politically motivated prosecutions; pervasive corruption; forced labor; and attacks, threats, 
 
 
11 
and systematic police-driven extortion of sexual and ethnic minority groups. Official 
impunity was a significant problem. While authorities investigated reports of official abuse 
in the security services and elsewhere, they rarely prosecuted and punished officials 
accused of human rights violations, or complicity in trafficking. While the law provides for 
an independent judiciary, judges were subject to influence or corruption. Throughout the 
year there were multiple instances where the conduct and outcomes of trials appeared 
predetermined. Numerous sources, including non-governmental organizations (NGOs), 
attorneys, government officials, and private citizens, asserted judges paid bribes to attain 
their positions. Many attorneys asserted that bribe taking was ubiquitous among judges. 
Authorities generally respected court orders. Numerous NGOs described pervasive 
violations of the right to a fair trial, including coerced confessions, use of torture, denial of 
access to counsel, and convictions in the absence of sufficiently conclusive evidence or 
despite exculpatory evidence. International observers reported threats and acts of 
violence against defendants and defense attorneys within and outside the courtroom, as 
well as intimidation of trial judges by victims’ relatives and friends. Law enforcement 
officers, particularly in the southern part of the country, frequently employed arbitrary 
arrest, torture, and the threat of criminal prosecution as a means of extorting cash 
payments from citizens. 
 
Kyrgyz law provides for freedom of expression, including for members of the press, 
and citizens generally were free to exercise these rights. NGO leaders and media rights 
advocates, however, asserted the situation worsened during the year, highlighting the 
increase in libel lawsuits against independent media outlets and journalists and forced 
closure of news agencies. Self-censorship was prevalent, and some journalists reported 
pressure from editors and political figures to bias their reporting on sensitive topics. Some 
journalists reported intimidation related to coverage of sensitive topics, such as inter-
ethnic relations, “religious extremism,” or the rise of nationalism. In recent years there 
were attempts to proscribe independent media from operating freely in the country. Tight 
government controls over news content on state television was widely acknowledged. 
Media rights advocates noted increasing pressure on media outlets in advance of the 
2017 October presidential election. The Kyrgyz government failed to enforce laws against 
rape effectively, and rape cases were underreported. Police generally regarded spousal 
rape as an administrative, rather than a criminal, offense. While the law specifically 
prohibits domestic violence and spousal abuse, violence against women and girls 
remained a significant yet underreported problem. 
 
 The CSCE estimated in August 2017 that 12,000 young women in the Kyrgyz 
Republic are kidnapped and forced to marry their abductors. Although illegal since 1994, 
“bride kidnapping” is socially accepted as a Kyrgyz tradition and is often justified by the 
perpetrator on that basis. According to the CSCE, in Kyrgyz society, particularly in the 
rural areas, an unmarried woman’s reputation can be irrevocably damaged if she spends 
even a single night outside her family home so she may feel she has no recourse other 
than to consent to the marriage. The CSCE attributes the practice to Kyrgyz assertion of 
ethnicity and tradition as a way to distance themselves from their Soviet past and affirm 
the country’s independent identity (ethic nationalism). As a participating state of the Office 
of Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the Kyrgyz Republic is a party to several 
 
 
12 
OSCE commitments to gender equality and is making efforts to end the practice of bride 
kidnapping. In 2013, the penalty for bride kidnapping was increased from three to seven 
years in prison. In 2016, a new law was enacted against underage marriages and forced 
marriages that holds accountable those who perform them and the relatives who 
participate in organizing them. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be 
considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present 
evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
13 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is articulated in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that 
is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant has familial ties through marriage to the Kyrgyz Republic that raise 
foreign influence security concerns. Applicant’s spouse is a native of the Kyrgyz Republic 
who became a U.S. permanent resident in October 2014, moved to the United States in 
September 2015, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2018. Her daughter, now 
age 23, has been a citizen of Kyrgyzstan since birth. She acquired her U.S. green card in 
October 2014, but attended college in Kyrgyzstan and so has lived continuously in the 
United States only since June 2017. Applicant’s spouse’s father and six of her siblings 
are currently residents of Kyrgyzstan. Five if not all six of those siblings are citizens of 
Kyrgyzstan. One of her brothers with Kyrgyz residency and citizenship began working for 
the Kyrgyz government on his graduation from college. As of Applicant’s OPM interview 
in August 2016, this brother-in-law was an intelligence official. Applicant has heard that 
his brother-in-law was removed from his position with the change in government in 
October 2017, but he does not know for certain. 
 
  Review of Applicant’s contacts and connections to these foreign citizens through 
marriage is warranted to determine whether they present a heightened risk under AG ¶ 
7(a) or AG ¶ 7(e) or create a potential conflict of interest under AG ¶ 7(b). Those 
disqualifying conditions provide: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
 
14 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information or technology; and 
 
(e) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Not every foreign contact or tie presents the heightened risk under AG ¶ 7(a). The 
“heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. The nature and strength of the family ties or 
other foreign interests and the country involved (i.e., the nature of its government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record) are relevant in assessing 
whether there is a likelihood of vulnerability to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government; a family member is associated with, or dependent on, the foreign 
government; or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United 
States. In considering the nature of the foreign government, the administrative judge must 
take into account any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR Case 
No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
Applicant has bonds of affection and obligation to his spouse, who now enjoys the 
protections of U.S. citizenship and residency, and to his stepdaughter, who is a U.S. legal 
permanent resident with Kyrgyz citizenship. There is also a rebuttable presumption that 
a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of his or 
her spouse. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-12659 (App. Bd. May 30, 2013). Applicant 
indicated on his SF 86 that his only contact with his father-in-law was in person, once 
annually. However, Applicant’s spouse is in monthly contact with her father. Applicant 
indicated on his SF 86 that he has quarterly contact with her brother who was then a fraud 
investigator in Kyrgyzstan. He testified that his spouse has monthly contact with her 
brother and that she also has some contact with an older sister in Kyrgyzstan. Little 
information was provided about that sister, who was not listed by Applicant on his SF 86 
or discussed during his interview. Applicant and his spouse suggested that they are 
somewhat estranged from some of her family members in Kyrgyzstan, particularly from 
her brother (brother-in-law X) employed by the Kyrgyz government for most, if not all, of 
his career. However, the evidence shows that Applicant and his spouse got together with 
her family, including brother-in-law X, during family events when they lived in Kyrgyzstan 
until May 2012, and during trips to Kyrgyz for family visits and reunions in March 2014, 
July 2015, and October 2015. She traveled to Kyrgyz early to have more time with her 
family. 
 
The Kyrgyz Republic and the United States have good relations, although the DOD 
is concerned about growing Russian influence in the region and the decline in the security 
relationship between the Kyrgyz Republic and the United States. With its mixed human 
rights record and brother-in-law X’s longtime career in intelligence for Kyrgyzstan, there 
is a heightened risk of undue foreign influence.  AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are established. 
 
 
15 
Applicant’s spouse had owned an apartment in Kyrgyzstan that she purchased for 
$45,000 in April 2012. Although not significant to Applicant in terms of his overall financial 
situation, it was important to his stepdaughter because it was her residence while 
attending college. Given that the property was sold in June 2017 and the sales proceeds 
were wired to the United States well before the SOR was issued, AG ¶ 7(f) is not 
established.7  
 
The burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate the risk of undue foreign influence that 
exists because of his familial ties through marriage to Kyrgyzstan, a former member state 
of the USSR that continues to align its interests to some extent with Russia, a country 
known to target the United States and its citizens for sensitive and classified information. 
AG ¶ 8(a) provides for mitigation as follows: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the United States.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant’s spouse’s family members in the Kyrgyz 
Republic have attempted to obtain classified or sensitive information from Applicant. Even 
so, AG ¶ 8(a) is difficult to apply based on what is known about his spouse’s siblings in 
Kyrgyzstan. Applicant’s spouse and the older of her siblings, if not all of them, were raised 
in Kyrgyzstan when it was part of the USSR. They were taught Russian under a Soviet 
system which emphasized education, and they all had advanced schooling. They speak 
Kyrgyz and Russian, and it is unclear whether they have fully embraced democratic 
institutions and proclivities. Apparently only one of her sisters knows English. Her oldest 
brother, who was described by Applicant as the head of the family, spent his career in 
intelligence for the Kyrgyz government. Even if her brother was removed from his position 
on the change of administrations in October 2017, his past employment presents a risk 
that Applicant will be placed in the untenable position of having to choose between the 
interests of his spouse or those of her family members with Kyrgyz citizenship or 
residency with whom she has ongoing relations.  
  
There is no evidence that Applicant has any loyalty or affiliation to the Kyrgyz 
Republic or its institutions, but it is difficult to conclude that the bonds of affection or 
obligation to his spouse and her immediate family members, including her daughter and 
father, are so minimal to satisfy the first part of AG ¶ 8(b), which provides: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
                                                 
7 AG ¶ 7(f) applies when there is a “substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the individual to a heightened risk 
of foreign influence, or exploitation, or personal conflict of interest.” 
 
 
 
16 
and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant’s relationships and loyalties in the United States may still be so deep and 
longstanding that he can be counted on to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In that regard, he is a native U.S. citizen who served honorably on active duty and in the 
reserves for the U.S. military. His three sons are U.S. citizens and reside in the United 
States. Applicant owns property in the United States, and his employment is in the United 
States. He held clearances over the years with no evidence of any security infractions or 
violations. He has no foreign assets. His spouse intends to reside permanently in the 
United States, and as evidence of her intention in that regard, she became a U.S. citizen. 
Her daughter now lives and works in the United States and intends to apply for U.S. 
citizenship at her first opportunity. While AG ¶ 8(b) has some applicability, I am concerned 
about the fact that Applicant’s brother-in-law X knows that Applicant served in the U.S. 
military and worked for the United States government at an embassy. Applicant admitted 
that there is no way to know whether his brother-in-law’s employment with the Kyrgyz 
government has ended. 
 
Applicant testified that he will immediately report any efforts to approach or 
influence him by or through foreign sources, including his spouse’s relatives. Some 
concern arises that he may not recognize or report an improper contact. If Applicant’s 
testimony is credible, he has made little effort to inform himself of even basic information 
about his spouse’s relatives and their activities. It could be said that he minimizes his risk 
by knowing little. At the same time, he has the burden of mitigation to address the foreign 
influence security concerns, and he did not show himself to be fully forthcoming about the 
extent of his spouse’s foreign ties to Kyrgyzstan. The Government was not aware before 
Applicant’s hearing that his spouse has two sisters and four brothers in the Kyrgyz 
Republic. Conceivably, Kyrgyz authorities could bring some pressure on his spouse’s 
family members to gain influence or information from Applicant. People act in 
unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a family member.8 
 
There is nothing untoward in the record about Applicant’s relationships and 
contacts with his spouse’s family members in Kyrgyzstan. AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” has limited 
applicability nonetheless, given the evidence of ongoing contact his spouse has with her 
father and some of her siblings. The foreign influence security concerns are not fully 
mitigated. 
  
                                                 
8 As stated by the DOHA Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 08-10025 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009), “Application 
of the guidelines is not a comment on an applicant’s patriotism but merely an acknowledgment that people 
may act in unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved-one, such as a 
family member.” 
 
 
17 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).9 Furthermore, in weighing these whole-person factors in a foreign influence case, 
the Appeal Board has held that: 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and material 
under the whole person concept. However, a finding that an applicant 
possesses good character and integrity does not preclude the government 
from considering whether the applicant's facts and circumstances still pose 
a security risk. Stated otherwise, the government need not prove that an 
applicant is a bad person before it can deny or revoke access to classified 
information. Even good people can pose a security risk because of facts 
and circumstances not under their control. See ISCR Case No. 01-26893 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002). 
 
Although Applicant’s spouse is now a U.S. citizen, she has lived in the United 
States only since September 2015. She and Applicant traveled to the Kyrgyz Republic for 
a family reunion in October 2015, and she is not estranged from some close family 
members.  Perhaps at some future date, Applicant’s family situation may present less of 
a risk. At this time, I am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant security clearance eligibility for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
                                                 
9 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 
18 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
