1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--- ) ADP Case No. 17-03453 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility to occupy a public trust position is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On February 19, 2015, Applicant applied for a public trust position and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 13, 2017, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); DOD Manual 
5200.02, Procedures for the DOD Personnel Security Program (PSP) (April 3, 2017) 
(Manual); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016) (AG), for all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017. 
01/04/2019
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant’s eligibility for occupying a public trust position to support a contract 
with the DOD. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether such eligibility should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on October 25, 2017. In a sworn statement, dated 
November 8, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed on December 8, 2017. The case was assigned to me on March 20, 2018. A 
Notice of Hearing was issued on June 29, 2018, and amended on July 11, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for July 24, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
 
 During the hearing, Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 4 and Applicant 
exhibits (AE) A through AE I were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 3, 2018. I kept the record open to 
enable Applicant to supplement it. She took advantage of that opportunity and timely 
submitted several documents, which were marked and admitted as AE J through AE Q, 
without objection. The record closed on August 21, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with comments, all of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g.). 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been serving 
as a claims processer with her current employer since May 1998. She graduated from 
high school in 1983. She also received an associate’s degree in 1985. She has never 
served in the U.S. military. She has never held a security clearance, but has been 
occupying a position of public trust since 1998. Applicant was married in 1985. She has 
one son, born in 2000. 
 
Financial Considerations1 
  
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until 2006 when she 
decided not to place her mother in a nursing home and instead became her caretaker. 
Applicant’s mother was afflicted with a variety of health issues: diabetes, high blood 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial issues discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: GE 1 (e-QIP, dated February 19, 2015); GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated 
December 4, 2015); GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 4, 
2016); GE 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated September 29, 2017); and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated 
November 8, 2017.   
  
 
3 
                                      
 
pressure, diabetes-related foot surgery, and Alzheimer’s. Eventually her mother’s 
situations necessitated obtaining a wheelchair, a lifter (to get her into and out of bed, and 
a ramp for egress and ingress to and from the house. Although there was some financial 
support through Medicare and Medicaid, Applicant was responsible for uncovered 
expenses. In 2009, Applicant’s mother-in-law died from cancer. Applicant’s husband lost 
his $25 an hour job in 2010 when his company shut down in the area. In order to generate 
some income, he started driving a bus (making between $13 and $15 per hour) and he 
did seasonal landscaping. Applicant was also forced to borrow funds from her 401(k). In 
2012, Applicant’s son was diagnosed with keratoconus – a progressive eye disease – 
that resulted in three surgeries in 2013 and one in 2015, as well as different prescription 
medications which he continues to take. In 2013, Applicant’s mother passed away. In 
June 2015, her husband had foot surgery, and he was out of work for two months.  
The continuing combination of family health issues caused expenses to increase, 
and her husband’s health and employment issues reduced the family income. As a result, 
some accounts became delinquent. A federal tax lien was filed when Applicant’s husband 
erred in applying his Form 1099 associated with his landscaping earnings. As a result, 
their anticipated federal income tax refund for a subsequent year was applied to the 
earlier year. Applicant’s most recent federal and state income tax refunds amounted to 
over $4,000, and those funds were used primarily to make mortgage payments to make 
sure it remained current, and for her son’s school expenses. 
The SOR identified seven purportedly delinquent accounts that had been placed 
for collection or charged-off, as generally reflected by Applicant’s June 2016 or 
September 2017 credit reports. Those debts total approximately $34,302. The current 
status of those accounts is as follows: 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): This is a joint installment loan with an unpaid and past-due balance 
of $13,438 that was placed for collection and charged off.2 Applicant reached out to the 
creditor and agreed to a repayment plan under which she commenced making monthly 
$50 payments before November 2017. She submitted documentation of routine past 
monthly payments with a recent receipt, dated July 25, 2018, reflecting a reduced 
remaining balance of $12,988.3 Applicant also discussed settlement possibilities, and the 
creditor initially offered to settle the account for a one-time payment of $6,494, or a 
monthly payment of $780 for ten months, neither of which Applicant could afford. Another 
option was an increased monthly payment of $75, commencing in September 2018. 
Applicant claimed that she agreed to this option,4 but she has not submitted any 
documents to support any such payments. Nevertheless, the account is in the process of 
being resolved. 
                                                          
2 GE 3, supra note 1, at 6; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2; GE 2, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
3 AE B (Receipts, various dates); AE O (Receipt, dated July 25, 2018); Answer to the SOR, dated 
November 8, 2017, at 1. 
 
4 AE N (Statement, undated). 
 
4 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is an unspecified type of account with an unpaid and past-due 
balance of $3,891 that was placed for collection and sold to a debt purchaser.5 Applicant 
reached out to the debt purchaser and agreed to a repayment plan under which she 
commenced making monthly $50 payments before November 2017. She submitted 
documentation of routine past monthly payments with a recent receipt, dated July 24, 
2018, reflecting a cumulative payment of $350.6 Applicant also discussed a settlement 
possibility, but Applicant could not afford the one offered to her. She intends to increase 
her monthly payments for six months before exploring another settlement option.7 
Nevertheless, the account is in the process of being resolved. 
 (SOR ¶ 1.c.): This is a joint secured installment loan, which Applicant claims was 
made to purchase a vehicle, with an unpaid balance of $3,727 that was placed for 
collection and charged off in 2014.8 Applicant contends that she called the original creditor 
and the eventual creditor, to validate the account, but neither creditor had any information 
about it. She claims that she searched for paperwork and found a letter stating that the 
balance was $463.50, and that on February 28, 2014, she paid the creditor $471.22 with 
her debit card and has a confirmation number.9 While Applicant is specific in her 
references and claims, she failed to submit any documents to: (1) connect the original 
creditor to the eventual creditor; (2) support her position that she contacted the creditors 
or was advised that they had no information regarding the accounts; (3) support her 
position that she made the claimed payment; or (4) support her position that the account 
has been paid in full. Until those documents are submitted, it is impossible to determine 
the current status of the account. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.d. and 1.g.): These are two medical accounts with unpaid balances of 
$101 and $123 that were placed for collection and charged off.10 Applicant and the 
creditor agreed to a settlement regarding the smaller of the two accounts, and on 
December 10, 2015 – two years before the SOR was issued – she paid the remaining 
balance of $76.13, settling the account in full. With respect to the larger of the two 
accounts, on December 10, 2015 – again two years before the SOR was issued – she 
paid the creditor $123.84.11 Both accounts have been resolved. 
                                                          
5 GE 3, supra note 1, at 6; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
6 AE C (Receipts, various dates, and Bank Account History, dated July 24, 2018); AE P (Receipt, 
dated July 24, 2018); Answer to the SOR, supra note 3, at 1; Tr. at 45. 
 
7 AE N, supra note 4, at 1; Answer to the SOR, supra note 3, at 1. 
 
8 GE 3, supra note 1, at 7; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2; GE 2, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
9 Answer to the SOR, supra note 3, at 1. 
 
10 GE 3, supra note 1, at 15; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2; Answer to the SOR, supra note 3, at 1-2. 
 
11 AE D (Payment History, dated May 9, 2007); Answer to the SOR, supra note 3, at 1-2. It should 
be noted that Applicant’s June 2016 credit report clearly states that both accounts were paid off in 
December 2015. See GE 3, supra note 1, at 15. The September 2017, incorrectly reports the smaller 
account as unpaid. See GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
5 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): This is consumer loan from a financial institution with a high credit of 
about $10,000 that was placed for collection. A judgment for $11,524 was filed in 2014.12 
Applicant explained that she had made monthly payments of about $300 for two to three 
years. When her financial issues made it difficult to make the regular payments, the 
creditor agreed to accept reduced payments.13 She failed to submit any documentation 
to support her contention that before the judgment was filed she had made any payments. 
By July 2017, the unpaid balance on the judgment had increased to $14,272, including 
interest. Applicant reached out to the collection attorneys and discussed settlement 
possibilities, and she was offered a proposed settlement of 60 percent of the existing 
balance to be paid by October 2017,14 but she was unable to agree to that offer. 
Negotiations continued, and in November 2017, Applicant agreed to a repayment plan 
under which she authorized automatic withdrawals from her account in the amount of 
$50. She submitted documentation of routine past monthly payments. Unfortunately for 
Applicant, despite her continuing monthly payments, because of the accrual of interest, 
the unpaid balance keeps increasing. As of April 2018, it was $14,659.15 Applicant 
intended to continue making the monthly payments, and after six months, she expected 
to receive another settlement offer. While the record is silent as to what subsequent 
events had occurred, the account is in the process of being resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.): This is a credit-card account with an unpaid balance of $1,499 that 
was placed for collection and sold to a debt purchaser.16 Applicant reached out to the 
debt purchaser and agreed to a repayment plan under which she authorized automatic 
withdrawals from her account in the amount of $63. She submitted documentation of 
routine past monthly payments, and expects the account to be paid in full by August 
2019.17 The account is in the process of being resolved. 
In addition to the accounts alleged in the SOR, Applicant addressed various other 
accounts that were not alleged in the SOR, and they have been resolved. Other than the 
accounts alleged in the SOR, Applicant is not aware of any other delinquent accounts. 
Following the hearing, Applicant prepared a Personal Financial Statement to reflect her 
combined monthly net income ($4,572); monthly expenses ($4,324), including those 
made to her creditors described above; and a monthly remainder ($203) available for 
discretionary saving or spending.18 The unanticipated expenses associated with the 
                                                          
12 GE 3, supra note 1, at 5, 10; GE 2, supra note 1, at 4; Answer to the SOR, supra note 3, at 2. 
 
13 GE 2, supra note 1, at 4. 
 
14 AE E (Letter, dated August 1, 2017). AE Q is an identical copy of AE E; AE N, supra note 4, at 
2. 
 
15 AE E (Letter, dated April 17, 2018). 
 
16 GE 3, supra note 1, at 15. 
 
17 AE F (Letter, dated November 3, 2017); AE F (Transaction History, various dates). 
 
18 AE J (Personal Financial Statement, undated); AE L (Monthly Income, dated July 2018); AE K 
(Bills, dated July 2018). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
earlier described problems have disappeared, and Applicant has made significant 
progress in stabilizing her finances and avoiding other financial delinquencies. In July 
2018, Applicant completed financial counseling with a certified financial planner.19 
Character References and Work Performance 
 One friend, who has known Applicant for 15 years, described her as a hard-working 
person of integrity who is very hospitable, disciplined, kind-hearted, loyal, strong, and 
morally excellent.20 Applicant’s annual performance reviews over the years generally 
reflect an individual whose performance exceeds expectations, although there are 
instances where she is either exceptional or merely meets expectations.21 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a [position of public trust].”22 As Commander in Chief, the President 
has the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. DOD contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained 
in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination may be made.23  
 
Positions formerly designated as ADP I or ADP II are classified as noncritical-
sensitive positions and include those personnel “[w]ith access to automated systems that 
contain military active duty, guard, or reservists’ personally identifiable information or 
information pertaining to Service members that is otherwise protected from disclosure by 
[the DOD Privacy Program] where such access has the potential to cause serious 
damage to the national security.”24 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
                                                          
19 AE M (E-mail, dated July 26, 2018). 
 
20 AE G (Character Reference, dated July 23, 2018). 
 
21 AE H (Performance Reviews, various dates). 
 
22 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
23 It should be noted that a memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for 
Counterintelligence and Security, Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases, dated November 19, 2004, 
covers the handling of trustworthiness cases under the Directive. The memorandum directed the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) to continue to utilize the Directive in ADP contractor cases for 
trustworthiness determinations. 
 
24 Manual, ¶ 4.1.a. (3)(c). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for a public trust position. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”25 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.26  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to sensitive 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  Furthermore, security clearance 
determinations, and by inference, public trust determinations, should err, if they must, on 
the side of denials.27 In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that 
are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
25 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
26 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
27 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
      
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶19:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant failed to maintain several accounts in a current status and a number of 
them became delinquent. Accounts were placed for collection or charged-off, and in one 
instance, a judgment was filed. Those debts total approximately $34,302. AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c) have been established. AG ¶ 19(b) has not been established because there is 
no evidence that Applicant had the ability to pay her debts but was unwilling to do so.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;28 
                                                          
28 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.29  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) all fully or partially apply. Applicant’s financial 
difficulties arose initially in 2006 and continued until 2015 with significant health issues 
involving her mother, mother-in-law, husband, and son. They were exacerbated when her 
husband lost his job. The continuing combination of family health and employment issues, 
all of which individually and cumulatively were largely beyond her control, increased 
family expenses and reduced the family income. Applicant acted responsibly by seeking 
information from her creditors or collection agents.30 She reached out to the various 
creditors, collection attorneys, and collection agents, and discussed settlement 
possibilities. Applicant paid off her non-SOR debts as well as some SOR debts, and 
entered into repayment agreements with other creditors. As her debts were reduced, 
Applicant continued making her monthly payments with the intention of increasing those 
payments as the opportunity to do so presented itself. Applicant offered substantial 
evidence to indicate that her financial situation is now under better control. She also 
                                                          
29 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
30 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 
2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she 
maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
received financial counseling. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances no longer cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.31 
Trustworthiness decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines 
do not require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the 
SOR. An applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant 
immediately resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, 
nor is there a requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. 
Rather, a reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such 
debts, or resolution of such issues, one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the 
future, without further confirmed action, are insufficient. In this instance, however, 
Applicant’s promises transitioned into positive action, and she now has a history of 
fulfilling her promises. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of public trust by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a position of public trust must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I 
have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record 
evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.32 
  
 There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Seven of 
Applicant’s accounts, totaling $34,302, became delinquent when she failed to maintain 
them in a current status. They were placed for collection or charged-off, and in one 
instance, a judgment was filed. 
                                                          
31 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
32 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been serving as a 
claims processer – a position of public trust – with her current employer since May 1998. 
She has been described as a hard-working person of integrity who is very hospitable, 
disciplined, kind-hearted, loyal, strong, and morally excellent. Her annual performance 
reviews generally reflect an individual whose performance exceeds expectations. Rather 
than simply ignoring her creditors, Applicant reached out to them and discussed 
settlement or repayment possibilities. She paid off her non-SOR debts as well as some 
SOR debts, and entered into repayment agreements with other creditors. She has 
continued to make her regular anticipated payments under those agreements. 
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a position of public trust. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has successfully mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from her 
financial issues. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.g.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a position of public 
trust to support a contract with the DOD.  Eligibility is granted. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
