 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01576 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 24, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F and B. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 31, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on February 
13, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on February 15, 2018, scheduling the hearing for March 21, 2018. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted into evidence. GX 5 was admitted for Administrative Notice as to 
the Philippines. Applicant testified on his own behalf and offered two documents, which I 
marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A and B and admitted into evidence. The record 
 
2 
 
was left open until April 23, 2018, for receipt of additional documentation. Applicant 
submitted nothing further. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on March 
29, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (TR at page 20 line 
22 to page 21 line 13, and GX 1 at page 5.) He has been employed with the defense 
contractor “since July of 2017.” (TR at page 20 line 22 to page 21 line 13.) He is married 
to a Philippine national; and has three children, the two eldest living with his former 
spouse in the United States. (TR at page 20 lines 18~21, and GX 1 at pages 46~47 and 
53.) His youngest child resides in the Philippines with the child mother, Applicant’s 
current wife. Applicant resides in the United States. 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant attributes his admitted financial difficulties to brief periods of 
unemployment, the one “started May 31, 2017, to July 17, 2017.” (TR at page 34 lines 
1~10.)  
 
 1.a. Applicant admits that he has a past-due debt in the amount of about $7,291, 
as the result of a breach of contract with a former employer. (TR at page 21 line 21 to 
page 25 line 6.) Through a credit counseling service, Applicant is making monthly 
payments of $134 towards this admitted debt, as evidenced by documentation from that 
counseling service. (AppX A at page1 and AppX B at page 1.) This allegation is found 
for Applicant. 
 
 1.b. and 1.f. Applicant admits that he has two past-due debts with the 
Department of Education totaling about $3,672. (TR at page 25 line 7 to page 27 line 2.) 
In August and September of 2017, Applicant was trying to make monthly payments of 
only $5 towards this admitted debt. (Id, and AppX A at page 2 and AppX B at pages 
2~3.) This documentation also shows that Applicant was “past due” $5 on his payments. 
(Id.) Despite having a month to do so, Applicant has submitted nothing further in this 
regard. (TR at page 42 line 23 to page 43 line 19.) These allegations are found against 
Applicant. 
 
 1.c.  Applicant admits that he has a past-due debt in the amount of about $1,747 
to Creditor C. (TR at page 27 line 3 to page 28 line 10.) Through a credit counseling 
service, Applicant is making monthly payments of $88 towards this admitted debt, as 
evidenced by documentation from that counseling service. (AppX A at page1 and AppX 
B at page 1.) This allegation is found for Applicant. 
 
 1.d. Applicant admits that he had a past-due debt with Creditor D in the amount 
of about $696, but avers that this “phone bill account . . . was paid off.” (TR at page 28 
 
3 
 
line 11 to page 29 line 8.) Despite having a month to do so, Applicant has submitted 
nothing further in this regard. This allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 1.e. Applicant admits that he had past-due child support payments totaling about 
$7,747. In August of 2017, this was being paid through wage garnishment. (TR at page 
29 line 9 to page 31 line 14, and AppX at page 3 and AppX B at pages 4~5.) Despite 
having a month to do so, Applicant has submitted nothing further in this regard. This 
allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
 Not alleged; but admitted to by Applicant at his hearing, he is a month past due 
on a car payment, and owes about $800 in state back taxes. (TR at page 32 line 3 to 
page 36 line 2.) 
 
Guideline B – Foreign Influence 
 
 2.a, 2.b., and 2.d. Applicant’s current spouse is a citizen and resident of the 
Philippines. She hopes to immigrate to the United States. Their four-year-old American 
son resides with Applicant’s spouse. Applicant provides financial support of about $600 
every few months to his spouse. She lives with her parents. (TR at page 20 line 4~21, at 
page 37 line 18 to page 40 line 17.) 
 
 2.c. Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of the 
Philippines. (TR at page 41 line 18 to page 42 line 3.) They know little about Applicant’s 
employment, only that he is “a mechanic . . . [who does] work for the Military.” (Id.) 
 
 2.e. In 2012, over five years ago, Applicant gave a one-time gift of about $500 to 
a female friend in the Philippines. (TR at page 40 line 18 to page 41 line 17.) Their 
relationship was terminated years ago. (Id.) 
 
     Administrative Notice 
 
 I take Administrative Notice of the following facts regarding the Philippines: It is a 
multiparty, constitutional republic with a bicameral legislature. However, dynastic 
political families continue to monopolize elective offices. The U.S. Department of State 
advises all U.S. citizens traveling to the Philippines to exercise caution due to crime, 
terrorism, and civil unrest. (GX 5 at pages 3~5.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
 
4 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
5 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has significant past-due debt to private companies, and to Federal and 
state agencies. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
 
6 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing. He has a long history of 
delinquencies. He has not demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. 
Mitigation has not been established. Financial Considerations are found against 
Applicant. 
  
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s spouse and in-laws are citizens and residents of the Philippines. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
7 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 The Applicant’s connection with his Philippine family does not outweigh his 
allegiance to the United States. His wife hopes to immigrate to the United States with 
their child. Foreign Influence is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and B in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
