KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Even if debts have been resolved a Judge may still consider the underlying
circumstances for what they may reveal about the applicant’s judgment and reliability.  The
government need not wait until an individual mishandles or fails to safeguard classified
information before it can make an unfavorable security clearance decision.  Even those with
good prior records can encounter circumstances in which their judgment and reliability might be
compromised.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17/02599.a1
DATE: 01/18/2019
DATE: January 18, 2019
In Re:
--------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-02599
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 29, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant  requested a hearing. 
On October 12, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has a bachelor’s degree and requires a clearance as a condition of his current
employment by a Defense contractor.  He is married with two grown children.  Applicant has
numerous delinquent debts.  The ones that the Judge found against him were for credit card accounts
and a line of credit provided by a bank.  Applicant attributed his financial problems to several
causes–his failure to monitor spending or maintain a budget; his having refinanced his home to pay
off credit card debt; and his mismanagement of an inheritance that he received upon the death of his
mother.  
Applicant sought the assistance of an attorney to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy on his
behalf.  Accordingly, he stopped paying on credit cards, as they were to be included in the
bankruptcy petition.  Applicant’s attorney did not file a petition, however, because he “kept trying
to figure out the right formula.”  Decision at 5.  Subsequently Applicant discovered a means of debt
resolution propounded by a radio personality.  He began selling some of his assets in order to build
up a cash emergency fund, and he sold off a vehicle.  However, he still did not have enough funds
to pay off his credit card debts. 
Although Applicant stated on more than one occasion that he would pay all of his debts, as
of the close of the record he had failed to do so.  For example, he claimed that he would resolve his
largest account, a credit card debt for nearly $23,000, by withdrawing from his retirement fund, but
he provided no evidence that this debt had been paid or settled.  Neither did he demonstrate
resolution of two relatively small credit card accounts.  He did present evidence that the creditor of
a $4500 charged-off account had forgiven $3,472 and that he testified that he had paid taxes on this
amount.  In the Analysis, however, the Judge stated that it was not clear from the record whether
Applicant still owed some portion of the debt that might be attributable to interest or penalties. 
Applicant self-reported his financial problems to his employer, and he has handled classified
information properly.  A supervisor from a previous job recommended him for a clearance, provided
he addresses his financial situation.
2
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised three disqualifying conditions:
inability to satisfy debts, a history of not meeting financial obligations, and consistent
overspending.1  Regarding four debts, including the largest addressed above, she concluded that
Applicant had not demonstrated mitigation.  She noted that creditors were willing to settle, although
Applicant did not have on hand sufficient funds to make even the reduced amounts.  She stated that
Applicant does not have pending settlement offers or plans.  She noted Applicant’s evidence that
his difficulties were, in large part, due to his having failed to budget his expenses, his reliance upon
credit cards, etc.  She also noted evidence that Applicant had engaged in new spending by using
discretionary funds that could have been directed toward debt payment.  In the whole-person
analysis, the Judge acknowledged that Applicant had properly handled classified information while
undergoing financial difficulties.  She stated, however, that once a security concern arises, there is
a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a clearance.  
Discussion
Applicant argues that he has resolved all of his debts.  His argument includes assertions from
outside the record, which we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  In any event, even if debts have
been resolved a Judge may still consider the underlying circumstances for what they may reveal
about the applicant’s judgment and reliability.    See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-02246 at 2 (App. Bd.
Dec. 8, 2017).  He cites to aspects of the record that he contends are favorable to him, such as his
efforts at debt settlement, the debt that the creditor forgave, his full disclosure of his financial
problems to his employer, his credit reports which he argues show that his debts have been resolved,
and his good security record.  On this last point, the government need not wait until an individual
mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information before it can make an unfavorable security
clearance decision.  Even those with good prior records can encounter circumstances in which their
judgment and reliability might be compromised.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-07941 at 2 (App. Bd.
Nov. 29, 2018).  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record, nor has he shown that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Id.  Applicant cites to a portion of his clearance interview
summary which states that he cannot be blackmailed or coerced due to his financial difficulties. 
However, this represents the interviewer’s summary of Applicant’s answers, not the interviewer’s
independent judgment as to Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance.  Even if it did represent the
interviewer’s opinion it would not bind the Government in evaluating Applicant’s case.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 15-03995 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 24, 2017).        
Given Applicant’s history of overspending and evidence that as of the close of the record he
still had not resolved his delinquent debts, we find no error in the Judge’s overall adverse
conclusion.  The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation
for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance
may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” 
1See Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶¶ (a), (c), and (e).
3
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶
2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
