1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ADP Case No. 17-02048 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information in a public trust position is 
denied. 
 Statement of the Case 
On January 25, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG’s) effective within the DOD for 
SORs issued after June 8, 2017.  
Applicant timely answered the SOR on February 16, 2018, and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 16, 
2018. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
on November 20, 2018, scheduling the hearing on December 4, 2018. I conducted the 
01/24/2019
 
2 
 
 
hearing as scheduled and Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 – 5 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A - O were also admitted without objection. I left the 
record open until January 14, 2019, for the parties to submit supplemental 
documentation. (Tr. 71) Department Counsel submitted a supplemental credit report 
dated January 15, 2019. This was marked as GE 6 and admitted without objection. 
Applicant did not submit post-hearing documents during this period. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 2, 2019. 
  
                       
   Applicant is 41 years old. She obtained a general equivalency diploma (GED) in 
2003 and had some college courses. She was married in 2010, and she has four 
children, ages 16, 18, 20, and 27. (Tr. 64-66) The three youngest children reside with 
Applicant and she also provides for her 1 ½ year-old grandson. Applicant’s husband is 
incarcerated and has provided no child support. She reports no military service. She 
has been working as a customer-service advocate in a position of trust at a federal 
health-care provider since December 2016, with no problems. (Tr. 64, 99) Applicant was 
unemployed for a period of eight or nine months when she had two back surgeries in 
2014-2016. (Tr. 80) After she submitted a worker’s compensation claim to a previous 
employer, she was terminated. (Tr. 95)  
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied most of the alleged delinquent debts 
placed for collections, including SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h through 1.l. The 
alleged delinquent debts total $29,221. In addition to the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
Applicant has three charged-off delinquencies, and eight consumer or medical debts 
placed for collection. She claims in her answer that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f is 
disputed. 
 
 Applicant testified that she used a template obtained on the internet and sent 
several letters to creditors by certified mail requesting validation of her various debts 
pursuant to the Fair Debt Collections Procedure Act (FDCPA). (Tr. 15, AE N) She sent 
certified letters to the creditor corporation in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g requesting validations 
regarding two accounts placed for collection. (AE C and D) The creditor responded with 
a June 14, 2018, letter that said Applicant’s request for validation was not specific 
enough and it was frivolous. (AE E) Applicant also sent three letters requesting 
validation to the medical creditor at SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k. (Tr. 30-31) That creditor 
responded with a letter validating the debts and confirming the amounts owed. (AE H)   
 
 Applicant testified she had a telephone conversation August 10, 2018, with 
Constance, who assured her that all of the accounts for medical debts with the creditor 
at SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k would be removed within 30 days. The creditor was supposedly 
unable to validate these debts as requested by Applicant. (Tr. 36-38, AE I) The letter 
from this creditor to Applicant concerning a debt for $159 contains a handwritten 
annotation by Applicant about the conversation with Constance. (AE I) That 
conversation followed Applicant’s June 30, 2018 letter to the medical creditor requesting 
validation. Another similar letter referred to a $22 debt owed to the same creditor. (Tr. 
 
3 
 
 
45-47) SOR ¶¶1.j and 1.k are for medical debts, which the creditor validated and 
confirmed in a response to Applicant’s letter. (Tr. 74, AE M)    
 
Applicant waived her requisite 15-days’ notice at the outset of the hearing as the 
notice of hearing was dated November 20, 2018, for a December 4, 2018 hearing. (Tr. 
7-8, 39) The record was left open until January 14, 2019, specifically so that Applicant 
could provide follow-up documentation showing that these medical debts were removed 
from her credit report. (Tr. 39, 42) She also expressed an interest in consulting with an 
attorney during the interim. (Tr. 42) She produced no supplemental documentation or 
notice of appearance from an attorney. However, department counsel produced an 
updated credit report dated January 15, 2019, post-hearing. This was admitted without 
objection. The medical debts alleged in the SOR do not appear on this updated credit 
report. (GE 6)  
 
Applicant testified that the judgment alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a in the amount of 
$6,079 is the result of her eviction from her home in 2013. (Tr. 55) The judgment was 
entered against Applicant in June 2013. (GE 2, 4) Applicant testified that she called the 
property-management company in an effort to compromise this judgment, to no avail. 
(Tr. 56) She also claims that she called the court where the judgment was entered, but 
she produced no documentation addressing her efforts to compromise this judgment or 
pay it off.  
 
The charged-off debt in the amount of $8,294 alleged in SOR ¶1.b was for an 
automobile loan, which Applicant co-signed with her daughter. Applicant admits it is a 
valid debt. (Tr. 56) Her daughter stopped making payments and the vehicle was 
repossessed after the daughter’s boyfriend used it in a high-speed chase while fleeing 
from police. (Tr. 57-58) SOR ¶1.c is also for an automobile repossession in March 2018. 
(Tr. 59) This account was opened in August 2015. (GE 3) Applicant’s husband bought 
her a car for her birthday. Then, he lost his job and stopped making payments. 
Applicant disputed this debt and the creditor has removed this debt from her credit 
report by a June 2, 2018 letter. (AE J)   
 
 Applicant testified that she also purchased a used car, which turned out to be a 
lemon, and this resulted in the debt placed for collection in the amount of $4,010 at 
SOR ¶ 1.d. (Tr. 60) The vehicle had a cracked engine block that the dealer refused to 
fix. So, she stopped making payments and it was also repossessed. (Tr. 60) SOR ¶ 1.e 
and 1.f arose from Applicant’s supposedly fraudulent personal loans, in the amount of 
$1,740 and $589, obtained from the same lender. (Tr. 61) Applicant never received the 
money promised from these personal loans and she has requested validation. (Tr. 91) 
She has contacted somebody named “Baby” who is supposed to validate these debts. 
(Tr. 62) The debt alleged in SOR ¶1.e was sold to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.f. Her most 
recent credit report reflect a zero balance owed on these accounts and states “paid and 
sold.” (GE 6) 
 
 Applicant testified she has not reached out to contact the creditor in SOR 1.g 
concerning the past-due debt in the amount of $79. (Tr. 61-63) She simply has no extra 
 
4 
 
 
money as a single mother feeding and housing four children and a grandson on her 
salary of $11.78 per hour. (Tr. 95)  SOR ¶1.h is a delinquent medical debt in the amount 
of $545. Again, Applicant testified that she asked the creditor for validation. (Tr. 68) The 
creditor produced a letter in response dated August 28, 2018, which validated the debt 
and confirmed the amount. (AE H) SOR ¶1.i is a delinquent debt in the amount of $538 
resulting from Applicant’s cancelled automobile insurance. She testified that she has not 
reached out to the creditor or taken any action to resolve this debt. (Tr. 73) She does 
not know anything about the medical debt for $18 in SOR ¶1.l. (Tr. 75)  
 
 Appellant testified that she earns $1,600 a month after taxes and she does have 
some semblance of a budget. (Tr. 82) She has no residuary income after paying 
expenses. Her rent is $560 per month and she receives no general assistance except 
for her subsidized housing. (Tr. 86-87) She had no financial counseling beyond the 
credit-builder’s information publicly available on the internet. (Tr. 81) Applicant also 
owes over $100,000 in student loans for which she received a hardship deferral, 
according to her most recent credit report. (GE 6) It is unclear how she will ever repay 
them. She provided no evidence of any repayment plans with her remaining creditors or 
performance evaluations from her employer. She provided two very positive character 
references from co-workers attesting to her work ethic, trustworthiness and honesty. 
(AE A – B) One noted that Applicant turned in approximately $10,000 dollars that was 
apparently stolen in a robbery and hidden in a commode in their workplace.                
 
          Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Code of Federal Regulations Title 32 – National Defense, part 154.13 and part 
154, Appendix J – ADP Position Categories and Criteria for Designating Positions)  
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.” The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and 
Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in DOD Directive 5220.6 before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
5 
 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding information. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the government’s exhibits support the following AG ¶ 
19 disqualifying conditions:  
 
6 
 
 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR total approximately $29,221. The 
government exhibits admitted at the hearing, and post-hearing supplemental 
documents, together with Applicant’s admissions and testimony substantiate these 
debts. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns arising from financial 
difficulties are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;   
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant provided testimony and documentation to show that she successfully 
disputed or satisfied SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f. 
  
  Intentions to pay debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt 
repayment or other responsible approaches. See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Oct 23, 2013). Applicant sought a financial hardship deferral of her substantial 
 
7 
 
 
student loan debts. They have not been removed from her credit report. Otherwise, she 
produced limited documentation sent to her creditors, requesting validation of her 
various delinquencies. While Applicant did not deny that she incurred these debts, she 
did not provide documentation to show payments or progress on resolving any 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
   The delinquencies alleged in the SOR are longstanding and ongoing. Applicant’s 
surgeries and period of unemployment were conditions beyond Applicant’s control, but 
short-lived. She has not demonstrated that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She provided no evidence of financial counseling (beyond the internet), 
or good-faith efforts to repay a judgment, student loans, or other creditors to show that 
her financial problems have been resolved and are under control. The mitigating 
conditions enumerated above apply only partially except for ¶ 20(e) in connection with 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Applicant is the mother of four children and she 
cares for her grandson. She has endured medical setbacks and a brief period of 
unemployment and struggled to raise a family as a single mother.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a trustworthiness concern. She has not met her 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
8 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f:               For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a,1.b,1.d,1.g -1.l:            Against Applicant  
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a  
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
