1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-03916 
)  
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the guidelines for 
personal conduct, sexual behavior and criminal conduct. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On March 22, 2018, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines D and J.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
AG, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was issued under the previous 
AG. Applicant was provided with a copy of the new AG prior to the hearing, and permitted time after the 
hearing to submit further argument based on the new guidelines. (Tr. 4-6.) 
01/31/2019
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 14, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on October 22, 2018. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
October 11, 2018, scheduling the hearing for October 26, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. Applicant 
submitted 12 exhibits, marked Applicant Exhibit (AX) A through L, which were admitted 
without objection. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on November 6, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1 through 3.2 After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
 The SOR alleges in (1.a) under Guideline D, a June 2017 arrest and an August 
2017 guilty plea to contributing to the delinquency of a minor and indecent exposure. 
She was sentenced to twelve months in jail, with eleven months suspended and 
ordered to pay fines. It cross alleges under Guideline J, the same information (2.a). 
Under Guideline E, an amended SOR (3.a) alleges written falsifications that occurred in  
January 2017 to Applicant’s employer regarding allegations about an inappropriate 
relationship with a minor student; (3.b) falsification of material facts during a May 2017 
interview with an investigator in failing to disclose that she participated in a sexual act 
with a student; and in another investigative interview in July 2017, (3.c) not disclosing 
that after a minor student exposed himself to Applicant in a car, that nothing further 
happened when in fact she did touch him and provided oral sex. 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is single and 
has one young child. She received her undergraduate degree in 2008 and her graduate 
degree in 2016. (AX C, F, G, I) Applicant taught high school from 2015 to 2017, when 
she was fired for alleged workplace misconduct. (GX 1) She has been employed with a 
defense contractor for about one year. (Tr. 59)  She has received a number of training 
certificates in cyber security and counterintelligence. (AX L)  
 
 Applicant tutored a tenth grade male student while teaching in a high school. On 
one occasion, she and the student were in a public library after school. (Tr. 21) The 
student’s ride did not appear and Applicant stated that she would take him to his home. 
(Tr. 22) Applicant claimed that the student exposed himself while in the car and he 
demanded oral sex. She acknowledged that she tried to fend him off but he was bigger 
than she was. She testified that he tried to force her to give him oral sex. She continued 
to refuse but eventually she complied. (Tr. 23) 
 
 After an investigation by the school, Applicant received a criminal complaint from 
the police, and Applicant was charged with contributing to the delinquency of a minor 
                                                          
2 Before the hearing the Government amended the SOR to include Personal Conduct. It alleged three 
falsifications as noted above. 
 
3 
 
and indecent exposure for the incident that occurred in May 2016. (GX 3, 4, AX H)  In 
August 2017, Applicant pled guilty to the misdemeanor charges. She received 
consecutive sentences for the two charges. The total sentence was 24 months.  
Applicant was sentenced to twelve months in jail, with eleven months suspended. (AX 
H) Applicant served her incarceration on the weekends.  Applicant “shall be of good 
behavior” for a total of six years from the release from confinement. She has not had 
contact with the student since the conviction. (AX H) 
 
 Applicant initially denied that the criminal incident occurred when she received a 
letter of suspension from the school due to sexual misconduct. (Tr. 53) She told her 
employer that it was a rumor and was spread on social media. On January 13, 2017 
Applicant responded in writing concerning the incident.  She acknowledged that she had 
tutored the student and given him a ride home. She did not disclose any information 
about the incident of oral sex in her car. (GX 3) 
 
 During a May 12, 2017 investigative interview, Applicant described the May 2016 
incident with the minor student and mentioned a social media post concerning romantic 
behavior between Applicant and a minor student. She explained that she was not 
involved with the student. She made no mention of the fact that she gave the student 
oral sex in her car. (GX 2) 
 
 On July 26, 2017, Applicant was again interviewed by a DOD investigator. She 
stated that the student exposed himself to her in the front passenger seat of her car. 
She explained that she told the student that was not appropriate behavior and took him 
home.  Applicant further stated that nothing happened, that she did not touch him, and 
she did not know why the student made up this story. (GX 2) Applicant did not receive 
any counseling after this incident. 
 
 When cross examined at the hearing, Applicant explained that she did not 
provide the truth or the entire story as it happened because it was humiliating and 
embarrassing. (Tr. 56) During the interviews she never mentioned the oral sex. 
 
 Applicant submitted five letters of recommendation. Each reference from a 
former employer knew Applicant for at least two years and described her as honest with 
a positive attitude. Applicant has exceptional organization and communication skills. 
She is reliable and motivated. One letter of recommendation commended Applicant for 
her ability to encourage her students and build self-esteem. (AX A)  She attends church 
and is a member of her church community. (AX I, K) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG 
¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of 
judgment or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of 
 
5 
 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, 
may raise questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Sexual behavior includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, 
electronic, or written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 13. All are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high-risk sexual behavior 
that the individual is unable to stop;  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress;  and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of discretion or 
judgment. 
 
  Applicant provided oral sex to a minor student who she was tutoring. This 
occurred in her vehicle while she was taking him home. She did not show good 
judgment and put herself in a positon of vulnerability at the high school where she was 
teaching. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 14 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet; and 
 
(e) the individual has successfully completed an appropriate program of 
treatment, or is currently enrolled in one, has demonstrated ongoing and 
consistent compliance with the treatment plan, and/or has received a 
 
6 
 
favorable prognosis from a qualified mental health professional indicating 
the behavior is readily controllable with treatment. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets forth the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted; and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 
Applicant was convicted of contributing to the delinquency of a minor and 
indecent exposure in August 2017. She completed her consecutive sentences and is on 
a condition of “six years of good behavior.” The evidence establishes the disqualifying 
conditions. 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate the above security concerns 
raised in this case: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
7 
 
 Sufficient time has not passed since Applicant’s 2017 conviction. She breached 
a position of trust that a teacher has with a student. Granted this is a one-time 
occurrence and she has a good employment record, but given the fact that she used 
incredibly poor judgment with a minor student in 2016 and has not received counseling, 
she has not met her burden in this case. The evidence does not establish mitigation 
under either of the above conditions. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
Based on Applicant’s alleged deliberate falsifications, the following disqualifying 
condition could apply: 
 
AG ¶ 16 (a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national 
security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admitted the three separate falsifications under personal conduct. She 
explained that she was very humiliated and embarrassed. She admitted that she did not 
disclose the full story either in writing to her employer or during two investigations.  She 
is 32 years old. Granted she is a small woman, but the student, although larger than  
Applicant, was a minor. She stated that initially she refused the student’s request but 
 
8 
 
then agreed to perform the oral sex. She told officials at school that the student was 
starting rumors. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.3 An applicant’s level of education 
and business experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose 
relevant information was deliberate.4  
 
In this instance, it is clear from Applicant’s comments that she was embarrassed 
and humiliated and hoped nothing would occur. She deliberately falsified and omitted 
relevant information on three separate occasions in 2017. I find substantial evidence of 
an intent by Applicant to intentionally omit, conceal, or falsify facts from her employer 
and the government. Therefore, AG ¶ 16(a) is  established. 
 
 Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct her falsifications or 
concealment.  She spoke to two investigators and did not reveal the May 2013 incident 
and the oral sex. She also denied any oral sex in a letter written to her employer. 
Applicant has not persuaded me that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. 
She did not seek counseling and she deliberately withheld relevant information on three 
separate occasions. There is no information in this record to demonstrate that she did 
not intentionally falsify and mislead the Government on three separate occasions. None 
of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
                                                          
3 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
4 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
9 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines J, E, and D in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant on three different occasions failed to disclose that she gave oral sex to 
a minor student that she was tutoring in May 2016.  She was convicted in 2017. She 
denied three different times that the incident occurred. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
personal conduct, sexual behavior, and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-c:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
