1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ADP Case No. 17-02888 
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John V. Berry, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On October 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline B, 
foreign influence. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 
2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 10, 2017, and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2018. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing (NOH) 
on May 29, 2018, scheduling the hearing for June 21, 2018. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. 
01/30/2019
 
2 
I appended to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I, II, III, and IV, respectively, 
the Government’s request for administrative notice of facts about India, the 
Government’s exhibit list, Applicant’s exhibit list, and a 2017 joint report to Congress by 
the DOD and the U.S. Department of State (DOS) concerning India. Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called 
four witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, which were 
admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 29, 2018.             
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
At hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform to the 
evidence. With no objection, the SOR was amended to read as follows: (1) SOR ¶ 1.b 
alleges, “You possess two foreign bank accounts with balances totaling approximately 
$2,000”; (2) SOR ¶ 1.c alleges, “Your husband owns property in India worth in excess of 
$50,000 U.S.”; and (3) SOR ¶ 1.d was added and alleges, “Your husband has a bank 
account in India with a balance totaling approximately $28,000.”1 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel’s request that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about India was included in the record as HE I. Applicant did not object, and requested 
that I also take administrative notice of certain facts about India, as set forth in HE IV. I 
have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in HE I and IV. The facts 
administratively noticed are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. She is 42 years old. She obtained 
a bachelor’s degree from a university in India in 1994. She is married. She has two 
children; both are native-born U.S. citizens.2 
 
 Applicant has worked as a tester of health applications for her current employer 
since October 2016. Within six months, she was promoted to a team lead position in 
which she has managed a six to eight-person team. She was first granted eligibility to 
hold a public trust position in December 2016, and she is seeking to maintain her 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.3 
 
Applicant was born in India. She immigrated to the United States in 2001, to join 
her husband. She was naturalized as a U.S. citizen and obtained a U.S. passport in 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 7-11. 
 
2 Tr. at 6-11, 41, 69, 71-73, 91-94, 99-100; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 22-80; GE 1; AE K. 
 
3 
2009. Her husband was also born in India. He immigrated to the United States in 1998, 
and he also became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2009. Both Applicant and her husband 
consider themselves solely U.S. citizens.4   
 
Applicant’s father, six sisters, brother, mother-in-law, and father-in-law are 
citizens and residents of India (SOR ¶ 1.a). Her mother died in 1995. She testified that 
none of her family members in India have ever had ties to the Indian government or 
military. She travels to India once every two years to visit her family there, and she did 
so in 2010, 2012, 2014, 2017, and 2018. She testified that she has reported all of her 
foreign travels to her security officer, as required. She and her husband indicated that 
none of her foreign family members are aware that she has a public trust position, and 
are only generally aware that she works in the information technology field as a 
software tester.5 
 
Applicant’s father is 80 years old. He was formerly self-employed. He owns 
farming land in India worth approximately $70,000 USD. Applicant testified that her 
brother would inherit her father’s land when her father passes away. She maintains 
biweekly to monthly telephone contact with her father, and she gives him $150 once 
yearly.6 
 
Applicant’s six sisters are ages 61, 58, 56, 54, 52, and 50. They are all 
homemakers. Their husbands work for private companies--one runs a publication 
business, another runs a product supply business, one works in education, one works in 
a private bank, one works as an accountant, and one is retired from a private 
newspaper. Applicant maintains biweekly to monthly contact with her sisters. Applicant’s 
brother is 46 years old and works for a private company. He lives with their father. 
Applicant maintains monthly contact with her brother, and she gives him approximately 
$100 to $200 once every two years.7  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are approximately 70 and 74 years 
old, respectively. They are both retired from the same private company, where 
Applicant’s mother-in-law was a typist and her father-in-law was a clerk. They do not 
receive a pension. Applicant maintains bimonthly telephonic contact with them, and her 
husband talks to his parents once biweekly to monthly. Applicant’s husband travels to 
India to visit his parents once every three to five years, and he last did so in 2017. 
Applicant and her husband occasionally provide them with financial support, as further 
discussed below.8 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 22-80, 91-94; AE C. 
 
5 Tr. at 22-80, 91-116; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 22-80, 91-116; GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. at 22-80, 91-116; GE 1. 
 
8 Tr. at 22-80, 91-116; GE 1. 
 
4 
Applicant and her husband have financial interests in India totaling approximately 
$75,000. She has two bank accounts in India that she uses to pay for her expenses 
when she travels there. The combined balance on both accounts was $2,000 USD at 
the time of her October 2017 security clearance application (SCA), and it was $1,020 
USD as of the date of the hearing. Her husband has a bank account in India that his 
parents use to pay for their medical and daily living expenses. He also uses it to pay for 
his expenses when he travels to India. Its balance at the time of her SCA was $28,000 
USD, and it was $24,000 USD as of the date of the hearing. Applicant’s husband 
intends to close his bank account in India when he no longer needs it to pay for his 
parents’ expenses. He also owns one property in India. He purchased it for 
approximately $12,000 USD in 1999, before he and Applicant were married, for his 
parents to live. Its value as of the date of the hearing was $50,000 USD. Applicant and 
her husband intend to sell this property when his parents no longer need to live in it, and 
invest the money from the sale in the United States.9 
 
Applicant testified that neither she nor her husband intend to return to India in the 
future to live, as their life is in the United States. She also testified that they are loyal to 
the United States. Their assets in the United States total approximately $1.9 million. 
This includes their two homes--their primary residence and rental property that they 
purchased in 2017 and 2014, respectively; their combined annual income of $200,000; 
and their retirement and investment accounts.10  
 
Applicant has not had any unfavorable issues at work, and she has completed all 
requisite annual training. She testified that she would report any attempts to blackmail 
her or her family in India to the proper authorities. Prior to holding her current public 
trust position, she was a homemaker from 2001 through 2009. She then worked in the 
public school system for several years from 2009 to 2016. She is involved in her 
community, to include serving as her children’s Girl Scouts treasurer.11 
 
Applicant’s supervisor and project manager since 2016 described Applicant as a 
good worker. Her coworker since November 2016 testified that Applicant is an 
exceptional team lead, a driven and detail-oriented worker, and an honest and likeable 
individual. A former coworker from the public school system, and a friend of Applicant of 
ten years, described Applicant as possessing a strong work ethic and an individual who 
is loyal to the United States. Individuals who know Applicant from Girl Scouts described 
her as an honest person.12  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 22-80, 91-116; GE 1; AE A, B, D, E. 
 
10 Tr. at 6-11, 22-80, 91-116; AE F, G. 
  
11 Tr. at 22-91, 116-125; GE 1; AE H, I, J. 
 
12 Tr. at 22-91, 116-125; GE 1; AE H, J. 
 
5 
India  
 
 India and seven other countries were identified, in a 2008 Annual Report to 
Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, as being involved 
in economic and industrial espionage. In its 2009 to 2011 Report to Congress, the 
Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive reported that sensitive U.S. 
economic information and technology are targeted by the intelligence services, private 
sector, and citizens of dozens of countries, to include U.S. allies and its partners. The 
U.S. Department of Justice identified numerous criminal cases concerning export 
enforcement related to proprietary defense information, economic espionage, theft of 
trade secrets, and embargo-related criminal prosecutions involving both the Indian 
government as well as private companies and individuals in India. 
 
 Anti-Western terrorist groups, including some on the U.S. Government’s list of 
foreign terrorist organizations, are active in India, and the DOS warns U.S. citizens that 
India continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect U.S. 
citizens directly or indirectly. The South Asian Terrorism Portal, run by the nonprofit 
Institute for Conflict Management, reported fatalities during the first half of 2017 due to 
terrorism and insurgency in India.  
 
 India continues to experience significant human rights abuses. In its 2018 
annual human rights report for India, the DOS identified the following as India’s most 
significant human rights problems: police and security force abuses; widespread 
corruption; reports of political prisoners in certain states; instances of censorship and 
harassment of media outlets including some critical of the government; and a lack of 
accountability for misconduct at all levels of government, contributing to widespread 
impunity.  
 
 The Central Monitoring System (CMS) in India, a mass electronic surveillance 
data-mining program installed by a government-owned center, continued to allow 
governmental agencies to monitor electronic communication in real time without 
informing the subject or a judge.  The CMS also provides agencies with centralized 
access to the telecommunications network, the ability to hear and record mobile, 
landline, satellite, and Voice over Internet Protocol phone calls, read private e-mails 
and text messages, and track geographical locations of people in real time. 
 
Policies 
 
The Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum of November 19, 2004, treats 
ADP positions as sensitive positions, and it entitles applicants for ADP positions to the 
procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. The standard set out in the adjudicative guidelines for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security. AG ¶ 2.b.   
 
 
6 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The trustworthiness concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a trustworthiness concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a trustworthiness concern if 
they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns   
under AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
7 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The 
United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding sensitive 
information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have 
access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. 
Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with 
t h e  United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or 
national security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. 
Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage 
against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical 
fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the 
United States, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
 
8 
having a family member living under a foreign government. Applicant’s family 
members are citizens and residents of India. India was identified as involved in 
economic and industrial espionage. In addition, terrorist activities, significant human 
rights abuses, and government monitoring of communications and geographical 
locations of people are present in India. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly as well as through 
her husband and their financial interests in India. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(e), and 7(f) 
have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for the reasons set out in the above discussion 
of AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(e), and 7(f). AG ¶ 8(c) is also not established, as Applicant and 
her husband visit their family in India once every two to five years, they communicate 
with them frequently, and they provide financial support to them.     
 
However, Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
United States are sufficient to establish AG ¶ 8(b). She has lived in the United States 
since 2001. She has been a citizen since 2009. Her husband and children are citizens 
and residents of the United States. In addition, AG ¶ 8(f) is established, as Applicant 
and her husband’s assets in the United States total approximately $1.9 million, as 
compared to their financial interests in India of approximately $75,000.  
 
 
9 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. Applicant’s ties to India are outweighed by her deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States. I am confident that she will resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by her foreign family 
connections and financial interests. Accordingly, I conclude s he has carried her 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant her 
eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR:  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
