1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-00283 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 9, 2015. On 
May 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on May 7, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 11, 2018, scheduling the hearing 
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; and DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) were revised effective June 8, 2017, and apply herein. 
01/15/2019
 
2 
 
for July 10, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 10 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant and a witness testified, 
and Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E were admitted without objection. The record was 
held open to July 27, 2018, for Applicant to submit additional documentation. He 
submitted AE F, consisting of an e-mail statement that was admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 19, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old warehouse material expeditor, employed by a defense 
contractor since 1998. He graduated from high school in 1991. He married in 1992 and 
divorced in 2008. He again married in 2014. He has two adult children and one adult step-
son. He served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 1992 to 1997, and was honorably 
discharged. Applicant was previously granted a top secret security clearance with access 
to sensitive compartmented information in 2006, but it was revoked for financial concerns 
and denied by a DOHA Administrative Judge in 2013. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant is delinquent on nearly $20,000 in debts, including 
unpaid Federal income taxes for tax year 2015, and child support obligations. The SOR 
also alleges that Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in September 2007 that was 
dismissed in November 2007, and that Applicant failed to file Federal and state tax returns 
when due for tax years 2009-2013. The SOR allegations are sufficiently supported by 
relevant evidence. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began during his first marriage and 2008 divorce. 
Applicant and his spouse filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2007 to reorganize about 
$30,000 in debts. (Tr. 31) The bankruptcy was dismissed because Applicant’s debt to 
income ratio did not qualify for a Chapter 13 proceeding. (GE 3) He did not pursue a 
Chapter 7 discharge. By 2013, Applicant again had nearly $30,000 in delinquent debts. 
(GE 10) He attributed these debts to medical expenses, his divorce in 2008, his former 
spouse’s poor spending habits, and a decrease in work hours. After a 2013 DOHA 
hearing, Applicant was denied security eligibility based on his unmitigated delinquent 
debts. 
 
Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2009 
through 2013, when due. He later filed the delinquent returns, and owes the IRS 
approximately $4,000 in unpaid taxes, penalties, and interest from the 2015 tax year. At 
his hearing in this case, Applicant admitted that his Federal and state income tax returns 
for 2016 and 2017 were also past due and unfiled. In his post-hearing submission, 
Applicant did not provide evidence that these returns have been filed. He attributed his 
failure to file tax returns on time to his inability to work with his former spouse regarding 
claiming the children as dependents, and their efforts to reconcile. He also admitted that 
he did not have sufficient money to pay taxes owed. He did not seek assistance from a 
tax preparer, and he has not arranged a payment plan with the IRS. 
 
 
3 
 
After their divorce, Applicant and his ex-spouse reconciled and lived together from 
late 2008 to 2011. They purchased a 2009 luxury vehicle together. His spouse kept the 
vehicle after they separated in 2011, and it was repossessed in 2012. Applicant is jointly 
responsible for the debt. He noted that he contacted a debt collection agency in 2012 or 
2013, but was unable to renegotiate the debt which totals over $8,000. (SOR ¶ 1.a)  He 
claimed that subsequent contact with the agency showed they no longer held the debt. 
Applicant’s 2017 credit report shows the debt became delinquent in 2011 and was 
charged off. No post-hearing documentation was provided to show the current status of 
the debt or Applicant’s efforts to resolve it. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c is a $6,816 timeshare property debt, placed in collection with an agency 
in about 2015. Applicant admitted the debt, and stated that he has been making automatic 
monthly payments from his bank account to resolve it. The debt no longer appears on his 
2016 or 2017 credit reports. 
 
Applicant is delinquent on a mortgage for rental property he owns. He stated that 
the property is occupied, but he has been unable to catch up on his mortgage payments 
that became delinquent in May 2017, when he used the funds to pay for maintenance of 
the property. The debt is reported on his 2017 credit report as a past-due Veterans 
Benefits Administration mortgage. (SOR ¶ 1.d) No post-hearing information was provided 
showing the current status of the mortgage or efforts to resolve the past-due debt.  
 
Applicant became delinquent on child-support obligations because of a 
disagreement with his former spouse. (SOR ¶ 1.e) His pay was involuntarily garnished in 
2016 or 2017, and released in July 2018 after the arrearage was paid. (AE F) This debt 
is resolved. 
 
Applicant has not sought financial counseling nor does he have a budget. He noted 
that since his 2013 DOHA case, he controls his purchases and pays his debts. He has 
less than $1,200 in savings. His current supervisor testified to Applicant’s trustworthiness 
and work ethic. He noted that Applicant is a family man who would never put himself in a 
negative light in front of his children, and that his financial problems have not affected his 
work. Several other co-workers also attested to his trustworthiness, reliability, dedication, 
expertise and professionalism. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
 
4 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record supporting the 
SOR allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s tax delinquencies and other debts have been a long-standing, recurring 
problem. Although he has been working full-time with his current employer since 1998, 
he has not shown an ability to address delinquent debts, nor has he shown financial 
responsibility. Applicant’s on-again off-again relationship with his former spouse does not 
excuse his failure to file income tax returns when due, and his failure to arrange payment 
of a 2015 past-due income-tax debt is inexcusable. The evidence shows that Applicant 
has not made diligent efforts to resolve his debts, and the only resolved matter, delinquent 
child support obligations, occurred through an involuntary garnishment order. Although 
he has now filed his 2009 through 2013 tax returns, he admitted that his 2016 and 2017 
Federal and state returns were not filed when due, and he has not shown that they have 
been filed since his hearing. Additionally, he has not sought financial counseling or 
professional assistance with his debts and tax obligations. 
 
Overall, I find that Applicant has continued his long-standing financial 
irresponsibility, and has not adequately addressed his delinquent debts. I find that his 
financial status is not under control and that similar problems are likely to recur. No 
mitigating conditions fully apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d).2 Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
                                                     
2 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to 
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age 
and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence 
or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
7 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s long 
history of financial irresponsibility despite a long-standing work history has not been 
mitigated. His military service and difficulties with personal relationships do not overcome 
his financial irresponsibility. Given his past efforts to keep and attain a security clearance, 
the Government’s expectations for financial responsibility should have been clear. 
Whether Applicant’s actions with regard to his finances amount to simple inattention or 
negligence, he has clearly not heeded that knowledge. 
 
Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a; 1.d, 1.f – 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
