1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-03726 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On December 8, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant responded to the SOR on February 1, 2018, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on April 18, 2018, and reassigned to me on October 16, 2018. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled on October 31, 2018.  
Evidence 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through L, which were admitted 
without objection. 
01/02/2019
 
2 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Iraq. Without objection, I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
the request. The facts are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated 
verbatim in this decision. Of particular note is the significant threat of terrorism and 
ongoing human rights problems in Iraq. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old potential employee of a defense contractor. He will be 
hired if he receives a security clearance. He has a General Educational Development 
(GED) high school equivalency diploma, which he received in 2017. He is married for 
the second time. He and his wife have two young children.1 
 
 Applicant was born in Iraq to Iraqi parents. He attended high school in Iraq. His 
brother worked for a humanitarian organization that was affiliated with the United 
States. Because of his work with the organization, his brother was eligible to immigrate 
with his family to the United States. Applicant, his mother, and his three siblings 
immigrated to the United States in 1997. Applicant’s father, who was apparently 
divorced from Applicant’s mother and remarried, remained in Iraq. Applicant became a 
U.S. citizen in 2009. His mother and siblings live in the United States as U.S. citizens or 
permanent residents.2 
 
 Applicant worked under dangerous conditions as a linguist with the U.S. military 
in Iraq from 2005 to 2011, at which time he returned to the United States. His wife is an 
Iraqi citizen. He went to Iraq later in 2011 and married his wife. His two children were 
born in Iraq. His application for his wife to immigrate to the United States was approved. 
Applicant, his wife, and their two children moved to the United States in 2016. His 
children are U.S. citizens, and his wife is a U.S. permanent resident who plans to apply 
for U.S. citizenship as soon as she is eligible.3    
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased. His wife’s mother and siblings are citizens 
and residents of Iraq. His mother-in-law has never worked outside the home. Neither 
Applicant nor his wife have returned to Iraq since 2016. He sent his mother-in-law about 
$1,000 in 2016 for a medical procedure, but he has not provided any additional financial 
support to his in-laws. He does not have regular contact with his in-laws in Iraq. To his 
knowledge, none of his in-laws have any direct connection to the Iraqi government or 
any terrorist organization.4 
 
 Applicant owns a house in the United States. He has no foreign assets. His 
children are in school, and he would like to further his own education. His wife started 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20, 25, 31-34; GE 1; AE B, C, I. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-17, 30; GE 1; AE B, H. 
 
3 Tr. at 18-33; GE 1; AE B-D. 
 
4 Tr. at 27, 39-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
working a few weeks before his hearing. He credibly testified that his wife and her family 
in Iraq could not be used to coerce or intimidate him into revealing classified 
information.5 
 
Applicant submitted documents and letters from members of the U.S. military 
attesting to his outstanding service as a linguist. He is praised for his dedication, 
professionalism, honesty, reliability, work ethic, loyalty to the United States, courage, 
and integrity. A senior U.S. military officer wrote in 2009 that Applicant had been a 
fearless partner in their sometimes dangerous missions, and the officer trusted 
Applicant completely.6 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
5 Tr. at 26-28, 35-38, 46-47; AE B, K. 
 
6 AE A, D, E. 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
5 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s wife is an Iraqi citizen, and his mother-in-law is a citizen and resident 
of Iraq. The potential for terrorist violence against U.S. interests and citizens remains 
high in Iraq, and it continues to have human rights problems. Applicant’s foreign 
contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. The above disqualifying 
conditions have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Iraq. Guideline B is not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.7  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
6 
 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. He credibly testified that his wife’s family 
in Iraq could not be used to coerce or intimidate him into revealing classified 
information. The Appeal Board has stated that such a statement, standing alone, is of 
limited value, unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar 
manner in the past in comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous 
track record of complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of 
dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the 
national security.8 In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the 
Appeal Board discussed this issue as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
Applicant worked under dangerous conditions as a linguist with the U.S. military 
in Iraq from 2005 to 2011. He was heavily praised by senior members of the U.S. 
military. I find that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest 
in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) is applicable to his wife who is a U.S. permanent 
resident waiting to apply for U.S. citizenship. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable to all of Applicant’s 
foreign relatives.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
7 
 
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s work with the U.S. military in Iraq earned him high praise from senior 
U.S. military personnel. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of 
action in defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable 
result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”9 The complicated state of affairs in Iraq 
places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign 
family members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met that burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
