1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-04015 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated criminal conduct security concerns. However, he did not 
mitigate personal conduct security concerns arising from a 2014 employment 
termination for sexual harassment. He did not acknowledge wrongdoing, and did not 
provide sufficient evidence to establish that his behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in July 2016, in 
connection with his employment in the defense industry. On December 27, 2017, 
following a background investigation, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
alleging security concerns under Guideline J, criminal conduct, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. DOD CAF issued the SOR under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
01/28/2019
 
2 
 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which became effective on June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 22, 2018, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on June 27, 2018. On July 26, 2018, a Notice of Hearing was 
issued scheduling the hearing for August 20, 2018. The hearing convened as 
scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel submitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 7. GE 1 – GE 3 and GE 5 – GE 7 were admitted without objection. GE 4 was 
admitted over an objection. Applicant submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E.1 
AE A, AE B, and AE C were admitted without objection. AE D and AE E were admitted 
over objections. Applicant and two other witnesses also testified. 
 
I left the record open to provide Applicant the opportunity to submit additional 
evidence, which he did, on August 23, 2018. His three post-hearing documents, and 
related correspondence, are marked collectively as AE F, and admitted without 
objection.2 The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 29, 2018. The record closed on 
September 4, 2018.  
  
Findings of Fact  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c, all with 
explanations. He did not answer SOR ¶ 2.a, but it is a cross-allegation of SOR ¶ 1. He 
partially admitted and partially denied SOR ¶ 2.b, with an explanation.3 His admissions 
and other statements are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He married his third wife in 2004. He has four adult 
daughters, one from his first marriage, and three from his second marriage. He joined 
the U.S. Navy after high school. He spent about six years on active duty, from 1975 to 
1981. He also served in the U.S. Navy Reserve from 1996 to 2012. He retired as a petty 
officer first class (E-6). (Tr. 37-40; GE 1)  
 
Applicant worked for defense contractor X from 2008 until he was terminated in 
March 2014. For the next two years, he had sporadic employment. He has held his 
current job, with a defense contractor, since February 2016. He has had a security 
clearance since 2008, and previously held one in the Navy. (GE 1; Tr. 13, 41, 94-95) 
 
 
                                                          
1 AE A and AE B were also attached to Applicant’s Answer.  
 
2 AE F includes certificates of completion for a DOD training course, “Sexual Assault Prevention and 
Response,” from January 2017 and August 2018, and an August 2018 certification of completion for a 
gun safety course. 
 
3 Applicant admitted the termination alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b, but denied the underlying reasons for it.  
 
3 
 
 
Guideline J 
 
In October 1998, Applicant and his second wife had an argument. He testified 
that she was being physically combative. He said he defended himself, but also said he 
believes she wanted him to hit back so she could press charges. His eldest daughter 
was present. Applicant called police, and his wife left the house with them. She stayed 
with her parents. A few days later, after she filed charges, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with assault and battery of a family member. (SOR ¶ 1.c) He later pled not 
guilty. In February 1999, he was tried and found not guilty after a bench trial, and the 
charge was dismissed. Applicant and his second wife divorced later in 1999. (Tr. 52-54, 
81-83; GE 1; AE C)  
 
During the winter of 2015-2016, Applicant purchased a new firearm, a bolt action 
rifle. He kept his firearms in a gun safe in the basement. He said friends came over to 
see his weapons. He believes that, without his knowledge, one of them loaded a 
magazine into the rifle with a round in it, and then put the rifle back into the safe. 
Applicant was out of the room at the time. (Tr. 42-44, 82-87) 
 
About a month later, in March 2016, Applicant was just getting over the flu, and 
“wasn’t thinking straight.” (Tr. 132) He took the rifle out of the safe to clean it. His wife 
was drifting in and out of sleep on a couch across the room. He testified, “I opened up 
the safe door, took the weapon out and grabbed it. I brought my hand down to support 
the stock, and my finger caught the trigger and [it] went off.” (Tr. 45, 100) The weapon’s 
safety was not engaged. He was holding the weapon upright. He did not know it was 
loaded. A round discharged and travelled over his wife’s feet on the couch, went 
through a window pane, and hit a neighbor’s parked car across the street. (Tr. 42-46, 
82-88, 100) 
 
Applicant’s wife “screamed and asked him what had happened.” (GE 3 at 3) After 
comforting her, he went outside to see if his neighbors were all right. He could not find 
the bullet. (GE 3 at 3) Neither she nor any neighbors reported the incident. He and his 
wife had not been in an argument that day. (Tr. 44, 48) About a week later, a neighbor 
noticed damage to her car and told Applicant about it. He paid for repairs “right away” 
(about $600-$800). (Tr. 48-50) 
 
Applicant and his wife separated in May 2016. In June 2016, she filed charges. 
He believes that she did so at the urging of her daughter, with whom he does not get 
along. (Tr. 88-90) Applicant was arrested and charged with brandishing a firearm (SOR 
¶ 1.a) and reckless handling of a firearm. (SOR ¶ 1.b) (Answer; GE 1 at 36-39; GE 2; 
GE 3 at 3-4; GE 7) He pled not guilty. His wife later wanted to reconcile and she 
dropped the charges, which were dismissed with prejudice in February 2017. She 
moved back in with Applicant in May 2018, and they remain together. (Tr. 50-51, 88-93, 
98-99; AE A; AE B) 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he “broke protocol” and did not handle the weapon 
safely, in accordance with his training. (Tr. 47) He said he should have looked more 
 
4 
 
 
closely to see if the weapon was loaded. (Tr. 132) He has been familiar with firearms 
since childhood. He had never had an “accidental” or “negligent” discharge of a firearm 
before. He admitted he was negligent and expressed remorse. (Tr. 46-47, 88, 97-98, 
103, 138) After the hearing, he took a refresher course in gun safety. (Tr. 94; AE F)4  
 
Guideline E 
 
In 2014, Applicant was employed with defense contractor X. A female service 
member made a sexual harassment claim, alleging that a particular employee of 
defense contractor X had made inappropriate comments to her and had asked for her 
phone number. When the service member said she had a boyfriend, the worker told her 
he was “older and more stable and could take care of me.” She also reported that he 
touched her unnecessarily. Two other service members made statements reporting that 
a contractor had also touched them unnecessarily or made inappropriate comments to 
them. (Tr. 55-72; GE 6 at 1-4) 
 
Applicant is not specifically named in the statements. However, contractor X’s 
internal investigation, conducted by representatives from human resources, soon 
centered on Applicant and another employee, Mr. A, based on their age, physical 
description and clothing. Both men were interviewed multiple times. The complainants 
were shown photographs of both Applicant and Mr. A, and they identified Applicant as 
the employee who acted inappropriately towards them. (GE 4, 5, 6)  
 
Several of Applicant’s co-workers told the company interviewers that Applicant 
had a history of getting inappropriately or uncomfortably close to other people at work 
(both men and women) and of making inappropriate comments, particularly to and 
about women. (GE 6 at 4, 5, 6, 8) At hearing, Applicant testified that he felt that several 
of the employees who made negative comments about him during the company’s 
investigation were racially biased against him.5 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by the company’s interviewers (both of whom 
were women), he denied making inappropriate comments to the female service 
members and denied touching them inappropriately or unnecessarily, as alleged. (GE 6 
at 7) He also speculated to the company interviewers that he was falsely accused: “It is 
possible the females got together to collaborate and bring charges possibly against 
them;” and “It’s the gospel truth (when asked why female [service members] would 
make false allegations against them). (GE 6 at 6) 
 
According to the company’s report (which paraphrases what Applicant said to the 
interviewers), he also made several comments to the interviewers about the female 
                                                          
4 Applicant also submitted a newspaper article about an incident in which a police officer accidentally shot 
and killed someone during a professional role-playing exercise. (AE D) Applicant offered the exhibit to 
show that even for professionals with constant firearms training, “everyone makes mistakes.” (Tr. 97) 
 
5 Tr. 60; GE 4 at 4-5.  
 
 
5 
 
 
service members’ appearance: 1) “If we (HR) saw the [service member], she should be 
flattered because she looks like nothing and is not that attractive;”6 2) “With regard to 
the female [service member], if we can see what she looks like she should never make 
complaints and he would not waste his time;”7 and 3) “If he was going to do that he 
would not go after someone like that.”8  
 
The company’s interviewers concluded that Applicant met the general description 
of the subject employee, and wore specific clothing identified by the complainants. The 
investigation also concluded that in his own statements, Applicant “was very open about 
female [service members’] behaviors to include whether they are attractive or not and 
how [they] are perceived by their male counterparts when they get rejected.” (GE 4 at 5) 
The investigation also noted that Applicant’s co-workers describe him as one who is 
known to make inappropriate comments to females and touch them.  
 
The company investigation also confirmed that Applicant was trained in company 
X’s code of ethics, conduct, and workplace harassment on February 10, 2014, 11 days 
before the complaint was made against him. Applicant acknowledged this at hearing, 
and said he had gone through similar harassment training earlier in his career at 
company X. (GE 4 at 6; Tr. 74-76) 
 
In addition, company X’s human resources substantiated that in 2009, Applicant 
was reprimanded or moved to another workplace for what was perceived as acting 
inappropriately towards a female employee after he spoke to her in Arabic, stared at her 
and made her uncomfortable. (GE 4 at 6, 7) At hearing, Applicant acknowledged being 
reprimanded but said he had been smiling at another employee and applauding her for 
getting an award. He disputed that he had acted inappropriately. He recalled being told 
by his supervisor to treat people with dignity and respect. Applicant told his supervisor 
that he agreed but did not understand what he did wrong. (Tr. 72-74, 77-79) 
 
The company’s investigation concluded that the number of incidents reported 
about Applicant carried greater weight than his adamant denials that he engaged in the 
behavior, making it more likely than not that it was Applicant who behaved 
inappropriately towards the female service members. (GE 4 at 5, 6) As a result, in 
March 2014, Applicant’s employment was terminated, “effective immediately for 
violating [contractor X’s] Code of Ethics and Business Conduct and Workplace 
Harassment policies.” Mr. A was exonerated and returned to work. (GE 4 at 7; Tr. 77) 
(SOR ¶ 2.b) 
 
Applicant reported his termination from company X, and the reason for it, on his 
SCA. (GE 1 at 14) In the summary of his background interview, he explained that he 
                                                          
6 GE 6 at 6.  
 
7 GE 6 at 12.  
 
8 GE 6 at 12.  
 
 
6 
 
 
needed access to a secure area. When he saw a female service member exit the 
compartment, he asked to access it, but this was denied. He then said he asked for a 
phone number to contact supervisors who might grant him access to the space. (GE 3 
at 1) In his Answer to the SOR, he provided similar information. He acknowledged 
receiving a letter of termination. He said his termination was “due to allegations of 
sexual harassment,” which he denied “to the fullest extent.” (Answer) 
 
At hearing, Appellant denied making sexually suggestive comments to the 
service members, or anything that might be construed as such. (Tr. 62-63) He did not 
acknowledge any specific action he allegedly took, or any specific statement he 
allegedly said, to the female service members. (Tr. 79-81) He stressed several times 
during his testimony that he felt he had been wrongly accused, both by other contractor 
employees (Tr. 60-61) and the female service members. (Tr. 100-101, 138)9  
 
Applicant testified that his current employer “has provided classes for sexual 
harassment and workspace ethics, and I have taken it, and I understand it, and I adhere 
to it.” (Tr. 96) He submitted documentation of his training after the hearing. (AE F) He 
also testified that he worked with women on active duty, mentored them and considered 
them “like my sisters.” He also worked with female customers in his current job, and 
“I’ve never had any complaints. I’ve had a lot of praises.” (Tr. 101) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor testified that he has known and supervised Applicant since 
February 2016. The witness has held his position, with a clearance, for eight years. He 
works with Applicant on a daily basis. He has never witnessed Applicant engage in any 
inappropriate behavior, nor is he aware that Applicant has done so. He has not heard 
that Applicant has ever made any lewd or improper comments. Applicant “always 
seems to go out of his way” to be professional. He has never had to counsel Applicant. 
Applicant has been through sexual harassment training, as required. Prior to the 
hearing, he was aware of the firearms charges but not the other allegations. (Tr. 105-
113) 
 
Another witness, a longtime close friend, has known Applicant for 18 years, since 
they served together in the Navy Reserve. They are also former co-workers. The friend 
has had a clearance for many years. He has never seen Applicant treat people with 
anything other than courtesy and respect. He took care to stress that he has no 
personal knowledge of the allegations in this case, other than what Applicant has told 
him, since he was not there when they occurred. (Tr. 114-123, 129) 
 
Both men are experienced and practiced gun owners. They have gone to the 
shooting range together, and he is not aware that Applicant has ever had any other 
negligent discharges. He does not believe Applicant discharged the weapon 
maliciously. (Tr. 127-129) 
 
                                                          
9 Applicant also submitted an academic article to bolster his view that that women make false sexual 
allegations. (AE E) 
 
7 
 
 
The friend testified that sometimes a person might say something that could be 
misinterpreted or misconstrued by the person who heard the comment. He attributed 
this, in part, to generational differences. He acknowledged, however, that that is why 
sexual harassment and ethics training exists, to allow protections in the system for 
complainants, so they can address such issues with their supervisor. (Tr. 124-125)  
 
The friend is not aware of anything Applicant has said of a sexual nature that 
might be misconstrued by someone who heard the comment. The friend never 
witnessed Applicant being counseled or reprimanded for making physical contact that 
was “not well received.” (Tr. 126) The actions that led to Applicant’s termination, 
however, are “way out of his character.” (Tr. 114-123, 128) 
 
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance. As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”10 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences grounded on 
mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
10 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).  
 
8 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct: 
 
 AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern for criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
  AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is applicable: 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 In 1998, during his second marriage, Applicant was arrested and charged with a 
domestic violence offense against his second wife. In 2016, he was charged with two 
firearms offenses after a negligent discharge of his weapon at home, while his wife was 
present. SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are alleged separately, though they arose from the same 
incident.11 Thus, they are more properly considered as a single allegation. SOR ¶ 1.b is 
found for Applicant, as it is largely duplicative of SOR ¶ 1.a. Further, Applicant is also 
alleged to have committed both firearms offenses “while holding a clearance.” This is 
true, but the fact that he held a clearance at the time does not constitute additionally 
disqualifying conduct under either guideline alleged. AG ¶ 31(b) applies to the offenses 
at SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c, even though they were later dismissed.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
11 Tr. 136-138.  
 
9 
 
 
  AG ¶ 32 sets forth the potentially applicable mitigating conditions:    
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
  
 AG ¶ 32(a) applies to the 1998 domestic violence charge. The incident occurred 
about 20 years ago, during a marriage that ended shortly thereafter. Applicant was also 
found not guilty. He has had no other domestic violence charges in the years since 
then. The offense at SOR ¶ 1.c is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply to mitigate the firearms charges (considered as a 
single allegation, as noted above). Applicant credibly testified that the charges resulted 
from a negligent discharge of his weapon, something which had never happened 
before. He was remorseful, and accepted full responsibility. He is an experienced gun 
owner, and he acknowledged that the incident should never have happened, and could 
have caused great harm. He voluntarily took refresher firearms training afterwards. The 
gun charges are unlikely to recur and he took rehabilitative action. He has mitigated the 
criminal security concerns.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . . 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that 
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may 
 
10 
 
 
not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information;  
   
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: . . . 
 
                     (2) any disruptive . . . or inappropriate behavior;  
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and  
 
The criminal conduct allegations, noted above, are also cross-alleged as SOR ¶ 
2.a. The general personal conduct security concern (AG ¶ 15) and AG ¶ 16(c) are 
satisfied.  
 
 Under ¶ E3.1.14 of the Directive, the Government had the burden to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that Applicant “was fired from 
his position with [contractor X] in 2014 for sexual harassment.” Applicant admitted that 
he had been terminated and that it was due to allegations of sexual harassment. SOR ¶ 
2.b, as written, is established by the record evidence.  
 
 However, Applicant adamantly and consistently denied that he committed the 
acts of sexual harassment that led to his termination. He did so: 1) during the 
company’s investigation of the complaints; 2) during the background interview for his 
clearance; 3) in his Answer to the SOR; and 4) at hearing.  
  
When three female service members made allegations of sexual harassment 
against a company X employee, Applicant’s employer conducted a thorough 
investigation. The company interviewed the subjects, Applicant and another employee, 
Mr. A, twice. They interviewed several other employees, who verified Applicant’s actions 
and described him as one known to make inappropriate comments to females and 
touch them inappropriately or unnecessarily. Applicant was also identified in 
photographs shown to the complainants. The company’s investigation concluded that 
Applicant met the general description of the subject employee and wore specific 
clothing identified by the complainants.  
 
Further, though he adamantly denied the allegations, Applicant made several 
inappropriate statements to the company interviewers regarding the female service 
members’ physical attractiveness and other perceptions about their reactions to male 
attention that lent credence to the allegations that Applicant was the employee who 
spoke to and acted inappropriately towards the female service members in the first 
place. Given the strength of the independent evidence gathered during the 
 
11 
 
 
investigation, and based on Applicant’s own words, the company concluded that it was 
more likely than not that he had done what he had been accused of, despite his denials.  
 
The DOHA Appeal Board has held that an employer’s characterizations of events 
underlying an adverse action are entitled to “some deference.”12 With that guidance, 
and in consideration of the Government’s evidence as well as Applicant’s testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant’s termination, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b, is fully established by 
the record evidence, as is company X’s rationale for it, as established by their thorough 
investigation of the service members’ complaints. I therefore give the company’s 
conclusions about Applicant’s actions, and their reasons for terminating him, significant 
deference. SOR ¶ 2.b satisfies the general personal conduct security concern (AG ¶ 15) 
as well as the “catch-all” disqualifying conditions of AG ¶¶ 16(d)(2) and (3).  
 
  Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:    
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and   
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
  
 Although the criminal conduct allegations are mitigated under Guideline J as 
discussed above, I must also consider them as part of the total pattern of Applicant’s 
behavior and judgment, not just in a piecemeal fashion as a series of unrelated 
incidents.13 Having done so, however, I still conclude that, while Applicant’s criminal 
offenses are also instances of generally poor judgment, they are also mitigated under 
AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) for the same reasons they are mitigated under AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 
(d), above.  
 
 This leaves SOR allegation ¶ 2.b. On the one hand, there is some mitigating 
evidence to consider. Applicant’s actions occurred more than four years ago. His 
current supervisor testified that he is not aware that Applicant has ever engaged in any 
inappropriate behavior, or ever made any lewd or improper comments, in his current 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 14-0114 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 30, 2014)(citing ISCR Case No. 10-03886 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Apr. 26, 2012)). 
 
13 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-22563 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (regarding the need to avoid a 
piecemeal analysis). 
 
12 
 
 
job. Applicant has never been counseled for inappropriate comments or behavior. He 
has taken his employer’s required sexual harassment training, and said he would 
adhere to it.  
 
 On the other hand, several factors weigh against a conclusion that Applicant has 
fully mitigated allegation ¶ 2.b. Chiefly, he never acknowledged any wrongdoing, either 
during the company’s investigation at the time, or at any time since, despite strong 
evidence that he committed the acts alleged. This casts significant doubt as to the 
veracity of his statement that he will adhere to the sexual harassment training he has 
taken from his current employer. He took that training, but has not taken it to heart. 
 
Applicant’s denials stand in stark contrast with his acknowledgment of 
wrongdoing concerning the negligent weapon discharge. In that instance, he credibly 
testified that he knew he was wrong, that it should not have happened, and that he 
knew better based on a lifetime of training and experience with firearms.  
 
 It is also noteworthy that all of the allegations in this case (even those that are 
mitigated), involve Applicant’s interactions with women. Each time, Applicant asserted 
that the charges were brought by women who he believed had something against him 
(his second wife, as to SOR ¶ 1.a; his third wife’s daughter, as to SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, 
and several female service members, as to SOR ¶ 2.b) 
 
 Further, the credibility of Applicant’s denials of wrongdoing in 2014 must also be 
balanced against the weight of the independent evidence against him. As company X 
concluded, the weight of the evidence here falls against the Applicant, and makes it 
more likely than not that he committed the acts alleged. For AG ¶ 17(f) to apply, 
Applicant must establish that “the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability.” Here, given the thoroughness of company X’s investigation, the 
opposite is true. The company’s conclusions that Applicant likely did and said what he 
was accused of, are substantiated and highly reliable. AG ¶ 17(f) does not apply. 
 
 The fact remains that Applicant’s demonstrated attitude towards women, and his 
lack of acceptance of any responsibility for his actions towards them, or expressions of 
remorse, undercut any finding that he is rehabilitated, or that his actions are unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (d) do not apply to mitigate the security concerns established by 
Applicant’s actions and comments that led to his 2014 termination, as alleged in SOR ¶ 
2.b. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated.  
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
13 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.                                               
   
   
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
