1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-03370 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
     Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 19, 2016. On  
November 21, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. An amended SOR, dated December 28, 
2017, was also issued under Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 6, 2017, admitting all of the SOR 
allegations with explanations. Applicant answered the amended SOR on January 19, 
2018, denying the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.d and admitting the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.e. He 
attached several documents to this answer including: copies of seven checks each in 
01/17/2019
 
2 
 
 
the amount of $200 made out to the homeowner’s association creditor in SOR ¶ 1.d; a 
payment agreement with a state A department of revenue; a November 8, 2017, letter 
from a well-known financial counseling company with a 14-page-action plan.                      
Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on October 16, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for December 5, 2018. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
The Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through I, which were admitted without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received at 
DOHA on January 2, 2019.  
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He was married in 2003 and separated in 2014. His 
divorce became final in June 2017. (Tr. 73) Applicant and his ex-wife raised five 
children. The oldest three are adults, in the service or college. Applicant and his ex-wife 
share custody of the youngest two boys, ages 12 and 14. He obtained a bachelor’s 
degree in 2010, and reports no military service. (Tr. 53-54) Applicant has been 
employed by a federal contractor as a consultant since November 2011. Applicant’s ex-
wife did not work outside the home.  
 
 The SOR alleged a debt to the federal government for past-due [sales] taxes in 
the amount of $115,861 (SOR ¶1.a) and a debt to state A for past-due-income taxes in 
the amount of $10,486 (SOR ¶ 1.b). It also alleged a charged-off debt for a credit card 
in the amount of $62,147 (SOR ¶1.c). Applicant admitted all of the allegations in his 
Answer to the SOR. Applicant testified credibly that he initially had tax problems when 
he changed status from a W-2 to a 1099 employee in 2009-2010. (Tr. 58-60) He didn’t 
understand that he was supposed to estimate and pay quarterly taxes. He had a 
certified public accountant (CPA) prepare and file returns at the end of each tax year 
(TY). However, he could not afford to pay the taxes due. So, he entered into a payment 
plan and has paid all income taxes owed for TY 2009-2010, which are not alleged in the 
SOR.  
 
Applicant was working full time as a federal contractor in 2013. He decided to 
start a retail store to supplement his income. (Tr. 79) He provided the lease for Chatman 
Solutions, LLC, which required that he make payments of $5,500 over five years 
starting on November 1, 2013. (AE B) This was his first venture into retail. Almost 
immediately, a large Walmart store opened up across the street from his store, 
siphoning off business. (Tr. 58) Applicant struggled and didn’t even break even on the 
store. (Tr. 53-54) He slept on a couch in the back of the store as he separated from his 
wife in 2014. His ex-wife did not work, he had children in college, his store was failing, 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s April 19, 2016, 
security clearance application (SCA). 
 
 
3 
 
 
and now he was headed for a divorce proceeding. (Tr. 53) Applicant admitted he did not 
pay the required quarterly taxes on his LLC for TY 2012 to TY 2016.   
 
Applicant submitted answers to interrogatories on November 13, 2017, verifying 
an attached summary of his personal subject interview (PSI) conducted on June 12, 
2017. (GE 2) He attached a packet of documents including: payment coupons to state A 
for delinquent sales tax as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. These confirmed his testimony that the 
state-tax lien is in a repayment plan; (Tr. 97) IRS tax transcripts reflecting a total 
balance of overdue federal taxes owed by the Chatman Solutions, LLC, for TY 2012 – 
2016, of $115,047 as of October 2017; a payment plan for overdue income-taxes owed 
to state A in the amount of $10,486 with several tax lien expungements; and a portion of 
a divorce decree showing that [Applicant] husband was responsible for working out a 
payment plan with the IRS, and state A, for all tax debts. GE 8 reflects a series of 
intermittent payments of approximately $458 made between May 2014 and July 2017 to 
satisfy the state tax liens. Applicant provided a sheaf of documents showing a 
continuous stream of $200 payments to state A department of revenue from July 2012 
to November 2018. (AE F) The remaining balance owed to State A is $16,911.  
 
 Applicant testified and provided documents showing that he opened a credit 
card account in late 2012 to pay expenses for his retail store. (Tr. 81) He put in 
approximately $60,000 to $70,000 but the store always lost money. (Tr. 88) The credit 
card went into default in early 2014. (Tr. 88) GE 6 shows a judgment entered against 
Applicant in a county court in the amount of $68,772 owed to this creditor. Applicant 
entered a repayment agreement and demonstrated a series of $100 dollar check 
payments to the creditor or its collection agency from April 2016 to November 2018. (AE 
G)  
 
Applicant testified and produced documentation showing that the lien entered 
against him in the amount of $1,400 by a homeowner’s association (HOA) as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.d has been paid in full. (Tr. 96) This was owed for a vacant parcel of land for 
which Applicant has a mortgage loan, and he agreed to keep making the payments 
pursuant to the divorce decree.  
 
Applicant’s IRS tax transcripts and W-2’s were attached to his answers to 
interrogatories. (GE 2) They reveal his adjusted gross income (AGI) of $247,000 in TY 
2012; $158,000 in TY 2013; $143,000 in TY 2014; $160,000 in TY 2015; and $124,000 
in TY 2016. He testified that he filed federal and state income tax returns timely each 
year, but he could not afford to pay the taxes owed due to his alimony and child support 
payments, failing store, and divorce. (Tr. 66, 139) He admits to also making some bad 
decisions about money. (Tr. 120) He contemplated filing for bankruptcy protection, but 
considered that to be a cop out, and avoided it. (Tr. 145)  
 
Applicant testified about an earlier installment payment plan that he had with the 
IRS in 2013 for overdue taxes from TY 2011. He detrimentally relied on a CPA who led 
Applicant to believe this was in a non-collectible status. (Tr. 126-128) His repayment 
agreement with the IRS fell apart after 18 months when Applicant encountered financial 
 
4 
 
 
distress with his retail store, and became separated in 2014. (Tr. 122) On March 21, 
2018, Applicant entered into an Offer in Compromise with the IRS after providing all of 
his financial information to the IRS. (Tr. 106) The IRS used a formula to set the amount 
of the payment due and he settled for $8,000, conditional upon his timely filing and 
paying all taxes due for five years. (AE E, Tr. 113-117) An October 7, 2018, letter from 
the IRS to Applicant accepted his offer in compromise and included a copy of a check to 
IRS from Applicant for $6,575. This was the balance owed for TY 2012, according to 
IRS tax transcripts. (AE E) The tax transcripts reflect a zero balance owed for TYs 2013, 
2014, 2015, and a $15,185 balance for TY 2016. (AE E) Applicant testified credibly that 
all of his overdue federal taxes have now been paid off. (Tr. 117-118) 
 
Applicant provided evidence of financial counseling from his aunts and a well-
known company with an action plan to formulate a budget and payment plan. (AE D, Tr. 
145) He also provided 16 character reference letters, all attesting to his positive attitude, 
integrity, work ethic, trustworthiness and reliability. (AE A) Applicant had his pastor 
testify on his behalf at the hearing. (Tr. 37-42) He testified that Applicant is a family man 
and actively involved in his church and he was even elected recently to the vestry or 
leadership. Applicant volunteers his time in the community and he is well respected, 
trustworthy, and reliable. The pastor has no reservations about Applicant holding a 
security clearance.  
 
                                          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and 
a careful weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG, 
Appendix A, ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching 
this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
 
6 
 
 
           (f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual federal, state or local income tax as  
required.   
 
 Applicant’s past-due taxes and delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are 
confirmed by his credit reports, answer to the SOR, and documents submitted at the 
hearing. The Government produced substantial evidence to support the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a),19(c) and 19(f), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.2  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;    
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant endured a series of setbacks including a downturn in the economy, an 
expensive divorce, and a bad business investment. His ex-wife did not work and they 
had five children. He pays alimony and child support. These conditions were beyond his 
control. He has done everything possible to pay off delinquent debts and enter into 
repayment plans for his past-due taxes. He documented strict compliance with these 
repayment plans through a stream of continuous payments to the state taxing authority 
and satisfaction of his past-due federal tax debt. He has now produced relevant and 
responsive documentation, demonstrating that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant appropriately engaged a CPA to address his financial 
problems with his retail store. He also had independent financial counseling. All of his 
debts and past-due taxes alleged in the SOR, have been paid in full or they are in 
repayment plans. He has met his burden to show that his financial problems are under 
                                                          
2 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. The mitigating conditions enumerated above in AG ¶ 20 apply.  
 
    Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG, Appendix A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG, Appendix A, 
¶ 2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant is ambitious, hard-working, and 
extremely well respected in his church and community. He helped in raising five 
children. He has been gainfully employed for most of his adult life, often working two 
jobs. He recognizes and accepts that he made a bad business decision with the retail 
store. He has struggled to overcome his financial travails and pay off his past-due taxes. 
He was organized and well prepared for his hearing and demonstrated a continuous 
stream of payments to the state A taxing authority, and satisfaction of the IRS tax debt. 
Applicant testified credibly and persuasively that his finances are now under control. 
Applicant has addressed the specific allegations in the SOR and taken affirmative 
measures to resolve them.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer are a security concern. The record evidence 
leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
8 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:              For Applicant 
 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                 Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                Administrative Judge 
 
