 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case:  17-04355   
 )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 11, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of the Case 
 
 On May 10, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On January 26, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 2, 2018.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  (Item 2.)  On 
August 2, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 11 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant on August 3, 2018, and received by him on August 23, 2018.  The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  Applicant did not object to Items 1 through 11, 
and they are also admitted into evidence.  Hereinafter, they are referenced as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 11.   
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a 
Protective Security Officer.  He is seeking to retain a security clearance in connection 
with his employment.  Applicant began working for his current employer in September 
2015.   
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant has engaged in excessive alcohol 
consumption, which often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure 
to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this guideline.  
(Government Exhibit 4.)  He has a history of alcohol abuse that began in about 2001 at 
the age of 20, when he joined the Army.  His alcohol abuse has continued over the past 
fourteen years, until at least 2017.  He has been arrested for Driving While Intoxicated 
(DWI) on three occasions.  In 2001, Applicant was arrested in North Carolina and 
charged with Driving While Intoxicated.  Applicant was stopped at a DWI check point 
and found to be intoxicated with a blood alcohol content of .18%.  (Government Exhibit 
6.)  The charges were eventually dropped due to the fact that Applicant was serving in 
the military and had moved out of the state.  Applicant was arrested in January 2008 in 
Washington D.C., and was charged with Driving While Intoxicated and Speeding.  
Applicant was pulled over while driving for going 80 mph in a 35 mph zone.  Prior to 
driving, Applicant has been drinking at a bar.  Applicant was also found to be 
intoxicated. In July 2008, he was convicted of Driving While Intoxicated and placed on 
one years of supervised probation.  In 2009, while still on probation for his 2008 offense, 
Applicant was arrested in Virginia and charged with Driving While Intoxicated 2nd 
Offense within five years.  Applicant was pulled over on his way home from a party 
because he was driving 90 mph.  He refused a breathalyzer and was arrested and 
charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI), Reckless Driving, and Refusal.  
Applicant was convicted of DUI and Reckless Driving.  He was sentenced to 180 days 
in jail with 160 days suspended.  About this same time, he was also charged in 
Maryland with Violation of Probation from his 2008 DWI case and required to service 
approximately 20 days in jail in Maryland.  (Government Exhibits 8 and 10.)       
 
 Since 2009, Applicant has worked as a Security Guard.  In 2015, Applicant was 
terminated from his employment as a Security Guard for misconduct – being under the 
 
 
3 
 
 
influence of alcohol at work.  (Government Exhibit 9.)  Applicant admits that he blacked 
out and was delusional on the day in question, although he attributes his condition to 
high blood sugar.  Applicant was reported to his supervisor that Applicant was drunk at 
work.  The following day, Applicant returned to work and was asked to resign.  Applicant 
refused to resign because he claims that the allegations against him were false.  
Instead, he sought representation by a union representative.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
At the conclusion of the investigation, Applicant was terminated. 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant has engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations which can raise questions about his reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), dated May 10, 2016.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  Section 22, regarding police 
records, asked him if he had ever been convicted in any court of the United States of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year for that crime, and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than 1 year?  Had he ever been 
charged with any felony offense?  Had he ever been convicted of an offense involving 
domestic violence or a crime of violence against your child dependent, cohabitant, 
spouse, former spouse, or someone with whom he shares a child in common?  Had he 
ever been charged with an offense involving firearms or explosives?  Had he ever been 
charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs?  Applicant answered, “NO”.  This 
was a false answer. Applicant failed to Iist any of his arrests set forth in the SOR 
subparagraphs 1.b., 1.c., and 1.d., discussed above.    
 
 Section 13A of the same application, regarding employment activities, asked 
about his reason for leaving prior employment.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  Applicant 
wrote that he was terminated: accused of being inattentive on post.  This was also a 
false answer.  Applicant failed to list that he was terminated for being under the 
influence of alcohol at work.  In addition, the arrests discussed above also show poor 
personal conduct, poor judgment, and unreliability. 
 
 Applicant states that he failed to disclose his alcohol-related arrests in his 2016 
E-QIP because he misread the relevant question and thought he was only required to 
disclose incidents that occurred within seven years of the date of this e-QIP submission.  
(Government Exhibit 4.)  With regard to his employment termination, Applicant states 
that he thought the termination letter that he signed indicated that he was being 
terminated for being in attentive on duty.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  This argument holds 
no merit.  First, Applicant does not provide any documentation in support of this claim.  
Second, Applicant was well aware of his alleged intoxication at work by the fact that he 
challenged the claim against him and forced an investigation into the matter.  His 
argument is not credible.  Applicant clearly falsified information on his security clearance  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
application in May 2016, by failing to disclose any of his alcohol-related arrests and by 
providing a false reason for his employment termination in 2015.  
 
 
       Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
 
5 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The disqualifying conditions raised by the evidence are: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an 
intoxicated or impaired condition, drinking on the job, or jeopardizing the 
welfare and safety of others, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
  
 The evidence shows that Applicant’s three arrests, charges and convictions for 
Driving While intoxicated as well as his termination from employment show poor 
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness.  These incidents raise security concerns 
under AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(b), and 22(c).   
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern  of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear  and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; 
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment or relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations.  
  
 None of the mitigating conditions are applicable here.  Applicant failed to 
introduce sufficient evidence of rehabilitation.  Although his last alcohol-related arrest 
occurred in 2009, he was terminated from his employment for being intoxicated as 
recently as 2015.  Given the extensive nature of his drinking problem, more time without 
drinking is needed to show the Government that he will not return to his old habits.  ¶ 32 
does not provide full mitigation. 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for the personal conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or 
provide truthful and candid answers during national security investigative 
or adjudicative processes.   
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any      
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form   
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a while, supports a whole-person assessment of 
 
 
7 
 
 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information. 
  
 From the evidence provided, Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his arrest 
history and real reason he was terminated from his prior employment on his security 
clearance application.  The fact that he did not list these facts in response to questions 
on his on his security clearance application indicates behavior that shows questionable 
judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness.     
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  At this time, there is 
no strong evidence in the record to show that the Applicant is now sober or will remain 
sober for any sustained period.  He has failed to present sufficient evidence of 
rehabilitation to overcome his heavy burden to mitigate his history of alcohol abuse and 
personal conduct.  Overall, the record evidence raises doubts about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:               Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:               Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:               Against Applicant 
  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:                      Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:                      Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:                      Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
