1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-02617 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On January 16, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 5, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2018. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 12, 2018. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 6, 2018. The Government offered 
01/23/2019
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. Applicant objected to GE 2. The objection was sustained and 
it was not admitted. GE 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 were admitted into evidence. Applicant and 
two witnesses testified. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through P. There were no 
objections and all exhibits were admitted into evidence. The record was held open until 
November 20, 2018, to allow Applicant time to submit additional documents. He provided 
documents AE Q and R, which were admitted without objection, and the record closed.1 
DOHA received the hearing transcript on November 15, 2018.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 The Government withdrew SOR ¶ 1.b. There was no objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR in ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. He denied the 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.f, and 1.g. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1995. He was married 
from 2000 to 2014, and has three children, ages 16, 14, and 11 years old from the 
marriage. The children live with their mother. He pays $850 per month in child support.  
He remarried in 2015 and has two stepchildren. Applicant has been employed by federal 
contractors since 2001.2 
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are corroborated by Applicant’s admissions and 
credit reports from March 2016 and July 2017.3 
 
Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to his ex-wife who he said managed their 
finances and was responsible for paying their bills. They had agreed early in their 
marriage that she would handle the finances. He had always lived frugally and was raised 
in a fiscally responsible family. He first learned that she was not paying their bills in 2001 
or 2002. He testified he had been saving money to take a trip. When he went to withdraw 
the money, the account was empty. Applicant stated that this happened several times. 
Each time his wife told him she had used the money to pay bills. He admitted to being 
naive. He wanted to believe she was doing the right thing. He was unaware that her 
spending habits were escalating, and her purchases were for high-end and luxury items. 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the Government’s discovery letter. HE II is Applicant’s email submitting additional 
documents. HE III is Government Counsel’s email noting there were no objections to Applicant’s additional 
exhibits. Applicant’s attorney timely submitted additional documents that he marked as AE O and P. He 
previously submitted exhibits marked AE O and P. I have remarked the additional exhibits as AE Q and R.  
 
2 Tr. 32-36, 95; GE 1.  
 
3 GE 1, 3, 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
He stated he was never a shopper and did not notice her expensive choices. She used 
credit cards to purchase these items.4  
 
When Applicant and his wife divorced, as part of the marital distribution, he 
received the house and was responsible for the two mortgages (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-$49,696 and 
1.d). He was also responsible for the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($7,548). The house 
was foreclosed. In 2015, he received an IRS Form 1099-A, abandonment of secured 
property from the lender. He testified he filed the form with his federal income tax returns.5 
Applicant remained responsible for the second mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.a).6  
 
 In April 2016, Applicant’s ex-wife filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy to address the 
marital debts she was responsible for in the divorce decree. Included in her bankruptcy 
were the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.f and 1.g. Applicant testified that he never discussed 
including his debts in her bankruptcy. He is listed as the co-debtor for the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.g. Applicant provided a notarized letter from his ex-wife that she is 
current on her Chapter 13 bankruptcy payments. Applicant testified that he did not pursue 
resolving any of the debts that his ex-wife included in her bankruptcy. He assumed they 
would be resolved by the bankruptcy. They are being paid through the bankruptcy.7 
 
 Applicant admitted responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($9,726). He made 
payment arrangements in September 2013 and paid $35 until December 2017. He 
increased his payments to $100 in January 2018 and has made consistent payments.8 
This debt is being resolved. 
 
 Applicant testified that he has participated in financial counseling. He provided a 
detailed written budget. His wife is employed and he manages their finances. He has 
savings and investments. He provided copies of awards and character letters. He is 
described as outstanding, hardworking, responsible, valued, honest and trustworthy.9  
 
 A character witness testified that he has known Applicant for 11 months and 
considered him knowledgeable and experienced. He has never seen him act 
                                                          
4 Tr. 39-44; Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 AE O. 
 
6 Tr. 42-47, 53-61, 86-88; GE 5, 6. 
 
7 Tr. 43-94; GE 3, 4; AE A, L, M, N, Q. Although the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f are being paid through 
Applicant’s ex-wife’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy, Applicant, as the joint owner and co-debtor may still be liable 
for the debts once his ex-wife’s bankruptcy is discharged. Applicant is also listed in the bankruptcy as co-
debtor for SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.g. 
 
8 Tr. 49-50, 61-67; AE K, R. 
 
9 Tr. 51-52, 73-81; AE E, G, H, I, J.  
 
 
4 
 
 
untrustworthy. A second witness testified that he has known Applicant for a year. He 
considers him very reliable and honest.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
                                                          
10 Tr. 22-32. 
 
5 
 
 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he failed to pay or resolve for several years. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
 
6 
 
 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant and his first wife divorced in 2014. He testified that she mismanaged 
their finances and failed to pay their creditors. Their divorce decree divided their 
delinquent debts. She was not held solely responsible for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.f. However, in order to resolve her debts she filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy and included 
all of the delinquent debts in the SOR, except SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant is making payments 
on this debt. His ex-wife is making the Chapter 13 payments. At this juncture, Applicant 
provided evidence that his current finances are stable. AG ¶ 20(a) has some application. 
 
 Applicant testified that his financial problems were the result of his ex-wife’s 
mismanagement. This was somewhat beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 
20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly. Applicant was aware as early as 2001 and 
at other times throughout his marriage that his wife was mismanaging their finances. 
However, he continued to let her handle the finances and did not provide oversight. He 
was aware of the problem when he attempted to use money from his savings and 
discovered she had depleted it. He did not act responsibly under the circumstances. AG 
¶ 20(b) has minimal application.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling and there are clear indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved and under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant’s 
ex-wife included the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f in her bankruptcy, both of which 
Applicant remains potentially responsible. Applicant’s ex-wife is making the Chapter 13 
payments. Applicant has a payment plan for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e and is making 
consistent payments. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the SOR debts.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. During his first marriage he and his wife accumulated 
numerous delinquent debts. Applicant was aware she was mismanaging their finances, 
but trusted her to resolve the problem. They eventually divorced and their debts were 
divided, holding each accountable for certain ones. His ex-wife filed Chapter 13 
bankruptcy and all of the debts in the SOR, except ¶ 1.e, are being paid through the 
bankruptcy. Applicant may become legally liable at some point. He is making payments 
on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. Currently, Applicant’s finances are stable. He has met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.g:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
