KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant does not explain why she answered “No” to the question asking whether she
had any property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed in the last seven years when her
vehicle was voluntarily repossessed less than three years earlier.  Second, she is again arguing
facts not in evidence, which we cannot consider and do not establish that the Judge erred in her
decision.  From our review of the record, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant intentionally
falsified her SCA is supported by substantial record evidence. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-03638.a1
DATE: 01/02/2019
DATE: January 2, 2019
In Re:
----------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-03638
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 8,  2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On October 1, 2018, after the hearing, Administrative
Judge Nichole L. Noel denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal:  whether the Judge erred in her findings and
conclusions and whether Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant has been working for a Federal contractor since mid-2017.  She has previously
held a security clearance.  In completing a security clearance application (SCA) in May 2017, she
did not disclose any derogatory financial information.  An ensuing investigation revealed she filed
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2005 and had a number of delinquent accounts, including owing over
$7,000 on a vehicle that was repossessed in 2014.   
In about 1999, Applicant’s husband was diagnosed with a serious illness that resulted in
significant medical expenses.  Shortly after returning to work, he lost his job, which resulted in a
significant decrease in the household income.   They received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in
2005.   For approximately six months after the bankruptcy discharge, they remained financially
stable until he again lost his job.  Both of them have sporadic work histories.  “Between 2004 and
2017, Applicant has held 11 jobs and experienced 6 periods of unemployment, the longest of which
lasted from May 2004 to March 2008.”  Decision at 2.  Applicant made payments towards two of
the alleged debts.  After her background interview, she contacted three other creditors to establish
payment plans for debts.  She did not know how to contact the lender of the repossessed vehicle
when the loan servicer went out of business.  She did not make payment arrangements for medical
debts when she learned those debts were charged off.  
Applicant interpreted the financial questions on her SCA as seeking information about liens
against property.  “Because she does not own any property, she did not believe the questions applied
to her situation and skipped the next set of questions regarding delinquencies involving routine
accounts, which sought information about automobile repossessions and collection accounts.  At the
hearing, Applicant testified that she did not intend to falsify her security clearance application.” 
Decision at 3.  
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant receives partial mitigation credit because circumstances beyond her control caused
her financial problems.  However those problems are ongoing and she does not have the means to
address them at this time.  
2
Applicant failed to disclose information in her SCA about any of her delinquent debts,
including a repossessed vehicle.  She claims that the omissions were due to her misunderstanding
the question.  She has completed an SCA in the past and the language of the question is clear on its
face.  The record supports a finding that she intentionally falsified her SCA.  
Discussion
Applicant’s brief includes character reference letters that are not contained in the record.  We
cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Applicant rightly challenges some of the Judge’s findings and conclusions.  First, she 
contends the Judge erred in finding she was unemployed from May 2004 to December 2008.  Her
SCA employment history reflects that she was employed during that period.1  Next, Applicant
highlights a problem with the falsification allegation that asserted she falsified her SCA by
answering “No” to pertinent financial record questions, “whereas, in fact, [she] knew of some or all
of the debts listed in Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.m” under Guideline F.  (SOR ¶ 2.a).  Applicant
correctly points out that one of those Guideline F allegations (SOR ¶ 1.a) pertained to her 2005
Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which was outside of the SCA’s seven-year reporting requirement for
bankruptcies.  Consequently, the bankruptcy allegation should not have been incorporated into the
falsification allegation.  Although the Judge erred in finding that Applicant was unemployed
between 2004 and 2009 and erred by failing to note that Applicant did not falsify her SCA when she
did not disclose the bankruptcy, we conclude those errors were harmless because they did not likely
affect the outcome of the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-15184 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2013). 
The Judge’s other findings and conclusions were sufficient to support the unfavorable clearance
decision.  
Applicant also challenges the Judge’s conclusions in the Analysis section that Applicant is
a prior clearance holder, has completed a SCA in the past, and should have known the importance
of providing full and complete answers to the SCA questions.  Applicant argues the Judge erred
because she did not disclose her financial problems in the prior SCA, was also confused when she
filled out her prior SCA, and later discussed her financial problems during the prior background
interview.  We do not find merit in Applicant’s argument.  Applicant’s prior SCA and background
interview are not part of the record of this proceeding.  She is arguing facts not in evidence, which
we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  On the other hand, the Judge’s conclusions in question
are based on substantial record evidence (i.e., Applicant’s more recent SCA (Government Exhibit
1) in which she disclosed that she previously held a security clearance and had her background
investigated) or constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).   
1 At the hearing, the Judge specifically asked Applicant whether her longest period of employment was from
May 2004 to March 2008, and Applicant responded in the affirmative.  Tr. at 21-22.  The Judge’s error regarding
Applicant’s employment history appears to be an oversight in drafting the decision.  
3
Applicant further argues that she did not intentionally falsify her SCA.  However, her
argument is not fully consistent with her hearing testimony and is not persuasive.  As the Judge
found, Applicant testified at the hearing that she misunderstood the SCA question regarding liens. 
Specifically, Applicant testified that she did not have any liens and “if I would have understood
the question more I would have listed all my debts in there.  But I didn’t understand, I thought
it meant for a house and I rented so I didn’t have a lien against my house.”2  [Emphasis Added.] Tr.
at 30 and 35.  Based on that testimony, the Judge inferred that Applicant skipped the remaining
questions regarding other financial delinquencies.   On appeal, Applicant raises for the first time that
she had a problem with the computer program and was not given the option to answer the remaining
financial delinquency questions.  In her brief, she states:
After I answered the question that I marked no that I didn’t have any possessions or
property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed it didn’t give the option of the other
questions that were listed as soon as I marked “no” it went on to the next set of
questions and I don’t remember making “no” for the 120 days delinquent for any
debt.3    
First, Applicant does not explain why she answered “No” to the question asking whether she had
any property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed in the last seven years when her vehicle was
voluntarily repossessed less than three years earlier.  Second, she is again arguing facts not in
evidence, which we cannot consider and do not establish that the Judge erred in her decision.  From
our review of the record, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant intentionally falsified her SCA is
supported by substantial record evidence.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3.4    
The remainder of Applicant’s arguments amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence.  Those arguments are not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-
00650 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 27, 2016). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
2 In Section 26 of the SCA, the question involving liens falls under a category of questions entitled
“Delinquency Involving Enforcement,” while the questions involving repossessions, defaults on loan, collection
accounts, charged-off debts, debts over 120 days delinquent, etc. fall under a category of questions entitled
“Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts.”  GE 1.  
3 Appeal Brief at 1.  Applicant does not explain why she did not seek assistance if she encountered a problem
with the SCA computer program, why she did not make an appropriate notation in the Additional Comments about the
computer glitch or her debts, or why she certified the incomplete SCA as being “true, complete, and correct to the best
of [her] knowledge and belief .”  GE 1.  
4 The Judge did not make a specific finding regarding Applicant’s credibility.  However, implicit in her findings
is a determination that she did not believe Applicant’s testimony.  The Directive provides that we must give deference
to a Judge’s credibility determination.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  
4
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App A ¶ 2(b):  “Any
doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in
favor of the national security.”
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed, James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
