1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-03642 
) 
In the matter of: 
 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 29, 2016. On 
January 12, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1
The case was assigned to me on April 25, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 12, 2018, scheduling the hearing 
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines were 
(AG) were revised effective on June 8, 2017, and apply herein. 
01/10/2019
 
2 
 
for July 11, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A and B were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted AE C, consisting of a statement, 
state tax returns, and budget documentation, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 24, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old munitions inspector and logistics technician, employed 
by a defense contractor since 2016. He was unemployed from 2006 to 2007, and from 
January 2010 to January 2011. He graduated from high school in 1979 and attended 
some college. He married in 2011 and separated in 2012. He has three adult children. He 
served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 1979 to 1999, and retired. He has not held a 
security clearance since retiring from the Army.  
 
The SOR alleges 17 allegations under Guideline F, including failure to file Federal 
tax returns from 2012 to 2015; Federal tax debts for tax years 2012, 2015, and 2016; and 
other delinquent debts totaling approximately $21,000. Applicant admitted all of the 
allegations, except he denied two medical debts and a telephone collection account. 
During the hearing, Applicant also admitted to failing to file state tax returns from 2012 to 
2015 that were not alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s credit reports show the SOR debts 
were incurred between 2012 and 2016. 
 
Applicant explained that he did not file tax returns as required, because he believed 
he did not earn enough to require him to file and did not believe he owed any taxes. In 
response to Government inquiries, he filed all Federal tax returns by July 2017. After 
receiving refunds for some years, he owed about $3,500. In October 2017, he arranged 
an IRS payment schedule beginning February 2018. He pays $98 per month that is 
automatically deducted from his bank account, and will continue for 35 months. He has 
made consistent payments as required, and his balance as of July 2018 was $1,842. He 
also filed all delinquent state tax returns, and received a net refund. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e is a $7,595 debt for a loan on a vehicle transferred to another person 
who did not make payments as required. Applicant contacted the lender and negotiated 
a settlement that was paid in full in February 2017. This debt is resolved and does not 
appear on his most recent credit report. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a charged-off credit-card debt in the amount of $2,818. Applicant 
contacted the creditor in October 2017 and was offered a lump-sum settlement, however 
he was unable to pay the full amount. He intends to make monthly payments to resolve 
the debt once his other debts have been resolved and he has the available funds. As of 
now, this debt remains unresolved and is the only debt remaining on his most recent 
credit report. 
 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g is a collection agency account for a phone carrier that Applicant 
disputed. He contacted the agency in November 2017 and was told that no account 
existed. This allegation is resolved and it does not appear on his most recent credit report. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i are collection accounts from cable television providers. 
Applicant spoke with one agency in March 2018 and agreed to make a payment on July 
15, 2018, however he disputed the debt. When he called again to make the payment, he 
was told there was no record of the account. (SOR ¶ 1.h)  Applicant attempted to contact 
the collection agency holding the other debt, but received no answer on the phone after 
repeated attempts in November 2017, and in January and February 2018. He believes 
the company is now out of business. (SOR ¶ 1.i)  These debts are disputed and resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j and 1.m are medical debts that Applicant denied and disputed with the 
credit reporting agencies. He only uses military treatment facilities and veterans hospitals 
for medical care and did not incur any additional charges. There is insufficient evidence 
showing the origin of these debts, and one is disputed on Applicant’s most recent credit 
report, while the other has been removed. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k is a $290 debt related to a defective apartment cooling unit that was 
alleged in a lawsuit. The debt was paid and the complaint was dismissed in 2017. The 
debt is resolved and does not appear on his most current credit reports. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l is a small collection account for a utility provider. Applicant paid the debt 
in full in January 2018. It is resolved and does not appear on his most current credit 
reports. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.n is a collection account for a utility provider. Applicant contacted the 
agency and was told there is no record of the account. He was advised to contact the 
credit bureaus to have the account removed. This debt is resolved and does not appear 
on his most recent credit reports. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.o is an older collection account that is no longer active. Applicant also 
contacted the original creditor, a phone service provider, but they have no record of the 
account, and it does not appear on his most current credit reports. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q are merged accounts with one collection agency. The 
collection agency did not accept payment over the phone, so Applicant drove to another 
city to pay the debts in person. They were paid in full in February 2018 and are resolved 
and do not appear on his most current credit reports. 
 
Applicant has spent the past three years resolving his delinquent debts, and pays 
all new obligations when due. He earns about $39,000 per year, and has a military 
retirement and VA disability income of about $20,000 per year. He attended financial 
counseling classes and submitted a comprehensive budget as a result. All tax returns 
have been filed and he is current on his tax payment plan. At the hearing, Applicant was 
credible and contrite, and he showed a renewed understanding of his financial obligations 
 
4 
 
and understands the importance of paying debts when due, and filing tax returns when 
required. As a result of his financial counseling, he now ensures he lives within his means 
and controls his spending. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
 
5 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record supporting the 
SOR allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
 
6 
 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s tax delinquencies and other debts have been a recurring problem that 
began to be addressed in 2016 when Applicant started his current employment. Through 
periods of unemployment and separation from his spouse, he fell behind on debts. He 
also failed to file tax returns when due, under the mistaken belief that he did not earn 
enough money to require filing tax returns or that he did not owe any taxes. He was wrong. 
Upon notice of the incomplete filings, he filed all returns and made arrangements to repay 
any taxes owed. He received a net refund for state taxes. Applicant diligently contacted 
creditors and collection agencies to resolve his delinquent debts, and made substantial 
efforts toward their resolution. He has since attended financial counseling and has a 
comprehensive budget. He showed a renewed understanding of his financial obligations, 
including tax-filing requirements. 
 
Overall, I find that Applicant has substantially addressed his financial and tax 
obligations, and has shown several years of financial responsibility. He has adequately 
addressed the SOR allegations and resolved most of the accounts. I find that his financial 
status is under control based on his diligence in addressing his debts, recent financial 
education, and his testimony at the hearing. I do not believe that similar problems are 
likely to recur. Mitigating conditions AG ¶ 20 (a) – (e), and (g) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
 
7 
 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d).2 Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s Federal 
and state tax delinquencies no longer remain a concern. His other debts have been 
substantially resolved through diligent efforts within his means. He has a renewed 
understanding of how to plan for financial responsibilities and has shown that he pays his 
current financial obligations when due. 
 
Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.q:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
                                                     
2 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to 
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age 
and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence 
or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
