1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 17-02785 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Troy Nussbaum, Esq.   
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for 
access to classified information. Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concern about his sexual behavior and his personal conduct. Accordingly, this 
case is decided for Applicant.  
Statement of the Case 
On March 14, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for a position with a 
defense contractor. On September 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging that his circumstances raised security concerns under the sexual behavior 
guideline and the personal conduct guideline. Applicant answered the SOR on October 
27, 2017, and requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for access to classified 
information.1 
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
01/30/2019
2 
 
  
 On July 19, 2018, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant testified and called three character witnesses to testify on his behalf. Applicant 
offered three exhibits, Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without 
objection. The exhibits offered by the Government were admitted without objection. 
(Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 3.) Applicant’s Answer to the SOR attached seven 
documents, which I have marked as Answer Exhibits (Answer Ex) A through G. Six of 
those are character reference letters. Answer Ex B through G. The transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) was received on July 27, 2018.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 59 years old, a college graduate, who has a professional engineering 
degree and is a certified project management professional. He is married (since 1994) 
and has a son age 13.3 
 
Applicant started his own mechanical contracting company in 1993. He now owns 
four separate companies, one of which is a secured facility, for which Applicant is a key 
management person. His companies provide engineering, consulting, and project 
management services for construction projects, particularly specializing in the 
construction of computer rooms. Over the years, Applicant’s companies have worked for 
numerous federal government agencies. On those projects, his companies have received 
a number of “exceptional” ratings, and always “very good” or higher.4   
 
Under Guideline D, the SOR alleges that Applicant engaged in prostitution from 
about the early 1990s through at least 2014. Applicant admitted that allegation, with 
explanations.5 Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that during an October 31, 2014 
polygraph examination, Applicant deliberately omitted that he had an extramarital affair 
with a female co-worker in 2007. The SOR also alleges that in his March 14, 2017 security 
clearance application, in explaining his clearance revocation by the Another Government 
Agency (AGA) in April 2016, he disclosed his activity with prostitution in foreign countries 
where such conduct was legal but deliberately omitted his conduct in one of the United 
                                                          
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here.    
 
2 Applicant’s counsel originally objected to GE 3, a report of three polygraphs of Applicant administered by 
the National Security Agency. Tr. 10. Counsel for Applicant later withdrew his objection, and GE 3 was 
admitted into evidence. Tr. 67-68.   
 
3 GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 32.  
 
4 Tr. 33-37.  
 
5 SOR ¶ 1.a; Answer, pp. 1-3. The SOR’s diction is inaccurate. Applicant did not “engage in prostitution.” 
Rather, he solicited or paid for sexual services offered by women. The women are the ones who “engaged 
in prostitution.” Nevertheless, in this Decision, the use of the phrases “engage in prostitution” or “engaged 
in prostitution” refers to Applicant’s conduct that is the subject of SOR ¶ 1.a.  
  
3 
 
States in which prostitution was illegal. Applicant denied that his omissions were 
deliberate.6  
 
Applicant testified about the frequency with which he engaged the services of 
prostitutes in the past. He testified about those instances when he was in foreign countries 
where he believed prostitution to be legal: once in 1998, between 2000 and 2010 (never), 
from 2011 to 2014 about 11 times. He identified one instance in 2010 or 2011 when he 
hired a prostitute in the United States. Applicant knew that was illegal but he called it a 
“lapse in judgment” and did not consider it a “major crime.” The last time he hired a 
prostitute was in August 2014. The occasions were social trips or conferences with 
business associates.7 
 
Applicant testified that his engagements with prostitutes in those countries where 
prostitution was legal, was not unsafe, was discreet, personal, and anonymous; he never 
carried his work or personal identification cards. He had only minimal concerns about to 
whom those prostitutes might be connected.8 
 
  In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant discussed a medical condition that his wife 
has had since he first met her, that is, a life-long glandular disorder that requires daily 
medications. One of the side effects is that his wife has no sex drive, and their sexual 
relations have been limited to once every two or three years. She is very loving and caring 
but has no interest in sex. Applicant and his wife have tried to resolve the issue with 
counseling, but the results have been limited and short-lived.9 
 
 Applicant elaborated on that issue in his testimony. His wife’s medical condition 
creates a problem with her sex drive. There is much intimacy between them but no sex. 
The longest lapse of sex with his wife has been about three years. In about 2010, his 
wife’s condition worsened, and her doctors tried to adjust her medications. That was 
unsuccessful, and surgery was required. At the time, Applicant and his wife were in joint 
and individual counseling. They continued that until 2011, when Applicant was assigned 
to a project in another state. He was unable to keep their counseling appointments. Since 
the SOR, he and his wife have been attending counseling. Applicant believes their 
                                                          
6 SOR ¶¶ 2.a -2.b; Answer, pp. 3-4. The AGA administered three polygraphs to Applicant, in October 2014, 
March 2015, and April 2015. Those polygraphs revealed that sometime in the 1990s and from 2000 (or 
2001) until 2014, Applicant hired prostitutes in foreign countries where he believed prostitution was legal, 
except for one occasion when he hired a prostitute in one state in America where it was illegal. As a result, 
Applicant’s Sensitive Compartmented Information clearance was revoked effective July 28, 2016. GE 3. 
Except for pointing out that prostitution was illegal in that one American state, the Government has not 
contended that prostitution was illegal in the foreign countries where Applicant engaged prostitutes.  
 
7 Tr. 38-40, 71-72. 
 
8 Tr. 75-76, 79, 93. Applicant’s wife does not know about today’s hearing. Tr. 83.  
  
9 Answer, p. 2.  
 
4 
 
relationship is now very strong, as strong as it has ever been. The counseling has had a 
positive effect, and they plan to continue it indefinitely.10  
 
Applicant testified that he has never told his wife about his history of using 
prostitutes, because it would hurt her feelings. Applicant is not sure his wife would leave 
him, but he could not be blackmailed. Applicant has not told his son, because he is 13 
and would not understand. Applicant has not told his parents or his three siblings, but he 
is not be afraid to do so. He said they would probably be surprised, but it would not 
jeopardize his relationships with them. Applicant would not be afraid to inform anyone if 
“push came to shove.” There are probably eight to ten friends and professional 
associates, including his FSO, whom he has told about his history of using prostitutes. 
Applicant expressed remorse, because it was “selfish and senseless.” Applicant testified 
that he will never engage in prostitution again.11 
 
Applicant addressed the SOR allegation that during his October 31, 2014 
polygraph he deliberately omitted that he had an extramarital affair with a female co-
worker in 2007. He testified that the affair was in 2007 to 2008, lasted about six months, 
and that his wife found out about the affair in that time frame. As a result, Applicant and 
his wife underwent joint and individual counseling. Since his wife knows about the affair, 
Applicant contends that he could not be blackmailed.12 Applicant also explained that he 
did not disclose this affair, because the focus of the October 31, 2014 polygraph was on 
his activities with prostitutes. He was trying to make sure he listed all the instances of 
prostitution. In the post-test interview after his March 3, 2015 polygraph, it appears that 
Applicant volunteered the information about his affair and the reasons he did not disclose 
it during the October 2014 polygraph. Applicant testified that he was never asked directly 
or indirectly about any affairs in that first polygraph. He denies that he deliberately omitted 
the information about his one affair.13 
 
Applicant addressed the SOR allegation that on his March 14, 2017 security 
clearance application he deliberately omitted that he engaged in prostitution in a state 
where it was illegal. The SOR selectively quotes Applicant’s response to Section 25-
Investigations and Clearance Record. A more complete response is as follows:  
 
In 2014 I applied for a TS-SCI with full scope polygraph. During my 
initial polygraph I disclosed my activity with prostitution on several 
occasions in foreign locations where the activity was not a criminal offense. 
I learned at that time that the US Government treats all prostitution as a 
serious crime (emphasis added).  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. 44-47, 81-83.  
 
11 Tr. 47-51, 96.  
 
12 Tr. 49, 52-53, 84, 89, 93-95. 
  
13 Tr. 56, 58-59; GE 3; Answer, p. 3.  
 
5 
 
The italicized portion was not quoted in the SOR. In the October 31, 2014 
polygraph, Applicant expressly listed his engagement of a prostitute in a state in America 
where he knew it was illegal. Applicant testified that having made that disclosure to AGA 
in 2014, he believed that the disclosure was part of his clearance record. He claimed that 
he did not intentionally omit that information.14 
 
Applicant submitted a January 11, 2018 Summary Report of Psychological 
Evaluation by a licensed psychologist. The psychologist has been licensed to practice 
since 1985 and has his doctorate in Clinical Psychology from a prestigious university. The 
dates of the evaluation were in October and November 2017 and in January 2018. The 
conclusions were that Applicant is a “fundamentally sound individual who appears to be 
free from any major psychological diagnosis or difficulties.” It found further that: “His 
testing indicates that he does not have any major psychological problems and that he 
does not warrant a psychological diagnosis.” The report concludes: “There is no indication 
that this illicit behavior will reoccur, and he appears to be fully capable of holding a position 
of trust as he has successfully done for many years prior.”15 
 
Applicant called three character witnesses. Each witness had known Applicant 
professionally and personally for ten years or more. They were aware of the SOR’s 
allegations. Each witness attested to Applicant’s reliability, honesty, and 
trustworthiness.16 Three other individuals who did not testify submitted character 
reference letters which also praised those qualities.17  
   
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
                                                          
14 Tr. 58-62.  
 
15 AE B.  
 
16 Tr. 23-30, 102-04, 110-13. Those witnesses also submitted character reference letters. Answer Ex C, D, 
and F. 
 
17 Answer Ex B, E, and G.  
6 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 The SOR alleges that from about the early 1990s through at least 2014 Applicant 
engaged in prostitution (SOR ¶ 1.a). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG 12:  
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of judgment 
or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, may raise 
questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Sexual behavior 
includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, electronic, or 
written transmission. . . .   
 
The following potentially disqualifying conditions are relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 13(a): sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the 
individual has been prosecuted;  
 
AG ¶ 13(b): a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high-risk sexual 
behavior that the individual is unable to stop;  
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 13(c): sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and 
 
AG ¶ 13(d): sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of 
discretion or judgment. 
 
 By his own estimates, Applicant has used prostitutes 13 times since 1998. On one 
occasion he hired a prostitute in a state where doing so was illegal. AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c), 
and 13(d) are established.   
 
 AG ¶ 13(b) is not fully established. Applicant engaged in high-risk sexual behavior  
over the span of 16 years. But after his first episode in 1998, he did not engage in 
prostitution until 2010. Moreover, the psychologist’s report and Applicant’s abstinence 
since August 2014 tend to negate the element of this disqualifying condition that he is 
unable to stop his behavior. The next inquiry is whether any mitigating conditions apply.  
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 14(b): the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 14(c): the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
AG ¶ 14(e): the individual has successfully completed an appropriate 
program of treatment, or is currently enrolled in one, has demonstrated 
ongoing and consistent compliance with the treatment plan, and/or has 
received a favorable prognosis from a qualified mental health professional 
indicating the behavior is readily controllable with treatment. 
 
 Applicant last engaged in prostitution in August 2014, more than four years ago. It 
appears that Applicant has informed his closest personal and professional friends of his 
history of using prostitutes. He has told them of his intention never to engage prostitutes 
again. Applicant’s psychologist is convinced that this conduct will not recur. Applicant 
testified credibly that he would not be blackmailed if his parents or siblings learned of that 
history. Applicant testified plausibly about why he believed it was unnecessary to disclose 
his history to his spouse or son. Applicant also testified credibly about his remorse for his 
past conduct and that he and his spouse are committed to continue marital counseling 
indefinitely. I find that AG ¶¶14(b), (c), and (e) apply.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct  
 
In assessing an allegation of deliberate falsification, I consider not only the 
allegation and Applicant’s answer but all relevant circumstances. Under Guideline E for 
personal conduct, the concern is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.”18 A statement is false or dishonest when it is made deliberately 
(knowingly and willfully). An omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate 
if, for example, the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, 
misunderstood the question, reasonably did not know the information, or genuinely 
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 
The SOR alleged that during his October 31, 2014 polygraph examination 
Applicant deliberately omitted that he had an extramarital affair with a female co-worker 
in 2007. Applicant denied that allegation. Applicant testified credibly that during that 
polygraph he was never asked directly or indirectly about any affairs. He also testified 
that the focus of the questioning was his history of hiring prostitutes, about which he was 
trying to give as complete a response as possible. I find that Applicant reasonably 
believed that he need not disclose that affair.  
 
The SOR also alleged that on his March 14, 2017 security questionnaire he 
deliberately omitted that he hired a prostitute in a state where that was illegal. Applicant 
denied that allegation. Applicant testified credibly that he disclosed that incident during 
his October 31, 2014 polygraph and believed it did not need to be disclosed in that 
questionnaire because it was already part of his clearance record. I find that Applicant 
reasonably believed that he need not disclose that incident again.  
 
 The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching 
this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable 
evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due 
consideration to the whole-person concept.19 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met 
his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                                                          
18 AG ¶ 15.   
 
19 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9). Applicant’s character witnesses and character reference letters were given positive 
weight.  
9 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraph 1.a:            For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)      For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 2.a-b:                      For Applicant   
   
  Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
 
  
____________________ 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
