       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------         )    ISCR Case No. 17-02680
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David Hayes,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq.
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated security concerns regarding his alcohol consumption and personal conduct.
Eligibility for access classified information is granted.
History of the Case
On August 15, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec.
Or.)10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and Security Executive
Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4). 
01/16/2019
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 7, 2017, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on March 20, 2018. The Government’s case
consisted of five exhibits that were admitted without objection (GEs 1-5). Applicant
relied on one witness (himself) and 21 exhibits that were admitted without objection
(AEs A-U). The transcript of the proceedings (Tr.) was received on June 14,  2018.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline  G, Applicant allegedly was arrested and charged with multiple
alcohol-related offenses between August 1984 and January 2016. Alleged offenses are
as follows: (a) Driving Under the Influence (DUI) and possession of marijuana in
January 2016; (b) open container in April 2015; (c)  DUI in March 2005; and (d) DUI in
August 1984.
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) received an administrative separation
from the Army in May 2005 for misconduct and testing positive for cocaine in November
2004, for which he was awarded non-judicial punishment (NJP) for both this offense
and his March 2005 alcohol-related offense.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the alcohol-related
allegations with explanations. He claimed the state of the offense covered by
allegations covered by SOR ¶ 1.a was mistaken. He claimed the charges covered by
SOR ¶ 1.b were reduced to an open container citation that produced a fine of $96 with
all other charges dismissed. He further claimed to have voluntarily enrolled in an
alcohol outpatient program as the result of his April 2015 open container offense and
continues to live a very healthy and regimented life. Applicant claimed also to have
addressed mental health issues with Veterans Affairs (VA) personnel. 
Addressing the remaining allegations covered by Guideline G, Applicant claimed
to have paid the $200 fine associated with the citation issued in connection with the
alleged April 2015 open container incident. He claimed responsibility for poor judgment
in connection with his March 2005 DUI offense and satisfied all of the court-imposed
requirements in connection with his conviction, inclusive of AA meetings, community
service, and fines. And, he claimed he paid the ordered fine and completed the ordered
drivers course program in satisfaction of the court’s requirements in connection with his
August 1984 DUI offense.
Responding in detail to the allegations covered by Guideline E, Applicant
provided detailed explanations of the circumstances associated with his May 2005
administrative separation from the Army. He claimed responsibility for his 2005 DUI
incident, and for his award of NJP and his ensuing administrative separation from the
Army.
Finally, Applicant offered regrets for his past actions and claimed credit for his
ongoing efforts to limit his alcohol consumption to infrequent drinking. Applicant claimed
he has been administered numerous urinalyses with negative results. He claimed he 
has enjoyed good success with his work and has been actively committed to
2
warehousing and logistics work for over 25 years. Applicant adopted his SOR response
as part of his testimony.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 53-year-old logistics analyst for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                               
Applicant married in February 1988 and divorced in September 1999. (GEs 1-2;
Tr. 30) He has no children from this marriage, but he has a nephew that he has
mentored since childhood, who recently earned his bachelor’s degree and is pursuing a
Ph.D. (AE G; Tr. 74-75) Applicant earned an associate’s degree with honors in July
2008 and a bachelors degree in human resources with honors in December 2013. (AEs
M-N; Tr. 49-50) 
Applicant enlisted in the Army in October 1992 and served 12 years of active
duty (including two tours of duty in Iraq). He received a general discharge under
honorable conditions in May 2005 for cited misconduct attributable to a positive drug
test for cocaine in November 2004. (GEs 1-2 and AEs G and K; Tr.  33, 52-53) Like his
father before him, Applicant enjoyed his military service. (Tr. 53-55)
Since October 2015, Applicant has been employed by his current contractor.
(GEs 1-2 and AE K) Applicant’s responsibilities involve managing and tracking
Government-furnished equipment. (AE K) He reported brief unemployment between
September 2015 and October 2015 and prior employment with federal contractors, 
interspersed with periods of unemployment. (GEs 1-2 and AE K)  Applicant has held a
security clearance since April 2007 and currently retains one. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 37, 85) 
Alcohol-history
Between August 1984 and January 2016, Applicant was involved in four alcohol-
related incidents. His most recent incident occurred in January 2016. (GEs 1-3 and AE
A; Tr. 40, 65) He was arrested by city police for DU), first offense, after refusing a
breathalyzer test at the scene. (Tr. 65-66) Possession of marijuana and open container
were added charges. Applicant had consumed quite a bit of alcohol the previous night
before his arrest. He could not provide any information on the source of the marijuana
and open container found in his truck. (GE 2) In court, he initially pled not guilty to all
charges. (AE D) in his March 2016 court appearance, he entered a guilty plea to the
open container charges and was fined $250. (GEs 2-3 and AE B and D; Tr. 40, 66) The
remaining charges of DUI and marijuana possession were dropped. (GE 2) Applicant
promptly reported his January 2016 incident to his employer. (GE 5; Tr. 39-40)
Records confirm that Applicant was cited in April 2015 for open container while
riding as a passenger in a vehicle driven by an unidentified individual. (GEs 2-3 and AE
3
D; Tr. 41-42) Applicant was issued a citation for open container after officers on the
scene found an open beer in the vehicle. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 63) Applicant was subsequently
convicted and fined for the misdemeanor offense, which he paid. (GEs 2-3 and AE D;
Tr. 42)  No evidence of drinking was produced at the scene.
Years prior to his April 2015 alcohol-related incident, Applicant was involved in
two other alcohol-related incidents. (GEs 2-3 and AE D) In March 2005, he was
arrested and convicted of DUI. (GEs 2-3 and AE E; Tr. 44) He was fined $1,153 and
was ordered to complete 80 hours of community service and participate in an Army
substance abuse program. Applicant was also placed on probation for six months. (GEs
12 and AE C; Tr. 61-62) Applicant complied with the court’s orders and attended
voluntary alcohol counseling sessions. (GE 2 and AE E; Tr. 44-45). 
Worthy of note, Applicant’s counselors made no diagnostic finding of alcohol
dependence. (AE E; Tr. 58)  And in August 1984, Applicant was arrested for DUI after
being stopped by police for speeding. Appearing in court, Applicant pled guilty to DUI
and paid the ordered fine. (GEs 2-3) 
Between March 2005 and April 2015, Applicant encountered no other alcohol-
related incidents.  Since his January 2016 alcohol-related incident, he consumes very
little alcohol (two to three beers at most) and has never abused alcohol. (Tr. 47-48, 81)
And, since March 2017, he has maintained sustained abstinence. (Tr. 48, 69, 76, 81-
82) 
Applicant self-referred himself to an alcohol-treatment facility in March 2016 for a
substance abuse screening inventory (SASSI) evaluation. (AE C; Tr. 43-44, 69)
Applicant’s screening was evaluated by a masters-level therapist, and he received an
SASSI assessment of low probability. He was advised as a precaution to enter the
facility’s Phase I DUI program in September 2017. (AE H) He is credited with
completing the program’s prescribed 20  sessions that consisted of individual therapy
sessions and attendance of 15 twelve-step meetings with Alcoholics Anonymous (AA).
(AEs I, K, and R; Tr. 71-72)) While enrolled in the program, he addressed issues
related to impact of alcohol addiction, and voluntarily submitted to random drug
screens. (AEs H; Tr. 68-69) These drug screens produced negative results for both
illegal substances and alcohol. (AE I; Tr. 80) Based on his demonstrated progress in
the program, he was assigned a good prognosis.
Applicant continues to attend regular AA meetings and is committed to avoiding
future alcohol abuse. (AEs R-S; Tr. 47-48, 70-71, 76-78, 82-84) Although he does not
have a sponsor, he regularly attends his scheduled weekly mixed meetings and
sometimes leads the meetings. (Tr. 83-84) In his AA meetings, he recites the serenity
prayer, drinks the traditional black coffee, and still works the 12 steps. (Tr. 85-86)
In his November 2017 statement of intent, Applicant certified his intent to never
abuse alcohol again with the understanding that should he engage in future alcohol
abuse, he consented to the automatic revocation (even if not covered required by the
4
regulations) of his security clearance. (AE S; Tr. 49-50) Applicant’s stated intentions
impress to be sincerely made and are accepted.
Drug-related issues
In May 2005, Applicant was administratively separated from the Army for cited
misconduct, after testing positive for cocaine in November 2004, and following his
March 2005 DUI incident. Applicant denied any knowing ingestion of cocaine, attributing
it to his consuming spiked drinks at a party containing cocaine ingredients. Still, he
admitted to his command that he ingested cocaine before he was tested. (GE 4; Tr. 56-
57) 
After admitting his wrongful use of cocaine before testing positive for the
substance, Applicant was awarded NJP by his command in January 2005. (GE 4 and
AE E; Tr. 32-33) Punishment consisted of reduction in rank and assignment to 45 hours
of extra duty. Applicant  accepted the test results and ensuing administrative separation
and general discharge without contesting the results with appeals or other means. (GE
2; Tr. 59-60) 
Before testing positive for cocaine, Applicant had never knowingly used or
possessed illegal drugs of any kind. (GE 2; Tr. 70) And, since his 2004 positive drug
test, he has avoided use and possession of all illegal substances. (Tr. 70) 
In his November 2017 statement of intent, Applicant certified his intent to never
use illegal drugs again or associate with anyone who uses illegal drugs with the
understanding that should he ever violate illegal drug use laws and policies, he
consented to the revocation of his security clearance. (AE S; Tr. 49) Applicant’s stated
intentions impress to be sincerely made and are accepted.
Endorsements, certifications, evaluations, and awards
Applicant is highly regarded by his current and former supervisors, coworkers,
and friends who know him and have worked with him. (AEs G and L; Tr. 45-46) Aware
of his clearance issues, they attested to his solid work ethic, reliability, and
trustworthiness. (AEs G and L; Tr. 46) 
Applicant’s employment credits include strong performance evaluations and
documented clearances and certifications of course completions in unit level logistics,
leadership development, and combat lifesaving. (AE Q) Past performance evaluations
(2015-2016) credit him with meets and exceeds requirements in all rated categories.
(AE U)
Among his decorations, medals, citations, and ribbons he received in recognition
of his military service, and noted in his DD 214 Certificate of Release and Discharge are
the following: Army Commendation Medal (4  award), Army Achievement Medal, (3th rd
award), Presidential Unit Citation, (Army-Air Force); Army Good Conduct Medal (4th
award); National Defense Service Medal (2d award); Global War on Terrorism
5
Expeditionary Medal; Global War on Terrorism Service Medal; and Non-Commissioned
Officer’s Professional Development Ribbon. (AE G; Tr. 60)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is
to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(d)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made
about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(d) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
         Alcohol consumption 
The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
AG ¶ 21.
6
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified and sensitive information.
Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and
candid answers during national security investigative or adjudicative
processes. . . .” AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant presents with a history of alcohol-related incidents (four in all) spaced 
over a period of 32 years. Between August 1984 and January 2016, Applicant pled
guilty to four separate alcohol-related incidents ranging from open container to DUI
offenses. Principal security issues raised in this case center on Applicant’s alcohol-
related offenses covered by Guideline G and incorporated under Guideline E.
7
Additional security concerns are raised over his administrative separation that resulted
from his testing positive for cocaine use in November 2004. 
Alcohol consumption concerns
Applicant’s problems with recurrent alcohol-related incidents over a 32-year
period raise concerns over his risk of future alcohol abuse. On the strength of the
evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions (DCs) of the AGs for alcohol
consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away
from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse,
disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the
individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol
abuse disorder,” and 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use
disorder.”
Applicant’s completion of a self-referred alcohol counseling program in 2017
followed his last open container conviction in March 2016. Still, Applicant felt enough
concern about his slip in January 2016 to self-refer himself to an outpatient counseling
program. After continuing his pre-January 2016 pattern of occasional drinking for the
ensuing 14 months, he made the decision to cease drinking altogether in September
2017, and with the support of AA and continued alcohol counseling, he  has maintained
his abstinence from alcohol since March 2017. 
Based on the findings of the court considering his March 2016 incident and the
sustained progress he has demonstrated in avoiding abusing drinking since March
2016, with sustained abstinence since March 2017, he may take full advantage of the
following Guideline G mitigating conditions: MC ¶¶ 23(a), “so much time has passed, or
the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or judgment,” and 32(d) “the individual has successfully completed a
treatment program along with required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with
treatment recommendations.” 
Applicant’s circumstances and subsequent proactive steps he has taken since
his last alcohol-related incident in 2016 are sufficient to facilitate safe predictions that
he will avoid any abusive drinking in the foreseeable future. Each of these cited
offenses are cross-referenced under Guideline E and are considered to be alcohol-
related for purposes of Guideline E analysis. 
Personal conduct concerns
Additional security concerns not expressly covered by Guideline G, are raised
under Guideline E, and require separate addressing. Applicant’s administrative
separation from the Army in May 2005 following a long and distinguished military career
with the Army was precipitated by his testing positive for cocaine in November 2004
and later receiving NJP based on his command’s finding of misconduct. Disqualifying
8
conditions covered by personal conduct that are applicable to Applicant’s testing
positive for cocaine are twofold: DC ¶¶ 16(d), “credible adverse information that is not
explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available information,
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or
sensitive information. This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of “ . . . (3) a
pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . .”
Mitigation is available to Applicant. Applicable mitigating conditions under
Guideline E covering Applicant’s 2005 administrative separation from the Army based
on his prior testing positive for cocaine and receiving NJP are as follows:  MC ¶¶ 17(c),
“the offense is so minor or, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment,” and 17(d), “”the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained
counseling to change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors,
circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or other
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur,” apply to Applicant’s
situation. Passage of time since his isolated positive drug test in November 2004
exceeds 14 years and provides enough time to mitigate this drug-related offense under
Guideline E.
Whole-person assessment
Applicant’s lengthy civilian service with DoD (over 14 years) is respected and
appreciated. Endorsements from his current and former supervisors, coworkers, and
friends who know and have worked with him document his strong character, trust, and
reliability. 
Applicant’s credits include strong performance evaluations and documented
clearances and certifications of course completions in unit level logistics, leadership
development, and combat lifesaving. Past performance evaluations (2015-2016) credit
him with meets and exceeds requirements in all rated categories. 
Applicant’s recognized service contributions and letters of appreciation when
considered in conjunction with the positive steps he has taken to mitigate security
concerns associated with his lengthy history of alcohol-related offenses and isolated
and aged positive drug test for cocaine are enough to dispel concerns about risks of
recurrent abusive drinking. Considering the record as a whole, safe predictions can be
made at this time about Applicant’s ability to avoid alcohol-related incidents and illegal
drug use in the foreseeable future. Alcohol and personal conduct concerns are fully
mitigated and warrant favorable conclusions to be made in connection with the
allegations covered by Guidelines G and E.  
9
                                               Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):   FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:           For Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):         FOR APPLICANT
   Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b :                      For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
11
