KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant also contends the Judge incorrectly analyzed the evidence.  She argues the
Judge concluded “the record fails to establish that her debts are being resolved or under control .
. . [and] does not show a good-faith effort by Applicant to repay overdue creditors” despite
evidence that she has “more than a two-year track record of regular payments.”  The above
quotes, however, are unrelated.  By contrasting them, Applicant has taken them out of their
context.  The Judge’s quote pertaining to the “two-year track record of regular payments”
addressed Applicant’s effort to resolve the car loan.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant on
the car loan.  The other quote pertaining to Applicant’s failure to establish that the “debts are
being resolved or are under control” addressed the other debts for which the Judge concluded
insufficient corroborating documentation was presented.  Applicant’s contention does not
establish any error in the Judge’s analysis. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-00302.a1
DATE: 01/10/2019
DATE: January 10, 2019
In Re:
-------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-00302
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Judd G. Millman, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 14, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On October 24, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact and Analysis
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  She has held a security
clearance for about 28 years.   The SOR alleged seven delinquent debts totaling about $24,900.  She
primarily attributed the delinquent debts to a geographic move associated with a military base
closure and to fluctuations in her earnings.  She also experienced medical problems that resulted in
hospitalizations. 
 
Applicant negotiated a settlement of a delinquent car loan for a repossessed vehicle.  Under
that settlement, she made regular monthly payment of $175 from early 2016 to mid 2018.  However,
she failed to present sufficient documentation to establish that she has resolved or is resolving the
other delinquent debts.  She acted responsibly towards the delinquent car loan, but not the other
debts.  
 
Discussion
Applicant’s appeal brief contains documents and assertions that are not included in the
record.  In fact, some of those documents post-date the Judge’s decision.  We cannot consider new
evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Applicant contends  the Judge incorrectly stated that she has worked for different contractors. 
She notes that she has worked for the same entity over the past 28 years, but it has changed names
several times.  We conclude, however, this error was a harmless because it likely did not affect the
outcome of the case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-15184 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2013).   
Applicant also contends the Judge incorrectly analyzed the evidence.  She argues the Judge
concluded “the record fails to establish that her debts are being resolved or under control  . . . [and]
does not show a good-faith effort by Applicant to repay overdue creditors” despite evidence that she
has “more than a two-year track record of regular payments.”  Appeal Brief at 4, quoting from
Decision at 7 and 8.   The above quotes, however, are unrelated.  By contrasting them, Applicant
has taken them out of their context.  The Judge’s quote pertaining to the “two-year track record of
2
regular payments” addressed Applicant’s effort to resolve the car loan.  The Judge found in favor
of Applicant on the car loan.  The other quote pertaining to Applicant’s failure to establish that the
“debts are being resolved or are under control” addressed the other debts for which the Judge
concluded insufficient corroborating documentation was presented.  Applicant’s contention does not
establish any error in the Judge’s analysis.  
Applicant challenges the Judge’s conclusion that she took inconsistent positions regarding
the debts that undermined her credibility and judgment.  The Judge, for example, noted that
Applicant testified that she entered into an agreement with the creditor to start making $100 monthly
payments on a delinquent vehicle lease in August 2018.  Tr. at 35-38.  In her post-hearing
submissions between June and September 2018, Applicant presented no proof of the agreement or
payments under it, but indicated that her attorney was trying to settle that debt.  Decision at 8.  From
our review of the record, the Judge’s conclusion about Applicant taking inconsistent positions about
the debts is based on substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn
from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).   
Applicant further argues “[t]he debts were not incurred as a result of the concerns outlined
in Guideline F, such as ‘frivolous or irresponsible spending’ and it certainly does not represent
‘unexplained affluence.’” Appeal Brief at 5.  The Judge, however, did not conclude that the
disqualifying conditions pertaining to frivolous or irresponsible spending or unexplained affluence
applied in this case.  Instead, the Judge concluded that Disqualifying Conditions 19(a), inability to
satisfy debts, and 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations, applied.  His conclusions
regarding the application of Disqualifying Conditions 19(a) and 19(c) were based on substantial
evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3.   
The balance of Applicant’s arguments amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing
of the evidence.  Those arguments, however, are not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-
06440 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 8, 2016).
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                  
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
