 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03560 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Heela Rasool, Esq. Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
January 17, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 31, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 7, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on February 
12, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
hearing on February 15, 2018, scheduling the hearing for May 22, 2018. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4, which 
were admitted without objection. GX 4 asked for Administrative Notice. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and called one witness. Applicant presented a set of 
 
2 
 
documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppX) A. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (TR) on June 7, 2018. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided an seven-page summary of 
the facts, supported by six Government documents pertaining to Afghanistan, identified 
as GX 4. The documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a., with explanation. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 66-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at pages 5 
and 11.) He has been employed with the defense contractor since June of 2009, and 
has held a security clearance since September of 2010. (GX 1 at pages 11 and 56.) He 
is married to a naturalized U.S. citizen, and has four children, three of whom are native 
born Americans. (GX 1 at pages 18~19, and 23~25.)  
  
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 1.a. Applicant has five close relatives who are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. His three sisters are housewives. (TR at page 14 line 2 to page 17 line 17, 
at page 23 line 6 to page 26 line 17, and at page 27 line 5 to page 28 line 8.) His brother 
is a retired school principal, and his brother-in-law is “a low clerk,” working for the 
Afghan Government. (Id.) Applicant has monthly contact with his Afghan relatives, who 
have no idea of what Applicant does as a contractor. (TR at page 14 line 2 to page 17 
line 17, at page 23 line 6 to page 26 line 17, and at page 27 line 5 to page 28 line 8.) 
Applicant’s mother and other brother-in-law have passed away. 
 
 Applicant has submitted two letters of support from two U.S. Army Colonels. 
(AppX A at pages 1 and 2.) These letters attest to his excellent work history, and 
dedication and commitment to our forces. 
 
Notice 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts: A U.S. State Department Travel 
Warning remains in effect for Afghanistan. Extremists  are active throughout the country. 
However, Afghanistan remains an important partner in of the fight against terrorism. 
  
 
 
3 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology 
 
  Applicant has five close relatives who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
5 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation 
 
 Applicant’s connections with his foreign relatives is far outweighed by his 
connections with his adopted country, and his immediate family connections in the 
United States. Foreign Influence is found for Applicant.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a distinguished history of working with our forces in Afghanistan, 
as evidenced by two letters of support from U.S. Army Colonels. He performs well at his 
job. He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States 
due to his longstanding ties here.  
 
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
