1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01884 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. He failed to provide sufficient documentation to establish 
mitigation with respect to his consumer debts and failure to file Federal tax returns. 
National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On July 16, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), implemented June 8, 2017.  
01/16/2019
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on August 9, 2018, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
its file of relevant material (FORM) on August 28, 2018. Applicant received it on 
September 19, 2018. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant submitted no response to the FORM within the time period allotted. Items 1 
through 6 are admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and divorced. He has been employed by a government 
contractor since March 2017. He worked as a driver for a ride-sharing service from 
November 2016 to March 2017. He was unemployed from April 2016 to November 2016, 
after he was “dismissed for absences” from a position with another government contractor 
that he held from August 2016 to October 2016. He was also terminated from a position 
he held from September 2015 to April 2016, following “missing time due to health 
issue[s].” He was employed from November 2011 to September 2015 by another 
contractor. He was unemployed from November 2010 to October 2011 after being laid off 
from a position he had held since 1998. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted to nine creditors in the total amount of $26,196 as listed in 
the SOR. He also failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for 2013 to 2016. 
Applicant attributed these debts and his failure to file his tax returns to his divorce. He 
stated in his security clearance application, “After my ex-wife moved out and we got 
divorced, it became increasingly difficult to keep up with bills and the[re] was no money 
available to pay the tax.” Applicant indicated that he hired a law group to “discuss strategy 
for paying back the IRS, debt consolidation and the possibility of filing Bankruptcy.” He 
provided nothing further in this regard. (Item 2.) His debts are as follows. 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off automotive loan in the amount of $10,977, 
as stated in SOR ¶ 1.a. This debt has been delinquent since at least May 2014. (Item 5; 
Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $6,059, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. This debt has been delinquent since at least 2013. (Item 5; Item 6.)  
 
 Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $4,209, as stated 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt was for a credit card account. It has been delinquent since 2013. 
(Item 5; Item 6.)  
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $1,016, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.d. This debt has been delinquent since at least 2016. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $621, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. It has been delinquent since 2013. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $584, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.f. It has been delinquent since 2011. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $362, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.g. This debt was for a storage unit. It became delinquent in 2017. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $1,342, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.h. This debt became delinquent in 2017. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the amount of $1,026, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.i. This debt became delinquent in 2017. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2013 
through 2016, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged his debt and indicated he was trying to resolve it. He 
stated: 
 
As pertaining to the financial questions earlier, I would just like to state that 
these issues came about after my divorce as I was trying to maintain my 
living situation. The losing of my jobs at both [government contractors], as 
discussed earlier did not help this situation. Since then I have cut my 
monthly bills down to almost nothing and I am actively pursuing cleaning up 
the situation. I am currently working with the [law group] on these matters, 
and will have the situation resolved in the coming months. It was never the 
goal to not pay or defraud any financial institution, it was simply being over 
extended at the time. (Item 2.) 
 
Despite Applicant’s claim that he was working with the law group to resolve his 
debts, he failed to provide any documentation to support his claim or show that he was 
otherwise working to resolve his delinquent accounts. He produced no evidence of filing 
his state or Federal tax returns from 2013 to 2016.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
 
4 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under the financial considerations guideline is set out in AG 
& 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
5 
 
 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has over $26,196 in delinquent debt, which became delinquent between 
2011 and 2017. He failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
2013 through 2016. He has insufficient income to address these liabilities. There is 
sufficient evidence to establish disqualification under AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f). 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has insufficient income to meet all of his financial obligations. There is 
no evidence that he will be able to avoid delinquent accounts in the future. He remains 
indebted on consumer loans and has not provided evidence of filing his delinquent tax 
returns. His debt is ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to unemployment and his divorce. 
These are circumstances beyond his control. However, he has failed to meaningfully 
address his delinquent accounts. The record lacks documentation to show he reasonably 
and responsibly addressed his delinquencies. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully 
established.  
 
 Applicant provided no documentation of financial counseling. There is no evidence 
to conclude that his financial problems are under control. He indicated he enlisted the 
help of a law group, but there is no documentation to show whether any of his debts were 
addressed or his delinquent tax returns were filed. The evidence does not establish 
mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d).  
 
 Applicant did not claim to dispute any of his alleged delinquencies. He admitted all 
of the allegations on the SOR. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant failed to resolve his delinquent Federal and state tax returns. AG ¶ 20(g) 
does not mitigate the security concern. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
7 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is credited with his 
efforts to enlist the help of a law group to resolve his debts and file his delinquent tax 
returns. However, he failed to support his statements with proof of concomitant action. 
He may be eligible for national security eligibility in the future if he is able to document 
reasonable and responsible actions toward resolving his outstanding Federal and state 
tax returns and maintain solvency. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
