1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
[REDACTED] ) ISCR Case No. 18-01142   
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on October 10, 2017. 
On April 25, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017.  
Applicant answered the SOR on May 8, 2018, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on June 1, 2018. On that same day, a complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM,) which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6, was sent to Applicant, 
who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
01/29/2019
 2 
or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on June 14, 2018, and 
did not file a Response.1 The case was assigned to me on October 11, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges that Applicant has 16 delinquent accounts 
totaling $64,265. Applicant denies SOR ¶ 1.a, a $12,765 debt for a car loan, and SOR ¶ 
1.p, a $1,136 credit-card account. He admits the remaining 14 debts, all of which are 
delinquent student loans totaling $50,364. The delinquent debts are reflected in 
Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) from May 2018 and December 2017, and 
discussed on his e-QIP and during his personal subject interview (PSI). (GX 6; GX 5; GX 
3; GX 4.) Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old service desk administrator currently working for a 
defense contractor since September 2017. He served honorably in the U.S. Air Force 
from June 2006 until March 2012, and was granted a security clearance in November 
2006.  He received his associate’s degree in 2013 and his bachelor’s degree in 2015. He 
and his wife married in 2009. (GX 2.)  
 
Applicant denies that he owes the $12,765 debt for a car loan alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a. According to Applicant, during the process of purchasing a new car from a dealership, 
the dealership paid off the loan on the car that Applicant was trading in, but then would 
not accept the actual trade in. Applicant went to a second dealership, where he was 
informed that the original dealership had paid off the trade-in car. When the original 
dealership discovered that it had paid for a trade-in that it did not receive, it changed its 
records to reflect that Applicant was liable for the amount the original dealership paid for 
the trade in. (GX 3; GX 2.) With his Answer, Applicant provided a letter from the lender 
from November 2014 that stated the loan for the trade in had been paid in full. Applicant 
further stated that he discussed the loan with another dealership and was told that he was 
not responsible for the debt. However, Applicant’s CBRs show that the account was 
charged off by the original dealership in April 2015. Applicant’s May 2018 CBR also shows 
that he disputed the debt after it was charged off. Applicant did not provide any information 
about what actually happened to the trade-in car. This debt remains unresolved.   
 
Applicant provided a letter from March 2018 from the creditor of the $1,136 credit-
card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p, which stated that the account was paid. This debt has 
been resolved. 
 
Applicant admitted each of the 14 delinquent student loan accounts. He attributes 
his inability to pay his student loans to underemployment. Applicant asserted that he was 
trying to consolidate his student loans and that he was seeking better paying employment 
                                            
1 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated June 1, 2018, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated June 14, 2018. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 
days after receiving it to submit information.  The DOHA transmittal letter and receipt are appended to the 
record as Administrative Exhibit 1. 
 
 3 
in order to resolve these debts. (GX 3.) However, there is no record evidence of resolution 
of these debts. 
 
Applicant was unemployed for five months after leaving the military in 2012. 
However, he has been consistently employed since August 2012. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
 4 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 The record evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”).  
  
Applicant’s financial issues are recent, ongoing, and unresolved. Applicant is 
legally obligated to pay his student loans and his failure to do so raises concerns about 
his willingness to abide by rules and regulations, and about his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. Applicant did he provide any evidence of any actions he has taken 
to resolve his delinquent accounts. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
 5 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the military from 2006 until 2012. His 
underemployment has adversely affected his ability to meet his financial obligations. 
However, Applicant’s failure to satisfy his legal obligations raises concerns about his 
security worthiness.  
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.o:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.p:     For Applicant 
 
 
 6 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
