 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01254 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 28, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
On May 1, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
(Government Exhibit 1.)  On May 30, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines, effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 5, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 27, 2018.  The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on November 15, 2018, and 
the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 3, 2018.  The Government 
offered four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered one exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s 
Exhibit A, which was admitted into evidence without objection.  She also testified on her 
own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 11, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 57 years old.  She has been married and divorced twice.  She has a 
high school diploma and some college.  She holds the position of administrative 
assistant with a defense contractor and is seeking to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with her employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.   
  
The SOR identified four allegations under this guideline concerning Applicant’s 
failure to file her Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2013 through 2016, 
and the fact that her wages were garnished by the state tax authorities for back taxes 
owed for tax years 2002 and 2016.  In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits each of 
the allegations.  Applicant attributes her failure to file her income tax returns to 
procrastination.     
 
 Applicant served in the United States Air Force for a year, seven months, and 13 
days, from 1980 until 1981.  (Tr. p. 23.)  Applicant claims that while in the military, she 
was a woman working in a male-dominated mechanic profession and felt discriminated 
against.  She did not get along with her supervisor.  In lieu of a reprimand, she was 
administratively separated from the Air Force prior to the end of her service contract and 
received an honorable discharge.  (Tr. p. 25.) 
 
 Applicant has a history of tax problems, including late filings, delinquent back 
taxes, and wage garnishments dating back at least twenty years.  (Government Exhibit 
3.)  Applicant has worked for her current employer since 2001.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  
 
 While married to her second husband from 1998 to 2004, Applicant states that 
she first encountered tax problems.  In 2002, he filed their taxes and received a refund.  
He took an $8,000 deduction for a tool box because he was a mechanic that was not 
allowed by the IRS.  As a result, there was a tax liability.  He and Applicant divorced, 
and he was on disability and moved out of state.  In about January 2008, Applicant’s 
wages were garnished to pay the taxes.  (Tr. pp. 16-17.)  
 
In regard to the other income tax returns that were not filed; namely Federal and 
state income tax returns for tax years 2013; 2014; 2015; 2016 and 2017, Applicant 
states that she is a procrastinator.  (Tr. p. 32.)  She did not file these Federal and state 
 
3 
 
income tax returns on a timely basis because she was overwhelmed.  In 2010, she 
moved in with her special needs daughter.  In order for the daughter to continue 
receiving disability, Applicant had to complete the required paperwork and had several 
court dates.  Then, her father moved in with them, who also needed help being taken 
care of.  Applicant knew that her income tax returns were due, but she kept putting them 
off.  Her daughter’s father passed away in May of last year, and since then, she has 
been working on trying to get all of the taxes caught up.  At one point, Applicant 
refinanced her house and has been having a hard time getting a hold of the mortgage 
interest statements from the previous mortgage company.  (Tr. p. 32.)  
 
Applicant’s wages were most recently garnished by the state tax authorities in 
November 2016.  She stated that this garnishment was due to the denial of the rebate 
for a solar system that she installed in her home.  She had not been advised until after 
the system was installed that the state said that it did not meet the qualifications for the 
rebate.  She was left with $2,311.70 in taxes that she did not have the money to pay.  
Applicant has paid the debt.  (Government Exhibit 2.) 
 
 Applicant states that she is a very independent person and that she did not want 
to hire anyone to help her file her income tax returns until recently.  (Tr. p. 29.)  In 
September of last year, she finally hired an accountant.  (Tr. p. 29.)  As of yet, Applicant 
has not filed the income taxes in question and has not filed her most recent income tax 
returns for tax year 2017.  (Tr. p. 34)   
 
Applicant further states that she understands the importance of filing her income 
tax returns but that she was owed a refund and did not owe taxes.  When her income 
tax returns are eventually filed, she believes that she is due a refund of approximately 
$12,000.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.”  The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
 
5 
 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is possibly applicable in this case:   
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
  Applicant is a procrastinator who has not filed her income tax returns on time 
since 2013.  There is no excuse for this misconduct.  Applicant has not demonstrated 
the high degree of judgment, reliability and trustworthiness required to hold a security 
clearance.       
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations guideline 
are potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
  
(e) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable here.  Applicant states that she 
understands the importance of filing her income tax returns on time, but she has not 
been diligent and responsible enough to file them.  Instead, she has established a 
pattern of failing to comply with Federal and state law that require her to do so.  
Applicant has not demonstrated sufficient good judgment and reliability concerning 
these tax issues and is clearly not eligible for access to classified information.   
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
