 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01946 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 28, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Lokey Anderson, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 20, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP). (Government Exhibit 1.)  On August 22, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse.  The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 4, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 29, 2018.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on November 
15, 2018, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 4, 2018.  The 
Government offered two exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which 
 
2 
 
were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered no exhibits at the hearing.  The 
record remained open until close of business on December 11, 2018, to allow Applicant 
the opportunity to submit supporting documentation.  Applicant submitted three Post-
Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 3, which 
were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 13, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old.  He is not married and has no children.  He has a 
Bachelor’s of Science degree in Electrical Engineering.  He is employed by a defense 
contractor as an Electrical Engineer.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant has used controlled substances that 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose, which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.  
 
 Applicant has a history of illegal drug use that includes his use of marijuana from 
about July 2006 to at least June 2017; cocaine use from about July 2010 to July 2017; 
and ecstasy use from about July 2010 to July 2012.  He has also purchased marijuana 
in June 2017. 
 
 Applicant attended college from 2009 to 2016, when he graduated.  During 
college he states that he used marijuana, cocaine, and ecstasy at varying frequencies 
for recreational purposes.  As a rough estimate, he believes he used marijuana in high 
school from eight to ten times and in college probably five to eight times. After college, 
he used marijuana three times while working for a defense contractor. (Tr. p. 29.)  In 
regard to cocaine, he believes he used it five to ten times in high school and the same 
frequency in college.  He used ecstasy two or three times at events in high school and 
about the same frequency in college.  (Tr. p. 31.)  Applicant also purchased marijuana 
on two occasions, once in college, and once in June 2017.  He states that he also 
purchased cocaine in 2011.   
 
 After graduating from college, Applicant went straight to his position with his 
current employer which started in August 2016.  Applicant knew at that time that he 
would be required to apply for a security clearance at some point as it was mandatory 
for all employees.  He also knew that his company had a zero tolerance policy regarding 
the use of illegal drugs.  (Tr. pp. 20 - 21.)  After being hired by the company, and after 
working there over a year, Applicant used marijuana in June 2017 on three occasions 
with the same person.  He also used cocaine with his cousin in July 2017.  (Tr. p. 28.)  
Applicant states that he last used ecstasy in July 2012, and has not used ecstasy since 
college.   
 
3 
 
 Applicant submitted a letter of intent dated December 7, 2018, to declare his 
abstinence from the use, purchase, possession, manufacturing and distribution of any 
illegal substance.  The letter further states that any future misuse of any illegal drug will 
be grounds for immediate revocation of his national security eligibility.  (Applicant’s 
Post-Hearing Exhibit C.)      
 
 A letter from the Applicant’s supervisor dated December 5, 2018, indicates that 
he hired the Applicant and that since then Applicant has been an excellent electrical 
engineer.  He is described as talented and hard-working and can always be counted on 
to get to the work done.  He is said to be professional and respectful of his colleagues.  
His supervisor recommends him for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing 
Exhibit A.)   
 
 A performance review of the Applicant for the period from April 1, 2016, through 
March 31, 2017, reflects that he “meets all job requirements.”  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing 
Exhibit B.) 
 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence that 
establishes controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
4 
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains three conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia, and  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position.  
 
 
5 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. None of the conditions are applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
 None of the mitigating factors demonstrate full mitigation.  Applicant is a young 
and immature man, with little experience in the defense industry.  Although he is a 27 
year-old man, he is a fairly recent college graduate, who used a number of illegal drugs 
while in college and continued to use them after he graduated, and after being hired to 
work in the defense industry.  His last use of marijuana and cocaine are considered 
recent.  Applicant was aware of his company’s zero tolerance drug policy as well as 
DoD policy, but chose to defy the policies by using marijuana and cocaine after being 
hired by and working for a defense contractor.  There is no excuse for this misconduct.        
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline H in my whole-person analysis.  Applicant is well respected on the job and is 
considered to be an excellent engineer.  However, he has failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to demonstrate that he meets the qualifications for a security clearance.          
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with many questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
security concern. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
