1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00776 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On May 4, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 28, 2018, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2018. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 12, 2018. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 6, 2018. The Government offered 
01/24/2019
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. The record 
was held open until November 20, 2018, to permit Applicant to submit documents. He 
timely submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D. There were no objections to any 
exhibits offered, and all were admitted into evidence. 1 DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on November 15, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, 1.m, 
1.o, and 1.q. He denied the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.h through 1.l, 1.n, and 1.p. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He earned an associate’s degree and recently started 
working on a bachelor’s degree. He has never been married. He has four children. He 
has twins who are 22 years old from a former relationship. He has two children ages 11 
and 9-years-old from a former relationship who live with their mother. Applicant has been 
employed by a federal contractor since August 2016. He has been consistently employed 
and has not disclosed periods of unemployment.2 
 
 Applicant was previously employed by a state agency from August 2015 until 
August 2016. In January 2016, he was involved in a serious car accident while working. 
He did not collect unemployment benefits. He testified he did not receive any pay after 
the accident. He filed a claim for worker’s compensation. During this time, he fell behind 
on his child support payments.3  
 
Applicant testified he had to take his employer to court to receive compensation 
for his accident. He provided a copy of a settlement agreement with his employer 
administered through the compensation claims division of the state. The settlement 
agreement stated that it was a complete and final release, and waiver of all medical 
benefits which Applicant might be entitled from his former employer. The employer agreed 
to pay a lump sum of $7,500, inclusive of attorney’s fees and costs. It noted that Applicant 
understood that this payment would settle his entitlement to all classifications of medical 
benefits. It highlighted that the settlement specifically included any and all outstanding 
medical bills, either currently known or unknown to the parties, as well as outstanding 
medical bills owed to various entities that provided medical services incurred by Applicant 
as result of the accident. The agreement stated that Applicant agreed that he will be solely 
responsible for payment of such bills and holds the employer harmless from any liability. 
The indemnity portion of the claim was previously settled. Out of the $7,500, Applicant 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the exhibit list and II is the discovery letter. HE II is the exhibit list. HE III is 
Department Counsel’s memorandum noting he had not objections to Applicant’s documents.  
 
2 Tr. 19-25. 
 
3 Tr. 23-25. 
 
3 
 
 
was to pay his attorney $1,250 and other court fees. His net recovery was $6,181. 
Applicant signed the agreement before a notary on July 28, 2018.4 
 
Applicant stated that the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.n 
were to be paid by his employer. He explained that when his accident occurred he learned 
that the contract for medical insurance had lapsed and the state would pay only $10,000 
for his medical debts. He testified that his attorney told him his medical bills would be 
paid. He said he believed his medical bills were covered by worker’s compensation. He 
used some of his settlement payment to pay child support.5  
 
Applicant disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m on his October 
2018 credit report. He testified he hired a law firm to dispute his debts. The credit report 
confirms that these accounts are being disputed. No determination was made as to the 
validity of the debts. Applicant testified that he paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($329). I find 
in his favor on these debts. He testified that he paid the debt in SOR 1.p ($200) and would 
provide documentation. He did not. This debt is not resolved.6  
 
 Applicant testified that he no longer has to pay child support as of March 2017 for 
his twin children. He said he is paying the arrearages owed (SOR ¶1.a-$15,065). He said 
he was paying $1,000 a month toward the amount owed. He provided a document that 
shows he made payments of $244 twice in September 2018, four payments of $244 in 
October 2018, and a payment of $244 in November 2018. The document shows that as 
of November 2018, the total arrears owed is $5,466. His intention was to complete paying 
this arrearage and then begin paying the arrearages for his other two children (SOR ¶ 
1.c-$12,313) and make the full payments. He provided a document from the state where 
they reside that shows the current balance of his arrearage is $16,822. The document 
showed he made $200 payments in April, May, June, August, September, and February 
2017. In March 2017, he made two payments of $200 and one payment of $1,360. The 
child support order requires him to pay $660 a month. He understands that each month 
he is deficient in amount of his payments. Applicant testified when he received his 
settlement payment, he paid about $5,000 toward child support.7 
 
 Applicant provided a document to show he made a payment of $107 in May 2018 
for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.q ($249). There is still a balance owed. He also provided a 
payment receipt showing that he made a $50 and $23 payment on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
The account lists a remaining balance of $281. These debts are not resolved.8  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 61-72; AE A. It was apparent from Applicant’s testimony that he is confused about terms of his 
settlement. 
 
5 Tr. 61-82.  
 
6 Tr. 55-78. 
 
7 Tr. 25-51; AE B. Applicant’s children live in two different states.  
 
8 Tr. 58-61; AE C. 
 
4 
 
 
 In Applicant’s October 2017 background investigation, he disclosed he purchased 
a vehicle in about 2011 and then could not afford the payments.9 He testified that the 
vehicle was repossessed (SOR ¶ 1.b-$13,013) in 2014. He told the investigator that once 
he caught up on child support payments, he would pay $20 a month on the repossessed 
vehicle. He testified that he contacted the creditor in August 2018 to see if the balance 
could be reduced. They did not respond. He has not contacted the creditor again. He 
intends to pay the debt in the future. The debt is not resolved.10  
 
 Applicant acknowledged the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g was for an apartment in which he 
lived with the mother of his younger children in about 2013 or 2014. When they separated, 
he broke the lease. During his background investigation, he told the government 
investigator that he would begin paying $35 a month within 30 days to resolve the debt. 
He testified that he does not have the resources to pay this debt at this time, but had 
contacted the creditor and advised them he would pay it. He admits the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.o has been delinquent since about 2015, and was not paid.11 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g 
and 1.o are unresolved.  
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are corroborated by Applicant’s admissions, 
documents, and credit reports from September 2017 and October 2018.12 
  
 Applicant testified that he is attending school so he can get a better job and earn 
more money. He has approximately $41,000 in student loans that are deferred. He began 
incurring the student loans in 2008.13  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
                                                          
9 At the hearing, Applicant testified he purchased the vehicle in 2013 or 2014. GE 3, a September 2017 
credit report shows the account was open in 2011. 
 
10 Tr. 51-55. GE 2, 3. 4. 
 
11 Tr. 82-88; GE 2. 
 
12 GE 1, 2, 3, 4; AE A, B, C, D.  
 
13 Tr. 88-97. 
 
5 
 
 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
 
6 
 
 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that began accruing in approximately 
2013 and continue to date. He also has two child-support arrearages. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a serious accident that occurred in 
January 2016 while at work. There was a dispute about his medical coverage. Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
settled with his employer and received a payment. The settlement waived Applicant’s 
claim regarding past or future medical debts. Applicant got behind on his child support 
payments during this period. However, prior to the accident, Applicant had other 
delinquent debts beginning in 2013 that he had not paid. Applicant’s debts are recent and 
ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s accident was beyond his control. The issues with his employer’s 
medical insurance coverage were also beyond his control. Applicant had numerous 
delinquent debts prior to his accident. Those were within his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant accepted a settlement agreement for his medical debts. He said 
he used some of the settlement to pay child-support arrearages. Some of his debts were 
incurred years before his accident. He did not provide sufficient evidence to show he is 
resolving most of his delinquent debt. He did provide some evidence to show he has 
made payments toward one child-support arrearage, but each month he is delinquent on 
the other. AG ¶ 20(b) has some application.  
   
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he has participated in financial counseling 
or that he established a budget from which to determine financial stability. There are not 
clear indications that the financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
Applicant provided proof that he made two payments in September 2018 on the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.e, but there is still a balance owed. He also provided proof that he made a partial 
payment on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.q in May 2018, but no further payments were made. As 
the result of Applicant’s inconsistent payments, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to these debts. 
Applicant has been making consistent payments toward one child’s support arrearages, 
indicating a good-faith effort to resolve that debt. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.a. He 
continues to be delinquent each month on his other child-support payments. AG ¶ 20(d) 
does not apply to the other debts.  
 
 Applicant disputed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m, which are 
reflected as such on his October 2018 credit report. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to these debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
8 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 44 years old. He has debts for a repossessed vehicle and early 
termination for a lease that occurred in approximately 2013 or 2014, before his accident. 
He agreed to a settlement from his employer which waived their responsibility to pay his 
past or future medical debts. He disputed some debts on his credit report. His child-
support arrearages continue to be a concern. Although he stated that he intends to 
resolve his delinquent debts in the future, at this juncture, he has an unreliable financial 
track record. He has not met his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.m  For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.q:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
