 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 18-01481  
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Daniel F. Crowley, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 11, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On November 13, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-
QIP).  On June 13, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for 
Access to Classified Information, effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 29, 2018.  He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  (Item 2.)  On 
July 29, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on July 31, 2018, and received by him on August 7, 2018.  The 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the 
FORM. Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  Applicant did not object to Items 1 
through 5, and they are admitted into evidence.  Hereinafter, they are referenced as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 5.   
 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and is married.  He has a high school diploma and an 
HVAC certificate.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Cable Technician.  He 
is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.   
 
 Applicant began working for his current employer in December 2014.  He has 
never held a security clearance before.  Applicant admits each of the allegations set 
forth in the SOR under both the criminal conduct guideline and the personal conduct 
guideline.  He admits to a serious history of criminal conduct that began in about 1994, 
at the age of 16, which continued until at least 2006.  Applicant admits that at the age of 
16, he was convicted for attempted robbery, (a felony) and by age 28, he was convicted 
and charged with an additional four felonies.  
 
 As mentioned above, in 1994, Applicant was charged with Felony Attempted 
Robbery.  Applicant and a friend attempted to steal a woman’s purse, when she 
screamed, and they ran back to his friend’s house.  Five minutes later, the police arrived 
at his friend’s house to arrest the Applicant.  Applicant was convicted of the charge and 
sentenced to six months detention.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)   
 
 In January 1999, he was charged with two counts of Assault and Battery.  He 
was convicted of one count of Assault.  In October 1999, he was charged with Profane, 
Threatening Language Over Public Airway.  In May 2000, he was charged with 
Possession of Marijuana, and convicted of the offense.  In July 2000, Applicant was 
charged with Destruction of Property.  He was convicted of this offense.  (Government 
Exhibits 4 and 5.)   
 
 In October 2000, Applicant was charged with Driving After Forfeiture of License 
and Driving After Illegally Consuming Alcohol.  Applicant stated that he was drinking 
and driving after leaving a bar.  He dropped off a friend, and then got into an accident 
where he wrecked his car in a storm drain.  Applicant left his car at the wreck location 
and walked home.  Five minutes later, the police arrived and Applicant was arrested.  
He was convicted of Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, and sentenced to 6 months 
suspended.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)   
 
 In March 2006, Applicant was charged with three counts of Felony Manufacture, 
Sale, Possession, of Controlled Substance; Felony Possession of Firearm While in 
Possession of Drugs; Felony Sale, Distribute Marijuana; and Felony Possession of 
 
 
3 
 
 
Controlled Substance.  Applicant’s house was raided by the police department.  
Applicant states that he not at home at the time, but his wife was, and she was charged 
with one count of possession of a controlled substance (cocaine) and was taken to jail 
immediately after the raid.  Applicant states that when his wife was in jail, he was 
contacted by a police officer who told him to turn himself in or his wife would be charged 
with all seven felony counts.  Applicant states that he turned himself in and took the 
blame for all of the charges to prevent his wife from being charged for all of them.  
Applicant contends that the firearms were not his, but belonged to, and were registered 
to a friend, consisting of two handguns.  Applicant’s stated that his friend had left the 
firearms at his house, as they would go to the shooting range together.  Applicant also 
contends that the drugs were not his and that he did not purchase them.  In fact, he 
states that he does not know how they ended up in his bedroom.  Applicant was initially 
charged with seven felonies consisting of two firearm charges and five substance 
charges which included psilocybin, marijuana, hash, mescaline and cocaine.  These 
charges were dropped to four felonies. On May 1, 2007, Applicant pled guilty to and 
was convicted of two felony counts of Possession with Intent to Distribute and two 
felony counts of Possession of Firearm while in Possession of Drugs.  Applicant was 
sentenced to 20 years in prison with 15 years suspended.  He was incarcerated for five 
years from May 2007 to about November 2012.  He was then placed on parole for three 
years.  (Government Exhibits 4 and 5.)     
 
 Applicant states that he no longer associates with the people who were involved 
in his prior convictions.  He further states that he does not smoke, drink, or use drugs 
anymore.  He now spends his time with his family, watching movies and going to work.  
(Government Exhibit 5.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
 
4 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgement, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matter of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless 
of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions are applicable. Although over ten years has 
passed since Applicant’s last conviction and imprisonment, he has not established that 
he is sufficiently reliable and trustworthy to access classified information.  Applicant has 
been convicted of at least six felonies for various criminal conduct discussed above.  
The offenses give rise to serious concerns about Applicant’s judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because of the nature of the offenses, and the circumstances 
surrounding the offense.  The beforementioned disqualifying conditions have been 
established.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15. 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.   
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive 
information.  This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
 (2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; and  
 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Applicant has failed to provide 
any evidence in mitigation.   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 39-year-old 
adult, who has an extensive criminal history that displays poor judgment and 
unreliability.  Applicant has also failed to provide any evidence in mitigation.  At this 
point, Applicant has not demonstrated sufficient responsibility on any level to be eligible 
for access to classified information.  Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He 
has not met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines for 
Criminal Conduct and Personal Conduct. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g     Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a     Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
