1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01715 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
     Statement of the Case 
On July 6, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of hearing.  
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on August 24, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on September 10, 2018, 
and had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant provided no response to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, 
identified as Items 1 through 9, is admitted into evidence without objection. The case 
was assigned to me on November 14, 2018.  
01/29/2019
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He served honorably in the U.S. Army from 1980 to 
1994. Applicant has been employed as a senior systems administrator by a federal 
contractor since November 2016. He disclosed that he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection in January 2010, in section 26 of his SCA. Applicant had a previous security 
clearance from July 2007. Applicant married in 1980, and he has two adult children.   
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy petitions in April 
1999, discharged in August 2001 (¶ 1.a); in January 2010, dismissed in October 2011 
for failure to make payments (¶ 1.b); and again in April 2012, dismissed in August 2016. 
Applicant admitted all of these filings in his answer to the SOR in August 2018. (Item 2) 
He also admitted to a mortgage account that is past due (¶ 1.d) and eleven medical 
delinquencies totaling $1,492 placed for collection. (¶ 1.e - 1.o) He states in his answer, 
that with respect to SOR ¶ 1.c, there were arrears owed on his mortgage loan that 
couldn’t be discharged. On advice of counsel, he voluntarily dismissed the bankruptcy 
case to try to work out a modification on his mortgage loan. That loan was sold to 
another company and is now reflected in SOR ¶ 1.d and it remains delinquent with a 
past-due amount of $30,794. (Item 6) 
 
In his personal subject interview (PSI), Applicant stated that he fell behind 
financially when he took a $25,000 pay cut after leaving his job as a network engineer, 
from 1996 to 2008, at a previous employer. He left to look for other employment 
opportunities. He became employed almost immediately as a computer technician. 
(Item 3) All of his creditors listed in his 2010 Chapter 13 bankruptcy case, were satisfied 
by 2014 and the bankruptcy case was ready to be discharged, but he could not get a 
modification on his mortgage loan. He fell behind on mortgage payments, which were 
$768 a month at that time. (Item 4) He was $23,000 in arrears when the loan was sold 
to another mortgagee. Applicant offered no plan for resolving this arrearage.  
 
Applicant’s wife fell down and sustained injuries in July 2017. (Item 4) She 
incurred medical bills reflected at SOR ¶¶ 1.e to 1.o, totaling $1,492, that were 
apparently not covered by health insurance. Applicant claims in his answer to the SOR, 
that he made payments to the creditor on each of these that resolved the alleged debts. 
He provided confirmation numbers as well, which were not helpful. He provided no 
documentation to substantiate his assertions in his Answer and show that these medical 
debts were resolved.  
 
Applicant’s 2010 Chapter 13 bankruptcy case documents include a statement of 
current monthly income and calculations of disposable income.2 This reflects Applicant’s 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s July 26, 2017 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 3), or his personal subject interview (PSI) on December 19, 
2017. (Item 4)  
 
2 Item 9. 
 
 
3 
 
 
monthly gross earnings of $4,948, and his wife’s gross earnings of $1,318. Their 
combined residuary or disposable income each month was negative $140 in April 2012.  
 
 Applicant provided no response to the FORM or evidence that he received 
financial counseling. He provided no budget showing income against expenses, or other 
documentation to show progress on his delinquent debts. He discussed his wife’s 
medical care and resulting bills and his intentions to repay these medical debts in his 
PSI in December 2017. He produced no documentary evidence that he has done so 
beyond the naked assertions in his answer. He provided no character references or 
performance evaluations.   
 
                                         Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Administrative Guidelines (AGs) promulgated in 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 
2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports and answer to the SOR. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c), thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.3 Applicant has not met that burden.  The delinquent debts alleged in the SOR 
have not been adequately addressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant endured a $25,000 pay cut when he voluntarily left his job as a network 
engineer in 2008. Arguably, this condition was beyond his control. Yet, despite his 
knowledge since at least 2017 that the delinquencies alleged in the SOR might affect 
his eligibility for a security clearance when he completed his SCA, and then reinforcing 
his intention to make payment arrangements in his PSI, he has done nothing to resolve 
these accounts. He has produced no relevant or responsive documentation either with 
his Answer to the SOR, or in response to the FORM. He has not demonstrated that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has the burden to provide 
sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, and that his 
debts were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
                                                          
3 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s credit report and SOR 
list the delinquent debts to medical creditors totaling $1,492. Applicant did not provide 
enough details with documentary corroboration about what he did to address his SOR 
debts. He did not provide documentation relating to any of the SOR debts: (1) proof of 
payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies of checks, or a letter 
from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the creditors; (2) 
correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of contact;4 (3) 
credible debt disputes indicating he did not believe he was responsible for the debts and 
why he held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate payment plans, 
such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting to resolve 
these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed to establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 Aside from Applicant’s uncorroborated statements in his answer, there is no 
documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to pay, settled, compromised, or 
otherwise resolved the SOR debts. He did not describe financial counseling or provide 
his budget. The record lacks corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed 
explanations of the causes for his financial problems and other mitigating information. 
The FORM advised Applicant that he had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in 
which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, 
mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any 
additional information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 3) 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
4 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or his] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant served honorably for 14 years in 
the armed forces. He has gone through an unexpected loss of household income. He 
has been employed most of his adult life and raised a family. Most importantly, 
Applicant has not addressed the specific allegations in the SOR. Instead, he has made 
uncorroborated representations that he did repay his delinquent medical debts. He has 
longstanding and ongoing financial problems going back to 1999 when he first filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. His mortgage arrearages have persisted for over five 
years. He has not met his burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.o:               Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                               
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
