1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-01325 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) dated July 26, 2017. 
On May 21, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
G.1 She answered the SOR and elected a decision based on the administrative record.
The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, known as the File of Relevant
Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel on July 17, 2018.
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
01/14/2019
 
2 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on July 25, 2018, and submitted a 
response dated August 9, 2018, marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The Government’s 
exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 10) and AE A are admitted into evidence without 
objections. The case was assigned to me on December 12, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old logistics specialist employed by a government contractor 
since April 2016. She received a bachelor’s degree in 1995. Applicant married in 1997, 
and has no children. She retired from the Air National Guard after serving from 1987 to 
2008. Applicant has a history of holding various security clearances. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant has four alcohol-related arrests and convictions in 
1995, 2007, 2016, and 2017. She admitted the allegations, and submitted documentation 
in explanation and mitigation. 
 
In 1995, Applicant was arrested for driving while intoxicated after leaving a wine 
festival. She was convicted and incarcerated for 180 days (177 suspended), fined, placed 
on one-year probation, and ordered to attend a three-day alcohol counseling course. She 
stated in a 2006 personal subject interview (PSI) before a Government investigator that 
out of the three people involved, she drove the vehicle because she drank the least at the 
festival, and that she has not consumed alcohol and driven since the 1995 arrest. She 
also noted that her use of alcohol never affected her employment or personal life. 
 
In 2007, Applicant was arrested for operating a vehicle under the influence of 
alcohol. She pleaded guilty, was fined, and attended a weekend intervention program 
where she was purportedly diagnosed as an alcohol abuser.2 She also attended follow-
up treatment at another facility, but no details of the treatment were provided. 
 
In 2016, Applicant was arrested for operating a vehicle under the influence of 
alcohol after she lost control of her vehicle, left the road and hit a pole. The police report 
noted that upon approaching Applicant in her car, she was so intoxicated she nearly fell 
out of the car, could not perform roadside sobriety tests, could not stand on her own, and 
was nearly carried to the police station. Her breathalyzer sample revealed a .334 blood 
alcohol content (BAC). She was convicted and ordered to serve 33 days confinement (30 
days suspended), fined, placed on one-year probation, and ordered to continue an 
alcohol treatment program already started. Details of the alcohol treatment program are 
not available in the record. 
 
In October 2017, Applicant was arrested for operating a vehicle under the influence 
of alcohol following a traffic accident. Her attorney recommended she attend an alcohol 
treatment program. She pleaded guilty and was ordered to be confined for 180 days (170 
                                                     
2 Applicant admitted the allegation, but the FORM does not contain documentation to support the diagnosis. 
 
3 
 
days suspended), home detention, supervised probation, fined, and ordered to undergo 
a drug and alcohol evaluation. She was released from probation in April 2018. There is 
no record of the results of the drug and alcohol evaluation.  
 
Applicant provided a short, hand-written letter from her therapist, dated June 21, 
2018. (AE A) The therapist noted that she was contacted after Applicant’s “second OVI.”3 
She noted Applicant’s hard work in therapy on personal issues that led to alcohol abuse, 
but did not expand on the issues involved, type and extent of treatment or therapy, or 
diagnosis. The therapist stated that Applicant no longer drinks alcohol and has resolved 
her personal issues satisfactorily. She stated that Applicant was doing extremely well in 
her life, and was not a threat to national security. 
 
Applicant noted the support of her employer and the Air Force, but did not provide 
independent evidence of such support. She also noted her dedication to her work and 
years of holding a security clearance without a security violation. She also stated that in 
the 15 months preceding her 2017 arrest, she fell on “hard times” and life was extremely 
difficult, but that she learned a valuable lesson, grew as a person, and changed her habits. 
Since Applicant elected a decision without a hearing, I was unable to inquire further into 
her alcohol treatment and evaluations, personal issues that led to alcohol related arrests, 
and any changes in lifestyle. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, effective on June 8, 2017. These AGs are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
                                                     
3 At the time Applicant sought counseling with this therapist, she had four alcohol related driving arrests. 
Applicant’s therapist did not disclose whether she was aware of Applicant’s complete background of alcohol 
related criminal history or prior treatment. 
 
4 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865  
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington 
Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed 
therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 
(App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01- 
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see, AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
Applicant has a history of drunk-driving arrests and convictions for over 20 years. 
In the 2016 arrest after an accident, her BAC was tested at .334%. One year later, she 
again was found guilty of drunk driving after another vehicle accident. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
Applicant’s history as detailed in the findings of fact, indicates a pattern of 
excessive use of alcohol and driving while impaired. Despite recurring incidents of 
alcohol-related arrests, probation, and court-ordered education classes, she has not 
shown sufficient evidence of abstinence or the ability to drink responsibly. Her current 
therapy is not conclusive since it is devoid of details of her alcohol use and treatment 
history, type and extent of therapy, and diagnosis. Because of the current therapist’s 
incomplete report, her prognosis has little value. Additionally, Applicant has been treated 
 
6 
 
or counseled after previous drunk-driving arrests, but relapsed and returned to drinking 
to intoxication and driving. The record is devoid of substantial evidence of a change in 
behavior, and efforts to ensure that no further alcohol related incidents will occur. I am 
not convinced that her newly claimed abstinence is credible or will be sustained in the 
future. None of the mitigating conditions fully apply, and Applicant’s evidence is not 
sufficient to overcome concerns about her established pattern of excessive alcohol use. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact 
and comments under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s history of 
alcohol-related incidents and failure to show credible rehabilitation and a changed lifestyle 
remain an ongoing concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
