1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01246 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On May 2, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on May 24, 
2018, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
The Government’s written case was submitted on June 29, 2018. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on July 9, 2018. As of 
August 27, 2018, he had not responded. The case was assigned to me on January 9, 
2019. The Government exhibits included in the FORM are admitted in evidence.  
01/15/2019
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2012. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1992 
until he retired in 2012. He is a high school graduate. He is married with an adult 
stepchild.1 
  
 Applicant did not file his federal income tax returns when they were due for tax 
years 2011 through 2016. His mother passed away in 2011, and he inherited an annuity 
of less than $10,000. His father and brother were upset that they did not inherit 
anything. His father threatened to disown Applicant if he did not sell the annuity and split 
it with his father and brother. Applicant sold the annuity, which may have created a tax 
liability, and split the results with his father and brother. He was overwhelmed by the 
loss of his mother and the strain placed on him by his family, and he did not feel that he 
was competent to prepare his federal income tax return. Rather than hire someone to 
prepare the return, he simply did nothing.2 
 
 Applicant thought he had to file the 2011 tax return before he filed subsequent 
years, and he did not file federal income tax returns for another five years. His wife was 
diagnosed with cancer, which also contributed to his failure to fulfill his obligations.3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
April 2017. He reported that he did not file his 2011 federal income tax return, but he did 
not report his failure to file the additional years. He wrote that the estimated amount of 
taxes owed was $45,000, and that he was “Working with the IRS to resolve/Monthly 
payments.” He also reported derogatory information under a different section.4 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in August 2017. He 
discussed his tax issues. He stated that he did not report the additional tax years on the 
SF 86 because he was unsure how to do so. He told the investigator that the $45,000 
figure on the SF 86 was his income for 2011, and it did not reflect the taxes owed for 
that year. He stated that he recently contacted tax professionals to file his tax returns, 
and he would then pay the IRS what he owes.5 After considering all the evidence, I find 
that Applicant did not intentionally provide false information on the SF 86. 
 
 Applicant provided documentation in his response to the SOR that he retained 
tax professionals. He asserted that the federal tax returns for 2011 through 2016 had 
been filed. He stated that he paid the IRS $15,910 as payment in full for tax years 2009 
                                                          
1 Items 2-3. 
 
2 Items 1-3. 
 
3 Items 1, 3. 
 
4 Item 2. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
and 2010. He also indicated that when the IRS determines how much he owes for 2011 
through 2016, the tax professionals will arrange a payment plan with the IRS.6 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling. He indicated that he has been 
forthcoming with his supervisors and leadership about his tax issues. He stated that he 
achieved every financial goal he set to address his tax problems. He is well regarded by 
the military units he supports.7  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
6 Item 1. 
 
7 Item 1. 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant did not file his federal income tax returns when they were due for tax 
years 2011 through 2016. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
condition.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant’s mother passed away in 2011. He was overwhelmed by the loss of his 
mother and the strain placed on him by his family over an inheritance. His wife also 
developed cancer. He did not feel competent to prepare his 2011 federal income tax 
return. Rather than hire someone to assist him, he simply did not file federal income tax 
returns for the next six years. The loss of his mother and his wife’s cancer are tragic 
events that were beyond his control, but he failed to act responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
 Failure to comply with tax laws suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
abiding by well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary compliance with 
rules and systems is essential for protecting classified information. See, e.g., ISCR 
Case No. 16-01726 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2018). A person who fails repeatedly to fulfill 
his or her legal obligations, such as filing tax returns when due, does not demonstrate 
the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted access to 
classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01382 at 4 (App. Bd. May 16, 
2018). This may be true even when the returns have been filed, as an applicant who 
begins to resolve his or her financial problems only after being placed on notice that his 
or her clearance is in jeopardy may lack the judgment and self-discipline to follow rules 
and regulations over time or when there is no immediate threat to his or her own 
interests. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 16-03187 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 1, 2018). 
 
  The tax returns have been filed, but Applicant still owes the IRS an indeterminate 
amount. His tax issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. AG 
¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable, and AG ¶ 20(g) is applicable, but they do not 
completely mitigate the judgment issues raised by Applicant’s many years of shirking 
his responsibility to file his tax returns and pay his taxes. I find that security concerns 
about Applicant’s finances remain despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant did not intentionally provide false information about his tax returns on 
his 2017 SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) has not been established. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for 
Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
 
7 
 
military service and that he is well regarded by the military units he supports. However, 
he shirked his tax responsibilities for years, and he still owes the IRS an indeterminate 
amount.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
