1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00144 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On May 18, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2017 
(AG). 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on June 1, 2018, and she requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 22, 2018, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on November 27, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 
6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list 
01/17/2019
 
2 
 
was identified as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered one exhibit (AE 
A), which was admitted without objection. The record remained open until December 
31, 2018, to allow Applicant to submit documentary evidence. She submitted AE B, 
which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 6, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted four SOR allegations and denied the remaining three. Her 
admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings 
and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She recently began 
working at her present job in approximately November 2018. She was laid off from her 
previous contractor job and was unemployed from May to October 2018. Before that, 
she worked for other federal contractors. She is married, but recently separated from 
her husband. She has four adult children. She has a high school diploma and has taken 
some college courses.1  
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant failed to file her federal and state income tax returns 
for years 2012 and 2013, and that she had five delinquent collection debts totaling 
approximately $11,430. Four of the debts are delinquent medical debts and the fifth is a 
deficiency from a vehicle repossession for a car loan she cosigned with her daughter. 
She admitted not filing her tax returns during her interview with a defense investigator in 
March 2017 and during her testimony. The debts were listed in credit reports from May 
2016, August 2017, and May 2018 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.g).2  
 
 Applicant credibly explained that she failed to file her tax returns because she 
experienced a series of medical issues that debilitated her to the point that she thought 
she had filed those returns when she had not. She was also unemployed during some 
of this time. She explained that she had hip surgery in 2009; back surgery in 2010; foot 
surgery in 2013; and another back surgery, involving fusion, in 2014. She was heavily 
medicated after these surgeries, which caused her to lose focus on daily life matters. 
After she completed her security clearance application (SCA) in March 2016, she 
received correspondence from the IRS indicating that she failed to file her tax returns for 
2012 and 2013. This is when she was first made aware that those returns were not filed. 
Applicant filed her 2012 and 2013 federal tax returns in April 2017. She contacted the 
state taxing authority to determine what years she needed to file. Because of a 
communication breakdown with the state tax authority, she did not file her 2012 and 
2013 state tax returns until March 2018. She paid the required tax due for those years 
(totaling $80) at the same time. She filed all of her federal and state tax returns before 
2012 and has filed them all for tax years 2014 forward.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 19-21; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 3-6. 
 
3 Tr. at 23, 25-27; Answer; GE 2-3. 
 
3 
 
 The status of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR is as follows: 
 
 Repossession account-$4,626. This is an automobile loan account Applicant 
cosigned with her daughter in 2011. Applicant’s daughter stopped making payments on 
the debt, and Applicant continued to do so through approximately 2014. Her 
unemployment and medical issues caused her to stop making payments at that time. 
She has been in contact with the creditor attempting to work out a payment plan.4 
 
 Four Medical Accounts-$2,788; $1,822; $2,144; $50. Applicant documented 
that three of the medical debts were settled and are resolved. Concerning the remaining 
debt, Applicant provided post-hearing information that she entered into a payment plan 
to make $100 monthly auto payments to the creditor. None of these accounts appear on 
her most recent credit report.5  
 
 Applicant testified that her current finances are in good order and that she 
typically has an $800 monthly surplus after paying all her expenses. She is current on 
her car loan, her camper, and her student loans. Her May 2018 credit report 
corroborates these assertions.6    
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 28-29; GE 6. 
 
5 Tr. at 29-30; Answer; GE 6; AE A-B. 
 
6 Tr. at 35; GE 6. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
5 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file her federal and state tax returns for 2012 and 2013, 
and she accrued several delinquent collection debts. I find all the above disqualifying 
conditions are raised. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Although Applicant should have responded in a more timely fashion, she has 
resolved her federal and state tax issues. She also addressed her delinquent debts. 
She missed filing her 2012 and 2013 tax returns when she experienced severe medical 
issues, which caused her to lose track of filing her returns. She also experienced 
periods of unemployment. These were conditions beyond her control. Given her health 
and employment status, she acted responsibly by filing her tax returns before the 
issuance of the SOR and by addressing her delinquent debts. There are clear 
indications that her financial issues are being resolved and that recurrence is unlikely. 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b) - 20(d) are applicable. Applicant filed her 2012 and 2013 federal and 
state income tax returns and has filed all her succeeding tax returns. AG ¶ 20(g) 
applies. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s federal contractor service, and the circumstances 
surrounding her indebtedness, specifically the medical issues she faced from 2009 
through 2014 and her periods of unemployment. I am convinced she will act in a timely 
manner with her taxes from now on, and that she will not incur tax problems or 
delinquent debts in the future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.g:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
