1 
-       
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01480 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Erin Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations or Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
     Statement of the Case 
On June 11, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant answered the SOR on 
July 5, 2018, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.  
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on August 16, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on August 24, 2018, and 
had 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided an 
undated, two-page response to the FORM, with attachments including two character 
references, and a printout of a two-year payment history of child support payments 
made in 2017 and 2018. The Government’s evidence, was identified as Items one 
01/04/2019
 
2 
 
 
through six. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on December 31, 2018.  
 
 Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He graduated from high school in 1988, and completed 
some community college courses, but did not obtain a degree. Applicant has been 
employed as a document preparation clerk by a federal contractor since October 2016. 
He was married in 1990 and divorced in 2004, and he remarried in 2007. He reports a 
son, age 18, and a daughter, age 15, and he has two-adult stepchildren. Applicant 
states that he had periods of unemployment including: October 2009 to October 2010; 
October 2013 to February 2014; August 2014 to May 2015; and November 2015 to 
June 2016. He served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 1989 to 1995 and earned an 
honorable discharge. He continues to serve in the Army Reserve and recently was 
promoted to sergeant first class. Applicant said he was deployed to Iraq for 15 months 
while he served on active duty at a U.S. base from October 2010 to October 2013.2 
 
Applicant disclosed an arrest in November 2015 for misapplying entrusted 
federal property in section 22 of his Security Clearance Application (SCA).3 He pled 
guilty in March 2016 to this misdemeanor offense and paid a $300 fine and $800 in 
court costs. He admitted to dumping several flyers and newsletters in a dumpster while 
he was employed as a letter carrier with the U.S. Postal Service (USPS). Applicant 
stated he resigned from the USPS under adverse circumstances but he was not 
terminated.4   
 
In his Answer to the SOR (Answer), Applicant admitted two of the three 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR totaling $37,340, Including the $36,532 child 
support arrearage alleged at SOR 1.a. He denied the debt placed for collection in the 
amount of $237 at SOR ¶ 1.c, stating that this account was paid in full as of June 22, 
2018. He attached a receipt documenting this payment to his Answer to the SOR. He 
also attached an “Income Withholding for Support” agreement that he entered into with 
his employer on February 16, 2018. This required Applicant to pay $1,012 per month in 
child support based on an order from the county court in state A.  
 
 The child support arrearage arose because although Applicant pays child 
support, his payments have been sporadic due to chronic unemployment.5 His first 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s February 19, 2017 
Security Clearance Application (SCA). (Item 3) 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Item 3.  
 
4 Item 4.  
 
5  Items 4 and 5.  
 
 
3 
 
 
marriage in 1990 was to a German national. They had a son and a daughter together. 
Applicant has had no contact with his son since 2004. Starting in 2006, a county court 
ordered that Applicant’s pay be garnished in the amount of $1,052 and sent to Germany 
via the county court in state A. This court order was reaffirmed in 2014. Applicant 
attached a one-page payment history to his response to the FORM, reflecting child 
support payments of $425 every two weeks in 2017, and $506 every two weeks (or 
$1,012 a month) in 2018, in compliance with the income withholding for support 
agreement. The last reported payment was made on August 17, 2018. He also attached 
two character reference letters attesting to his work ethic, integrity and trustworthiness.   
 
 He admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, for an automobile loan that is past due 
in the approximate amount of $571, with a total balance of $7,131. In his clearance 
interview, applicant claimed that he opened this account in 2005, and he eventually 
gave the vehicle to a friend who was supposed to take over payments on the loan. The 
friend reneged on his promise to make payments and Applicant attached a letter from 
the creditor dated June 26, 2018, to his Answer. It reflects a payment in the amount of 
$291 was verbally authorized in June 2018, and Applicant was supposed to continue 
making monthly payments on this automobile loan, pursuant to this verbal agreement. 
However, Applicant has provided no documents or evidence of the payment agreement, 
aside from this one-time payment, to support his claims. 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant also admitted the allegation under SOR ¶ 
2.a for personal conduct, his conviction for depositing postal flyers in the trash, with an 
explanation. He was already punished for this misconduct on the job as a letter carrier, 
when he paid court costs and a fine. He felt pressure to complete his mail route in a 
finite amount of time, which did not allow for additional advertising flyers to be delivered. 
He was also forced to resign under adverse conditions.    
 
                                             Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines promulgated in Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
4 
 
 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, answer to the SOR, and his clearance interviews. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(b) and 19(c), 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.6 Applicant has not met that burden. Only one of the 
delinquent debts has been resolved, the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under 
the circumstances;     
                                                          
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
6 
 
 
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant endured multiple periods of unemployment. Arguably, this condition 
was beyond his control. He bears some responsibility for his forced resignation as a 
letter carrier for misconduct. However, it is unclear what efforts he made to find 
employment. He made only sporadic child support payments, before being ordered to 
do so by the county court. He admits to an arrearage of more than $36,000. He did 
attach an income withholding for support agreement to his Answer, but it started in 
February 2018. His efforts are too little, too late. He has produced two favorable 
character references, but no evidence of financial counseling or a budget. 
 
  Applicant attached to his response to the FORM, a payment history showing 
child support payments made in 2017 and 2018, but he stated that these payments 
were ordered initially in 2006, and reaffirmed by the county court in 2014. It is unclear 
what payments, if any, he made before 2017. It is equally unclear why he was 
unemployed so frequently.   
 
 Applicant did produce evidence of one payment in the amount of $291 on his 
delinquent automobile loan at the end of June 2018. This is evidence of at least one 
repayment on this debt, presumably pursuant to a plan. He also demonstrated that the 
debt at SOR ¶ 1.c is paid in full. Yet, these efforts were on the eve of his FORM. SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b have not been resolved. In short, he has provided insufficient 
documentation to mitigate the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. His child support 
obligations are longstanding and unfulfilled. The alleged debts are recent and ongoing. 
He has not demonstrated that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant 
has the burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are 
under control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur. The mitigating conditions enumerated above do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes . . . .  
 
7 
 
 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgement, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics, indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, considerations of:  
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of government or other employer’s time 
or resources; and 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to  
the employer as a condition of employment.  
Since Applicant admitted his untrustworthy behavior and misdemeanor 
misconduct as a letter carrier, he has not mitigated the government’s concern. He had a 
fiduciary responsibility to his postal service customers when he was entrusted with their 
mail for delivery. He misused USPS time and resources. Although there is no evidence 
of a contract or writing, it is self-evident that his commitment to the USPS was to deliver 
the mail entrusted to him. He dumped it for his own convenience in expediting 
completion of his route. Insufficient time has passed since he committed this offense to 
conclude that Applicant would act reliably if he was entrusted with classified information.   
  Under AG ¶ 17, conditions that could potent ia l l y  mitigate security concerns 
include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant acknowledged his aberrant behavior by pleading guilty to the 
misdemeanor charge of misapplying entrusted federal property and disclosing his 
conviction in his SCA. He alleviated stressors and changed his circumstances by 
resigning his job under pressure. Since his arrest and conviction are public matters and 
he disclosed them, there is no vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
However, Applicant provided no evidence of counseling, and insufficient time has 
elapsed from his offense, to conclude that it won’t recur. His conviction cuts to the heart 
of the matter of special trust and confidence being placed in persons holding security 
clearances, and continues to cast doubt on his reliability and trustworthiness. Applicant 
has not mitigated the government’s concerns.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant has 
breached his position of trust as a letter carrier and raised concerns about his 
trustworthiness and reliability, which have not been mitigated, and he has not mitigated 
his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, or under Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
 
9 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:             Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:                                  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:                                   Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                   Administrative Judge 
 
