1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00652 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On March 28, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 
2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 21, 2018, and he requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on October 18, 2018, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on November 27, 2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s exhibit list was 
01/25/2019
 
2 
 
identified as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, but offered no exhibits. The 
record remained open until December 31, 2018, to allow Applicant to submit 
documentary evidence. He failed to submit any additional evidence.1 DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 7, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions are incorporated into these 
findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
at his present job in January 2017. In addition to his contractor job, he works part time 
for a local restaurant. He served in the Air Force for 20 years, honorably retiring as a 
staff sergeant (paygrade E-5). He deployed to Afghanistan where he was assigned to 
an Army unit. He received the Combat Action Badge (CAB) for his actions while 
deployed. He is a high school graduate. He is married, but currently separated from his 
wife. He has a 12-year-old daughter. His daughter has anxiety issues and therefore only 
attends school part time. She participates in on-line home schooling the rest of the time. 
For this reason, Applicant’s wife stays home with their daughter.2  
 
 The SOR alleged 16 delinquent debts totaling approximately $22,783. The debts 
were listed in credit reports from June 2017, and March 2018 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.p).3  
 
 Applicant explained that his financial difficulties started in approximately 2012 
when he was still in the Air Force. He received an administrative reduction in rank and 
his wife was unemployed. As a result of their reduced income, the family had a difficult 
time paying their bills. During his background investigation in October 2017, Applicant 
was confronted with his delinquent debts. He acknowledged most of them and stated he 
would get with a debt-consolidation company to work on resolving them. He failed to 
produce evidence of any such subsequent action by him.4   
 
 During his testimony, he admitted that he failed to contact any of his creditors or 
to take any action to resolve his debts, with two exceptions. He claims the credit-card 
debt in the amount of $2,274 (SOR ¶ 1.m) is being paid from his military retirement 
account. He did not provide supporting documentation, but his March 2018 credit report 
shows a balance reduction as compared to the balance shown on his June 2017 credit 
report. He also claimed he is making payments toward the consumer debt listed in SOR 
                                                          
1 I directed Department Counsel to contact Applicant to inquire whether he submitted any 
material. On January 11, 2019, she sent Applicant an email at his confirmed email address (See HE II). 
As of January 23, 2018, no reply was received from Applicant. 
 
2 Tr. at 5, 15-16; GE 1. 
 
3 GE 4-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 16-17; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
¶ 1.e. He failed to supply any supporting documentation showing those payments. His 
remaining debts are unresolved.5  
 
 Applicant did not produce a budget, but indicated that after paying all his monthly 
bills, he retained approximately $600-$700 at the end of every month. He plans to use 
this excess and the money he receives from his second job to pay his delinquent debts. 
He believes he just needs more time to take care of his debts. He failed to produce any 
documentation showing progress toward resolving his debts when the record was kept 
open for 30 days.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 23-25; GE 4-5. 
 
6 Tr. at 28, 38, 40. 
 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both the 
above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant’s debts are recent and multiple. He has not resolved any of the SOR 
debts. He is making payments from his military retirement account toward one debt. He 
failed to produce evidence showing that recurrence of his financial problems is unlikely. 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s wife’s unemployment, caused by their daughter’s medical issues, can 
be considered a circumstance beyond his control. However, he failed to act responsibly 
by establishing payment plans for the identified debts. Overall, the record evidence 
does not support that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) 
is partially applicable.  
  
 Applicant did not present evidence of financial counseling. Given the unpaid 
status of his debts, Applicant’s financial problems are not under control and good-faith 
efforts to pay or resolve the remaining debts are lacking. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not 
apply. Applicant is making payments on one debt (SOR ¶ 1.m) and AG ¶ 20(d) applies 
to that debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s federal contractor service and his military service. 
However, I also considered that he has made insufficient efforts to resolve his debts. He 
has not established a meaningful track record of debt management, which causes me to 
question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.7   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a - 1.l:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph:   1.m:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs: 1.n - 1.p:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 I considered the exceptions under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix C, 
dated June 8, 2017, and determined they are not applicable in this case.  
