1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 18-01486 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Gatha Manns, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se   
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for 
access to classified information. She presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concern stemming from her delinquent student loans and 
delinquent consumer debts. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
Statement of the Case 
On July 6, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that her 
circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 2, 2018, and requested a hearing to establish 
her eligibility for continued access to classified information.1 
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here.    
01/28/2019
2 
 
 On January 15, 2019, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant testified, and the exhibits offered by the Government were admitted into the 
administrative record without objection. (Government Exhibits (GE) 1 – 5 and Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) I and II were admitted without objection.) Applicant offered one exhibit, 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. At the request of 
Applicant, without objection, the record remained open until January 29, 2019. Applicant 
timely submitted five documents, which I marked as AE B through AE F and which were 
admitted without objection. The transcript (Tr.) was received on January 23, 2019.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 45 years old, a college graduate, and has been divorced since 2010. 
She has three adult children. Applicant has been employed by the same defense 
contractor since October 2011.2  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has six delinquent debts totaling $71,072, of which 
two student loans total $62,076.3 Along with her Answer to the SOR, Applicant provided 
documentation establishing that two of the SOR debts are under payment plans to which 
she is adhering, and two of the SOR debts have been paid in full.4  
 
Applicant testified about the status of her two student loans and explained AE A, 
which is a payment history for those loans. Although technically in default, since October 
2005 through January 2019, Applicant has routinely made monthly payments of amounts 
ranging from $5 to $6,847. The lender, in its discretion, allocates each payment to either 
interest-only, principal-only, or some split. Since April 2018, Applicant has only been able 
to address the interest.  She expects soon, however, to have the lender lift the default 
status, so her monthly payments can be allocated to retire some of the principal.5  
 
Applicant testified about the circumstances that caused her indebtedness. In 2009, 
Applicant and her then spouse encountered marital problems, and in 2010 they divorced. 
At the time, Applicant’s spouse, the father of the three children, was the sole breadwinner, 
Applicant being a full-time mother caring for the children. She was unemployed and was 
thereby deprived of the $80,000 to $90,000 annual earnings her spouse brought to the 
household. After the separation and divorce, Applicant’s ex-spouse provided only 
“occasional” child support. Applicant quickly took part-time jobs, like janitorial work  
cleaning offices. Because of the children, she could only manage about 20 hours of work 
                                                          
2 GE 1; Tr. 18, 25.  
 
3 SOR ¶ 1.  
 
4 Answer ¶¶ 1.(c) and (d) (payment plans); Answer ¶¶ 1.(e) and (f) (paid in full). 
 
5 AE A; Tr. 20-22.  
 
3 
 
per week. After she began her current job in October 2011, however, Applicant 
succeeded in becoming current with most of her debts.6  
 
Applicant’s post-hearing submissions are five annual Employee Performance 
Evaluations for Applicant from July 2012 through June 2017. Applicant routinely exceeds 
Rating Guidelines and in some categories, she “Significantly Exceeds” those Guidelines. 
Applicant is described as a “strong employee,” one with “excellent problem solving skills” 
who is “thorough and accurate,” and a “team player.”7   
 
     Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
                                                          
6 Tr. 20, 25-28. Applicant has about $15,000 in her 401(k), $7,000 in savings, and $5,000 in an emergency 
fund. Tr. 24.  
 
7 AE B through AE F.  
4 
 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has a number of delinquent debts, which 
purportedly raise a security concern under Guideline F. The financial considerations 
security concern is explained at AG ¶ 18, which in pertinent part, states: 
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence.  
 
 Guideline F is not limited to a consideration of whether a person with financial 
issues might be tempted to compromise classified information or engage in other illegality 
to pay their debts. It also addresses the extent to which the circumstances giving rise to 
delinquent debt and other security-significant financial issues cast doubt upon a person’s 
self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified information.8 
 
 In assessing Applicant’s case, I considered the following pertinent disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May. 1, 2012).  
 
5 
 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a debt-collection process. Rather, my 
obligation is to examine the way an applicant handles her personal financial obligations 
to assess how she may handle her security obligations.9 Here, Applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility was called into question by her delinquent student loans and 
delinquent consumer debt. I conclude that disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a) and (c) 
apply. The next inquiry is whether any mitigating conditions apply.  
 
The record is clear that Applicant’s financial problems were caused by her divorce 
in 2010. At the time, she became an unemployed (outside of the home) mother of three 
who suddenly lost all of her household income. What help she got from her ex-spouse 
was only “occasional,” not much to rely upon in raising a family of four. After a few part-
time jobs, in October 2011 Applicant landed the job where she works to this day. She is 
a valued employee and has managed to dig herself out of the financial hole that the 
divorce caused. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), and (d) apply.  
   
The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person 
concept.10 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion 
to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      For Applicant 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:        For Applicant 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
9 See generally ISCR Case No. ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016). 
 
10 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
6 
 
  Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
 
  
____________________ 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
