1 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
[Name Redacted] ) ISCR Case No. 18-00158 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Stephen C. Glassman, Esquire 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance (e-QIP) on February 
23, 2017. On February 28, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement; and Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented within the Department of Defense on June 8, 
2017.  
On April 3, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 10, 2018. 
Another administrative judge was assigned the case on August 9, 2018.  On September 
21, 2018, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing on October 25, 2018. 
The case was transferred to me on October 10, 2018, because of the unavailability of 
the assigned administrative judge. The hearing was held as scheduled. During the 
hearing, the Government offered five exhibits which were admitted as Government 
(Gov) Exhibits 1 - 5. Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered one exhibit 
which is admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A (consisting of a green notebook containing 
01/24/2019
2 
 
a brief from Applicant’s counsel and five attached exhibits), without objection. The 
transcript was received on November 2, 2018. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to the allegations.    
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old senior-level employee for a DOD contractor who seeks 
a security clearance. He has been employed with the DOD contractor since June 2013. 
He has held a top secret security clearance since 2008. He has a bachelor’s degree 
and has also attended executive-education courses. He is married and has three 
children. Two are in college and the youngest is in high school. (Tr.17-22, 34, 53; Gov 
1) (Note: The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of 
witnesses, or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited 
sources contain more specific information.)  
 
Under the drug involvement concern, the SOR alleged Applicant used marijuana 
in February 2014 and in January 2016 after being granted a security clearance in 2008.  
The same conduct is cross-alleged under the personal conduct concern. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations, but states he did not believe he 
was committing a crime because marijuana use occurred in a state where marijuana 
use is legal. (Response to SOR, dated April 3, 2018)  
 
On September 25, 2014, Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP) for a periodic reinvestigation.  In response to Section 
23 – Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity, Applicant listed that he used marijuana once 
on vacation. He believed marijuana was legal in the state where he used it. Applicant 
indicated on his e-QIP application that “It was legal in [state redacted], or so I thought at 
the time.” (Gov 2, section 23)  
 
On August 29, 2014, Applicant submitted a Standard Form 86 (SF 86), seeking 
to upgrade his security clearance for access to sensitive compartmented information 
(SCI). His sponsor was another government agency who sponsored him for his work as 
a contractor with the agency. In response to questions regarding illegal drug use, he 
listed marijuana use in January 2013 in a state where marijuana use was legal and 
marijuana use in June 2014 with his former college roommate. The location as to where 
the use occurred in June 2014 was cut off on the SF 86. (Item 5 b) The January 2013 
and June 2014 marijuana usage was not alleged in the SOR.  As such, it will not be 
considered under the disqualifying factors, but will be considered when applying matters 
of extenuation and mitigation.   
 
As part of processing for SCI access, the other government agency had 
Applicant execute a Personnel Security Policy Advisory on August 29, 2014, which 
states: 
 
As a condition of receiving or retaining security clearance with [other 
government agency], you are required to adhere to various personnel 
3 
 
security policies. These policies are in effect to provide NSA affiliates from 
being targets of espionage and other hostile activities carried out by or on 
behalf of foreign intelligence entities.” The policies included: 
 
Improper Use of Drugs – The improper usage of drugs by [other 
government agency affiliates] (e.g., [other government agency] 
employees, military assignees or representatives, contractors, 
consultants, and experts) and applicants is strictly prohibited. Improper 
use includes the illegal use of controlled substances as will as the use, 
transfer, possession, sale or purchase of any drug for purposes other than 
their intended medical use. . . .  
 
Failure to observe the policies summarized above may constitute grounds 
for disqualification from initial or continued access to [other government 
agency] information and facilities. Your signature below indicates your 
understanding and willingness to comply with these policies. 
 
While the actual statement signed by Applicant is not in the record, the 
Clearance Decision statement of the other government agency indicates he signed the 
statement on August 29, 2014.  (Gov 5a)   
  
Applicant was interviewed by an investigator conducting a background 
investigation on June 12, 2015. I considered the summary of the interview, but gave it 
less weight because it is unsworn and unauthenticated. (See Directive, enclosure 3, 
para 1.20) Applicant’s 2014 marijuana use was discussed during the interview.  The 
investigator’s summary of the interview states that Applicant had no desire to try 
marijuana again because he now realizes marijuana use remains illegal under federal 
law. (Gov 4)  Applicant did not recall this interview or making the above statement. He 
conceded under cross-examination that if it was in the statement he probably said it. 
(Tr. 59)  
 
On January 11, 2016, Applicant underwent a counterintelligence polygraph. 
During the pre-polygraph interview, Applicant told the polygrapher that he used 
marijuana in 2014 and 2016 while on vacation in a state where marijuana use was legal.  
His most recent use of marijuana occurred about two weeks before the polygraph. He 
believed that it was okay to use marijuana because it was legal in the state where he 
used it. The polygrapher told him that the use of marijuana was not okay because 
marijuana use was still illegal under federal law. Applicant claimed that he was not 
aware of this until he was so advised by the polygrapher. Applicant testified the 
polygrapher told him something to the effect that they would not be having this 
conversation a year from now, implying that marijuana may become legal nationwide. 
(Tr. 35-36; Gov 3 at 9-10 )  
 
The polygrapher asked Applicant if he intended to use marijuana in the future.  
Applicant responded, “I don’t know that I’d never use it again.” Applicant testified he 
intended to be honest and meant that he might possibly use marijuana again if it 
became legal under federal law or if he retired and traveled to a place where marijuana 
is legal. He stressed that he had no intentions of using marijuana while possessing a 
4 
 
security clearance and while working for the U.S. government. He believes the 
polygrapher mischaracterized his answer. (Tr. 38-39, 60-61; Gov 3 at 10)  
 
The polygrapher summarized the interview as follows: 
 
[Applicant] reported that from approximately January 2013 to January 
2016, he smoked marijuana approximately twice a year. In each instance, 
he was given marijuana free of charge from a friend. He reported that the 
last time he smoked marijuana was “this past Thursday,” which was 7 
January 2016. He reported that he had an active security clearance at the 
time. [Applicant] initially reported that he is likely to smoke marijuana again 
in the future; however, when asked if he would cease smoking the 
substance as a condition of employment, he stated, “yes.”  (Gov 5a at 2)   
 
Applicant disputed the polygrapher’s assertion that he used marijuana 
approximately twice a year from 2013 to January 2014.  Applicant testified there were a 
number of statements reflected in the report that were not factual or were taken out of 
context. (Tr. 59-61) On October 17, 2016, the other government agency denied 
Applicant access to SCI. (Gov 5a)  
   
On February 23, 2017, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. He listed that he used 
marijuana on two occasions in February 2014 and January 2016. On both occasions, he 
was on vacation with friends. Marijuana use was legal in the state where he vacationed 
with friends. Applicant later indicated in response to the question regarding future use “I 
now understand that was in violation of a federal statute by doing so.” (Gov 1, section 
23) 
 
In response to Section 25 – Investigations and Clearance Record on the same e-
QIP application, Applicant answered “Yes” in response to “Have you EVER had a 
security clearance eligibility/access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked?”  He 
explained: 
 
I smoked marijuana in a state where it was considered legal, while not 
realizing that I was violating the terms of my clearance given the federal 
nature of the action. I made it clear that if my employment status was 
contingent upon not smoking marijuana I would refrain. I have also 
completely refrained (January 2016) since I became aware that I violated 
the terms of my clearance.  
 
(Gov 1, section 25)  
  
Applicant has not used marijuana since January 2016.  He is not a habitual user. 
He claims all marijuana use occurred with friends while on vacation in a state where 
marijuana was legalized in 2013. He provided a statement on October 25, 2018, 
indicating that he does not intend to use marijuana in the future and is aware that any 
future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.  
(Tr. 39; AE A, exhibit 3)  
 
5 
 
Applicant no longer attends his friends’ annual vacation. He avoids situations 
where friends may use marijuana. Applicant testified that he was not addicted to 
marijuana. His marijuana usage never created problems in his life. He believed it was 
legal to use marijuana in the state where he was on holiday and only partook in the 
marijuana that was being passed around at the house where he and his friends were 
staying before they went out to dinner. If he was informed that marijuana use remained 
illegal under federal law, he would not have used it.  (Tr. 36-37, 42-45, 71 ) 
 
When asked why he was surprised to learn that marijuana was illegal under 
federal law in his 2017 background investigation, Applicant testified: 
 
There are - - you hear constant stories in the media about what is and is 
not legal, factual. There is so much conflicting information. And by the 
way, as my OPM investigator said to me, there is so much conflicting 
information out there that there is not a clear story as to what’s legal, 
what’s not, and as with any element of life, things constantly evolve and 
change. And, as I understood, that is the case.  (Tr. 62-63)  
 
Applicant is remorseful about his marijuana use. He would never have used 
marijuana had he known the seriousness of his actions. He does not believe any of his 
friends would pressure him to use marijuana again. His family, several of his closest 
friends, and some of his colleagues at work are aware of his past marijuana use. His 
marijuana use cannot be used to blackmail him. (Tr. 36, 49-50; AE 3 at 10)  
 
The Facility Security Officer (FSO) of Applicant’s employer (FSO A) testified 
during the hearing. He is a vice-president of administration and also serves as the FSO 
as an additional duty. The company has 21 people who have or need security 
clearances. In 2015, he trained to be an FSO by taking online training offered by the 
Center for Defense Security Excellence. During the online self-paced training, FSO A 
claims there was no discussion about the use of marijuana and the impact on security 
clearances. He never told Applicant about the adverse consequences of using 
marijuana while possessing a security clearance. (Tr. 72-77)  
 
FSO A claimed he only learned there was an issue about using marijuana while 
possessing a security clearance after Applicant told him about it after his background 
investigation interview. The Defense Security Service (DSS) sends out monthly e-mails 
about high-level facility security updates and changes in policy. FSO A cannot recall any 
of the e-mails containing information about the use of marijuana while possessing a 
security clearance. (Tr. 73-77)   
 
 FSO A is familiar with the SF 86.  He is aware that the questionnaire contains 
questions regarding illegal drug use. If an employee came to him and told him of their 
marijuana use, he would file an incident report. He testified he is required to report the 
use because marijuana remains illegal at the federal level. He is aware of that the policy 
regarding marijuana use has not changed. He never told Applicant or employees of the  
company that it was okay to use marijuana. He is aware of the statutory law on a federal 
drug-free workplace. He is aware that employees are subject to urinalysis. Applicant 
never came to him to inquire about the use of marijuana, how it relates to federal law, or 
6 
 
the affect it would have on his security clearance. He does not recall if he received any 
updates on DoD policy regarding the state legalizations of marijuana and how it affects 
federal law.  (Tr. 78-86)     
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
 Mr. M. met Applicant through a young leader’s business association. Applicant 
has been the leader of the organization over the past five years. Mr. M. is the president 
of a $6 billion privately-held company and holds a top secret security clearance. He 
believes Applicant is worthy of holding a security clearance because of the tremendous 
value his company provides to the U.S. government. If his privileged access is removed, 
it would be harmful to his business and its over 130 employees.  He strongly 
recommends Applicant be allowed to maintain a security clearance. (AE A, exhibit 4)  
 
Mr. A. is a long-time friend, neighbor and associate of Applicant’s. He describes 
Applicant as “an astute and responsible professional” and a wonderful father and 
husband. They have been neighbors for seven years. They attend the same church, 
health club as well as social events. Applicant’s reputation is “impeccable.” He is highly 
regarded in the community. He describes Applicant as a loyal U.S. citizen who 
possesses the necessary judgment to be trusted with matters of national security. He is 
a man of high integrity and good moral character. (AE A, exhibit 5)  
 
Numerous business colleagues of Applicant provided favorable comments about 
Applicant on his Linkedin page. (AE A, exhibit 1)  
   
DOD and Federal Government Policy on Marijuana Use  
 
  On October 25, 2014, the Director for National Intelligence, issued a 
memorandum titled, “Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana Use” addressing 
concerns raised by the decriminalization of marijuana use in several states and the 
District of Columbia. The memorandum states that changes to state and local laws do 
not alter the existing National Security Adjudicative Guidelines. “An individual’s 
disregard for federal law pertaining the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains 
adjudicatively relevant in national security determinations.”  
 
  On May 26, 2015, the Director of the United States Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) issued a memorandum titled, “Federal Laws and Policies 
Prohibiting Marijuana Use.” The Director of OPM acknowledged that several 
jurisdictions have decriminalized the use of marijuana, allowing the use of marijuana for 
medicinal purposes and/or for limited recreational use but states that Federal law on 
marijuana remains unchanged. Marijuana is categorized as a controlled substance 
under Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act. Thus knowing or intentional 
marijuana possession is illegal, even if the individual has no intent to manufacture, 
distribute, or dispense marijuana.  
    
 
 
 
7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:       
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of  
prescription drug and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other 
substances that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a 
manner inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled 
substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic 
term adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed 
above.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG & 25(a) any substance misuse; 
 
AG & 25(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including 
cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia; and  
 
AG & 25(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified 
information or holding a sensitive position.  
 
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits he used marijuana once in 2014 and 
once in 2016, both times while on vacation with friends in a state where marijuana use 
is legal. AG & 25(a) and AG & 25(c) apply.  His use occurred while he held a security 
clearance. AG & 25(f) applies.  
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to the Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
9 
 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
  
AG & 26(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
    
 AG ¶ 26(a) applies because three years have passed since Applicant’s last use 
of marijuana. At the time of use, Applicant believed his conduct was not illegal, because 
the state legalized the use of marijuana. He was unaware that marijuana use remained 
illegal under federal law.  Applicant disclosed marijuana use on several security 
clearance applications in 2013, 2014, and 2016 while in a state where marijuana use 
was legal. Although there was an additional admitted use of marijuana in 2013 by 
Applicant that was not alleged in the SOR, I find the discrepancies in the number of 
times used to be minimal. Once he learned marijuana use was illegal under federal law, 
he stopped using marijuana. Applicant has not used marijuana for over three years, and 
he was forthcoming about his marijuana use, which shows trustworthiness.  
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) applies. Applicant stopped using marijuana in January 2016, when he 
discovered marijuana use remains illegal under federal law even though it is legal in the 
state where he used it. He was not a regular user. Although he attended the annual trip 
for ten years, he stopped attending to avoid being around his friends who use 
marijuana. He no longer associates with anyone who uses marijuana or any other illegal 
narcotic, On October 25, 2018, he provided a signed statement of intent to refrain from 
all drug involvement and substance misuse. Applicant was truthful about his marijuana 
use and demonstrated an appropriate pattern of abstinence.  
 
 Applicant met his burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Applicant is warned that any future illegal marijuana use will result 
in the revocation of his security clearance.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during the national 
security or adjudicative processes.  
 
10 
 
 The following disqualifying conditions potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
AG & 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct , that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress by a foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such 
conduct includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if know, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.   
  
 AG ¶ 16(c) applies to Applicant’s marijuana use while entrusted with a security 
clearance. Applicant’s past conduct raises issues about his judgment, reliability, and 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations. This raises doubts as to Applicant’s 
ability to protect classified information.   
 
 AG & 16(e) applies because Applicant’s illegal marijuana use has the potential to 
affect his personal, professional, or community standing. As a senior leader of his 
company, Applicant should have demonstrated better judgment when opting to use 
marijuana even though it was legal in the state where he used it. He should have 
researched whether there would be security concerns raised when using marijuana 
even in a state where marijuana was legalized.   
 
 Under Guideline E, the following mitigating conditions potentially apply in 
Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
   
AG ¶ 17(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
AG & 17(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
11 
 
 All above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant used marijuana because it was 
legal under the state law. He was not aware that it was illegal under federal law. Upon 
learning it was illegal under federal law, Applicant immediately stopped using marijuana. 
He no longer attends the annual trip where the marijuana use occurred. Applicant was 
honest about his marijuana use and once he understood that his marijuana use was an 
issue, he stopped. He has not used marijuana in three years.  He was not addicted to 
marijuana. He learned a difficult lesson, and his past marijuana use no longer casts 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
There are reasons that support not granting a security clearance to Applicant.  
Questions are raised about Applicant’s judgment because of his failure to look into 
whether marijuana use in state where it was legalized would raise a security concern. 
Having held a security clearance since 2008, he should have known better. There is 
some evidence that he was told during a 2015 background investigation interview that 
marijuana remained illegal under federal law, yet he used marijuana in January 2016.  
 
I find the mitigating reasons outweigh the disqualifying reasons in Applicant’s 
case.  His honesty in disclosing his marijuana use during the security clearance process 
supports that he is trustworthy. At the location where he used the marijuana it was legal 
under state law.  Once he understood that marijuana remained illegal under federal law 
and was incompatible with holding a security clearance, he stopped using marijuana 
and has not used marijuana for over three years. He signed a statement of intent to 
refrain from all drug involvement and substance misuse and acknowledged that any 
future substance misuse would result in the revocation of his security clearance. 
Applicant is a successful businessman who is highly regarded among his peers. He is a 
family man. He and his wife have three children.     
 
12 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has learned a significant 
lesson.  Having been denied access to SCI in October 2016, he learned from his 
mistake in judgment and took steps to demonstrate his intent to refrain from illegal 
marijuana use. Concerns raised by Applicant’s illegal marijuana use are mitigated. 
Applicant is warned that any future illegal marijuana use will result in the revocation of 
Applicant’s security clearance.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT   
   
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  Applicant is warned 
that any future use of illegal substances will result in the revocation of his security 
clearance.  
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
