 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01538 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 28, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
On June 13, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 17, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on August 27, 2018.  The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on November 15, 
2018, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 3, 2018. The 
Government offered four exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 4, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered one exhibit at the hearing, 
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A.  Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on December 11, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 46 years old.  He is married a second time and has two step-
children, and three biological children from a previous marriage.  He has an Associate’s 
Degree.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Logistics Analyst and is seeking 
to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
Applicant served for twenty years on active duty in the United States Navy.  He 
retired honorably as an E-5 in 2011.   
 
Applicant states that he became delinquently indebted while in the military.  He 
separated from his first wife in 2005.  After their divorce, Applicant’s debt accumulated 
as he had the responsibility to take care of two households, including his ex-wife and 
their three children, as well as himself.  Applicant testified that he was stationed 
overseas at the time, and he was simply trying to make ends meet.  To assist him with 
this financial responsibility, he took out a loan with Navy-Marine Corps Relief Society, 
but he never obtained any financial counseling, budgets, or any other services that 
could have possibly helped him with this financial situation.  After retiring from the Navy 
in 2011, Applicant found it difficult adjusting to the civilian salary which was substantially 
less than what he had been making in the military.  Although he received a military 
pension, his pension and his civilian salary together was still less than what he had 
earned in the military.  (Tr. pp. 37 -38.)  As a result, he became delinquently indebted to 
the following creditors.   
 
The SOR identified fourteen debts under this guideline, totaling in excess of 
$51,000.  In his answer, Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this 
guideline.  Applicant began working for his current employer in 2015, and has been 
trying to remedy his financial indebtedness since then.  Credit Reports of the Applicant 
dated January 5, 2018, and August 19, 2018, confirm each of the debts listed in the 
SOR.  (Government Exhibits 3 and 4.)  
 
1.a.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $24,747.  This is for a car that Applicant leased that had 
excessive mileage.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 24.)     
 
 
3 
 
1.b.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $7,678.  This is a personal loan that Applicant took out.  The 
debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 25.)  
 
1.c. A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $4,303.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 26.)   
  
1.d.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $3,478.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 26.) 
 
1.e.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $3,363.  This is a military credit card.  Applicant states that he is 
currently making payments toward the debt of $70 monthly through allotments.  (Tr. p. 
27.)  He has provided no supporting documentation. 
 
1.f. A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $2,590.  This was a personal loan that Applicant has paid in full.  
(Tr. p. 27, and Applicant’s Exhibit A.)   
  
1.g.  Applicant owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $619.  This is a personal loan. The debt remains owing.  (Tr. 
p. 29.)   
 
1.h.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $536.  The debt remains owing.           
 
1.i. A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $1,349.  The debt is related to an apartment that Applicant 
rented.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 30.)    
  
1.j.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $1,276.  The debt remains owing. 
 
1.k.  A debt owed to a creditor for an account was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $676.  This is a credit card.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. pp. 
30-31.)   
 
1.l. A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection the 
approximately amount of $300.  This is for automobile insurance.  The debt remain 
owing.  (Tr. p. 31.)     
 
1.m.  A debt owed to a creditor for a medical account was placed for collection in 
the approximate amount of $210.  This is a medical bill.  The debt remains owing.  
(Tr.p.31.)   
 
1.n. A debt owed to a creditor for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximately amount of $61.  The debt remains owing.  (Tr. p. 31.)     
 
4 
 
 With his current employer, Applicant is now earning about $80,000 annually.  He 
states that he has now gotten to the point where he is above water and can start paying 
some of his delinquent debts off.  (Tr. p. 36.)     
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct  
 
 The Government alleges that the Applicant engaged in conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations that raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation set forth under this guideline.  He completed an 
e-QIP dated December 14, 2017.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  Section 26 asked about his 
Financial Record, specifically, “Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts Other than 
Previously Listed.”  The question asked, “In the past 7 years, have you defaulted on any 
type of loan?”  It also asked, “In the past seven years have you had bills or debts turned 
over to a collection agency?”  It further asked, “In the past seven years have you had 
any account or credit card suspended, charged off or cancelled for failing to pay as 
agreed?  In the past seven years have you been over 120 days delinquent on any debt 
not previously entered?  and, are you currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt 
not previously entered?  Applicant responded, “NO,” to all four questions.  (Government 
Exhibit 1.)  These were false answers.  Applicant failed to list any of the delinquent 
debts set forth in allegations 1. a., through 1. n., of the SOR.      
 
 Applicant explained that the reason he did not list his delinquent debts on his 
security clearance application is because there were “a lot to list”.  He knew that he was 
going to have to answer questions about them during his personal interview and so he 
did not list them.  He states that he did not intent to deceive or hide anything from the 
Government.  (Tr. p. 32.)  
 
  I do not find this testimony credible.  Applicant knew or should have known that 
he should answer the questions on the security clearance application truthfully.  He 
should have listed his delinquent debts in response to the questions in Section 26.  
Under the circumstances, he obviously thought that there were so many he did not want 
to be bothered.         
  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
 
5 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
6 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant remains excessively indebted.  He states that he has paid off one of 
the debts listed in the SOR and is making payments toward resolving another.  There is 
no evidence in the record to demonstrate that he is now financially stable, that he can 
afford his lifestyle, or that he has the financial resources available to handle his financial 
obligations.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under Financial Considerations are potentially 
applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent  or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
7 
 
  Trying to maintain two households on one person’s salary is difficult enough, 
especially where child support payments are required.  This situation obviously 
contributed to Applicant’s financial difficulties.  In addition, having to adjust from living 
on a military salary to a civilian salary, operating with less income and having to pay 
more taxes is also more financially burdensome.  In this case, Applicant encountered 
both of these situations.  However, at this point, although he has been working full time 
for several years, he has not yet started his monthly payments to resolve his delinquent 
debts, and they, for the most part, remain excessive and outstanding.  At this point, it 
cannot be said that he is financially stable or that he has made a good faith effort to 
resolve his indebtedness. 
  
Guideline E- Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.   
  
 Applicant deliberately falsified his e-QIP in response to questions regarding his 
delinquent debts.  Applicant is a retired veteran who understands the importance of 
being truthful on his security clearance application.  He knew that he had a lot of 
delinquent debts, and he deliberately failed to disclose them in response to questions 
requiring him to do so on the e-QIP.  The Government relies on one’s responses to the 
questions on the e-QIP to determine ones trustworthiness.  If the answers are not 
truthful, the Government is misled, and Applicant cannot be trusted.  Under the 
circumstances, Applicant knew about his financial indebtedness and deliberately chose 
not to list them.  He was not honest with the Government about them.  There are no 
applicable conditions that could be mitigating under AG ¶ 17.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant:    
  Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l.:   Against Applicant:    
  Subparagraph 1.m.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n.:   Against Applicant 
   
 
9 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
