1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01540 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline I, psychological 
conditions, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On August 10, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline I, psychological conditions, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 12, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 15, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
01/24/2019
 
2 
 
 
18, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 8, 2018. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3.1 Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 
A through D. There were no objections to any exhibits offered, and all were admitted into 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on November 26, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. He denied the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b through 1.d and 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old. He has a bachelor’s degree and two master’s degrees. 
He has never married and has no children. He has worked for a federal contractor since 
2005.2  
 
 In about June 2014, Applicant attempted suicide. After receiving treatment for 
physical injuries, he was voluntarily admitted to an inpatient mental-health facility for 
evaluation and treatment. Applicant testified that he was working long hours, going to 
work in the morning in the dark and coming home in the evening in the dark. His home 
needed repairs and he was trying to keep his homeowners’ association happy. He 
testified that he had a multitude of stressors that were increasing. He said he turned into 
a robot. He was alone, sad, and lost sight of what was important. He was dealing with 
these emotional issues without professional help. He was performance-oriented, and that 
attitude overrode what he should have been doing, which was to take care of himself. He 
lost touch with his personal needs. He was gaunt at the time and not eating healthy foods. 
When be felt overwhelmed by stress, he cut his wrists. He admitted himself to the hospital 
where he was treated, and then voluntarily admitted himself to inpatient treatment for two 
weeks.3  
 
 Applicant testified that he was treated by a psychiatrist after he was released from 
treatment in 2014. He saw the psychiatrist monthly and was prescribed medication. His 
treatment with this psychiatrist ceased in March 2015. In early 2016 Applicant was treated 
by a nurse practitioner, who was part of the psychiatrist’s practice, through the middle of 
2016.4  
 
 While in treatment, Applicant was diagnosed with a major depressive disorder-
single episode. He was prescribed antidepressant drugs, but had a negative reaction to 
the first medication. It was then changed to one he could tolerate. He remained on the 
medication until August 2016 when he was told by the nurse practitioner that he could 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the discovery letter.  
 
2 Tr. 15-16. 
 
3 Tr. 35-38, 44-45, 53. 
 
4 Tr. 27-31, 38-40, 45-48. 
 
3 
 
 
reduce the medication based on his own determination of his needs. He no longer takes 
this medication.5 
 
 In February 2018, Applicant participated in a government-requested psychological 
evaluation conducted by a duly qualified mental health professional, a neuropsychologist. 
A series of psychological tests were conducted. He was diagnosed with major depressive 
disorder, recurrent severe, with psychotic symptoms.6  
 
 Applicant’s prognosis by the neuropsychologist is guarded due to untreated 
symptoms of mood disturbance and psychosis, and limited awareness of his mental 
status. She noted that Applicant’s reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness could be 
affected by his psychiatric symptoms.7 Applicant disagreed with the diagnosis.8  
 
 Applicant returned to the psychiatrist who previously treated him in 2014 to 2015. 
He wanted the psychiatrist to evaluate the government’s mental health professional’s 
opinion. Applicant provided a two-page medical record from the psychiatrist. The report 
provided the following information. The last time Applicant was seen by the psychiatrist 
was in March 2015. He said Applicant did well until July 2016, when he returned to the 
practice and was seen by a nurse practitioner. He was restarted on medication for 
depression. He took the medication until February 2017. Applicant told the psychiatrist 
that he was feeling better at that time and stopped psychiatric treatment. Since then 
Applicant did not have additional contact with the psychiatrist. The report stated that on 
October 21, 2018, Applicant came to see him because he had received an evaluation 
from a neuropsychologist and was diagnosed with a major depressive disorder, recurrent, 
severe with psychotic features. He told the psychiatrist that he was worried about his job. 
He told the psychiatrist that he had done well at his job and denied issues with depression, 
severe anxiety, paranoia, sleep disturbance or other symptoms. He further disclosed he 
had a girlfriend of four years, and he was close with his parents. He denied any current 
stressors.9  
 
 The medical report further stated that the psychiatrist reviewed the government 
neuropsychologist’s opinion. He stated that he did not doubt the report about Applicant’s 
past history content, but he may have a different conclusion. He further stated that judging 
by current symptoms, the psychiatrist would opine that Applicant suffers from anxiety 
disorder not otherwise specified. Applicant may also have obsessive compulsive traits. 
The psychiatrist stated he did not see any current evidence of a major depressive disorder 
or psychotic symptomatology. He further stated: “I want to clarify that this does not mean 
                                                          
5 Tr. 27-31, 38-41. 
 
6 GE 3.  
 
7 GE 3. 
 
8 Tr. 42. 
 
9 Tr. 26, 45-48. 
 
4 
 
 
that it was not true before.”10 Applicant testified that when he returned to see the 
psychiatrist in October 2018, the psychiatrist did not perform nor did he participate in any 
new or updated tests.11  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in September 2015. 
Section 21-Psycholgical and Emotional Health, asked in the last seven years have you 
consulted with a health care professional regarding an emotional or mental health 
condition or were you hospitalized for such a condition. The question stated: “Answer ‘No’ 
if any of the counseling was for any of the following reasons and was not court ordered: 
strictly marital, family or grief not related to violence by you.” Applicant answered “no” to 
the question and failed to disclose his 2014 hospitalization; his mental-health treatment 
after his suicide attempt; his subsequent mental-health treatment where he was 
diagnosed with a major depressive disorder, initial episode with psychotic features; 
prescribed anti-depressant medication; and received subsequent treatment at a different 
mental health and counseling facility through at least March 2015.  
 
 Applicant was asked by Department Counsel if the word “hospitalize” triggered a 
thought that maybe he should disclose his hospitalization. He testified:  
 
I did not know who to ask and so I thought I was answering appropriately at 
the time, given the answer no if I –not everyone knows what happened to 
me and that was my personal privacy right I felt. I did the best I could to 
answer the question honestly and truthfully and I signed the medical release 
forms, you know, at the end willingly.12   
 
 Applicant was asked by Department Counsel if he reported his hospitalization after 
the June 2014 incident. Applicant testified: “They knew I was hospitalized. They don’t 
know why I was hospitalized. But HR was contacted and then security, so.” When further 
questioned about whether anyone inquired as to the reason for Applicant’s 
hospitalization, he testified: “They respected personal privacy, you know. They knew I 
was out and I was, you know, receiving treatment at a facility.”13 He confirmed his 
employer knew he was at a mental-health facility. He was on short-term disability while 
he was an outpatient until November 2014 and then he worked part time in December. 
He resumed ful- time employment in January 2015.14 
 
 Applicant’s explanation for his failure to disclose the above requested information 
was because he misinterpreted the question. He said he interpreted “grief” to mean he 
did not have to disclose the information because the reason he attempted suicide was 
                                                          
10 AE C. 
 
11 Tr. 32-33, 48-50. 
 
12 Tr. 54. 
 
13 Tr. 58. 
 
14 Tr. 58-61. 
 
5 
 
 
because he was grieving. He also said he was dealing with a multitude of stressors. 
During his background interview with a government investigator in December 2016, he 
explained he considered his treatment as being grief-related following a breakup with his 
girlfriend. He also explained he was feeling depressed and overwhelmed because he was 
working long hours and his father was having health issues. He said the combination of 
these stressors resulted in his suicide attempt.15 
 
The SCA specifically asked about hospitalization, highlighting the need to disclose 
this type of information. It is not believable that 15 months after Applicant was voluntarily 
hospitalized for two weeks after a suicide attempt that he did not think he had to disclose 
it. When Applicant completed the SCA in September 2015, he had previously stopped 
seeing his psychiatrist in March 2015, and he was still on medication for depression. He 
spent months as an outpatient and was on short-term disability due to mental-health 
issues. Although he told the investigator that there were many stressors that caused him 
to attempt suicide and one of them was grief, he described many others. I did not find 
Applicant’s explanation credible. Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his mental-
health conditions on his SCA as required.  
 
Applicant provided character letters from a friend and his girlfriend that describe 
him as professional, intelligent, funny, steadfast, optimistic, encouraging, proud, and 
loyal. He testified that his girlfriend is part of his support system. He provided performance 
evaluations from 2015 and 2016. His overall scores were 3.4 and 3.8 out of 5.0. He also 
provided a 2017 performance form indicating with comments from supervisors and 
leaders noting he had done an outstanding job.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
                                                          
15 Tr. 20-26, 35-38, 44-45, 53. 
 
16 Tr. 19-20; AE A, D.  
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I: Psychological Conditions 
 
The security concern for psychological conditions is set out in AG & 27:  
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is not required 
for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified mental health 
professional (e.g., clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) employed by, or 
acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, should be consulted 
when evaluating potentially disqualifying and mitigating information under 
this guideline and an opinion, including prognosis, should be sought. No 
negative interference concerning the standards in this guideline may be 
raised solely on the basis of mental health counseling. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 28, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
7 
 
 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, stability, reliability, 
or trustworthiness, not covered under any other guideline and that may 
indicate an emotional, mental, or personality condition, including, but not 
limited to, irresponsible, violent, self-harm, suicidal, paranoid, manipulative, 
impulsive, chronic lying, deceitful, exploitative, or bizarre behaviors; and  
  
 (b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition that may impair judgment, stability, reliability, or 
trustworthiness. 
  
 Applicant attempted suicide in June 2014 by cutting his wrists. He was treated for 
physical injuries and then he was voluntarily hospitalized as an inpatient to a mental-
health facility for evaluation and treatment. Applicant was diagnosed by a duly qualified 
mental-health professional, a psychiatrist, with major depressive disorder, initial episode, 
with psychotic features in June 2014. He was again diagnosed in February 2018, by a 
duly qualified mental health professional, a neuropsychologist, with major depressive 
disorder, recurrent, severe, with psychotic symptoms. Applicant’s prognosis by the 
neuropsychologist is guarded due to untreated symptoms of mood disturbance and 
psychosis, and limited awareness of his mental status. The neuropsychologist further 
noted that his reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness could be affected by his 
psychiatric symptoms. The above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from psychological conditions. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 29 were 
considered: 
 
 (a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the 
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the 
treatment plan;  
 
 (b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment program 
for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is currently 
receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a duly 
qualified mental health professional;  
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by, the U.S. Government that an 
individual’s previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a 
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation;  
 
(d) the past psychological/psychiatric condition was temporary, the situation 
has been resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of 
emotional instability; and 
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem.  
  
 
8 
 
 
 The evidence is insufficient to establish any of the above mitigating conditions. The 
record does not contain a favorable prognosis from a duly qualified medical professional 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, or a recent medical 
opinion that Applicant’s condition is under control, in remission, or has a low probability 
of recurrence or exacerbation. There is no evidence that his condition was temporary. He 
provided an opinion from his former doctor who Applicant visited in October 2018. 
Applicant had not been treated or evaluated by that doctor since March 2015, despite 
disagreeing with the more current diagnosis and prognosis. I have considered that 
doctor’s opinion, but it does not outweigh the more recent diagnosis by a government 
approved mental-health professional. The evidence is insufficient to conclude the issues 
raised have been mitigated and are no longer a security concern. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. The following will 
normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, 
security clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national 
security eligibility:  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
There is sufficient evidence to conclude Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on 
his September 2015 SCA his hospitalization and treatment by a health care professional 
regarding a mental health condition. Applicant attempted suicide in June 2014, was 
treated for his physical injuries, and then voluntarily admitted himself as an inpatient to a 
mental-health facility for two weeks for evaluation and treatment. He was diagnosed by a 
psychiatrist with major depressive disorder, initial episode, with psychotic features in June 
2014; prescribed anti-depressant medications; and received treatment at a mental-health 
center through March 2015. He stated he believed he did not need to disclose this 
information because the language of the question said he did not have to disclose it if the 
counseling was for grief. He said he was grieving a breakup with his girlfriend, but there 
 
9 
 
 
were a multitude of stressors that caused him to attempt suicide. I found Applicant’s 
explanation was not believable and disingenuous.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 were 
considered: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
There is insufficient evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to 
correct his omissions or falsifications made when completing his SCA. Applicant’s failure 
to disclose to the Government the information about his background that was requested 
is not minor. The Government relies on those seeking security clearances to be honest 
during the security clearance process. His intentional failure to do so casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. The above mitigating conditions do not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
 
10 
 
 
Guideline I and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old highly educated man. He experienced mental health 
issues and attempted suicide in 2014. At this time, insufficient evidence was presented 
to mitigate the psychological conditions raising security concerns. Applicant deliberately 
failed to disclose this information on his SCA. The record evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline I, psychological conditions and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline I:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2. Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
