1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ADP Case No. 18-01752 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information in a public trust position is 
granted. 
 Statement of the Case 
On September 21, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG’s) effective within the DOD for 
SORs issued after June 8, 2017.  
Applicant timely answered the SOR on October 16, 2018, and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 15, 
2018. 
01/24/2019
 
2 
 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
on November 21, 2018, scheduling the hearing on December 6, 2018. I conducted the 
hearing as scheduled, and Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 – 4 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B were also admitted without objection. I left 
the record open until January 7, 2019, for Applicant to submit supplemental 
documentation. (Tr. 58) He submitted post-hearing documents during this period 
including a credit report dated January 7, 2019, and additional documents from a well- 
known credit-repair agency that Applicant employed. These were collectively marked as 
AE C and admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on January 2, 2019. 
  
                       
   Applicant is 32 years old. He graduated from high school in 2004 and obtained a 
bachelor’s degree in 2010. He was married in November 2012, and he has three young 
children. (Tr. 27-28) He reports no military service. He has been working in a position of 
trust at a federal health-care provider since December 2017, with no problems. (Tr. 25, 
54) Applicant testified that he was laid off from his job as an information technology (IT) 
professional at a corporation, and he was unemployed from June 2013 until October 
2014, and again from August to September 2017. (Tr. 50)  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the seven alleged delinquent debts 
placed for collections, including SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.g, and the charged-off debt 
at SOR ¶ 1.a for delinquent student loans in the approximate amount of $11,971. He 
also admitted the past-due debt for $8,307 at SOR ¶ 1.f. The debts alleged in the SOR 
total $51,966. However, Applicant testified credibly that the debt at SOR ¶ 1.e is a 
duplicate of the debt placed for collection at SOR ¶ 1.b. (Tr. 22) The higher amount of 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($14,076) reflects the inflated amount that the collection agent for 
the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b added on for interest and fees to the deficit owed after 
repossession of a vehicle in 2015. Applicant disputes this debt. (AE C) Thus, the total 
owed is more accurately $37,890. 
 
 Applicant testified that he has been working with a well-known credit-repair 
agency for two years paying $80 per month. (Tr. 17) This agency purports to reach out 
to creditors to try to obtain validation of debts and remove erroneous debts from the 
debtor’s credit reports. Applicant produced documents including a computer generated 
print-out showing 47 negative items removed and 38 remaining on Applicant’s credit 
report. (AE A) It is unclear what the basis or relevance would be for these negative 
items, since they are not alleged in the SOR. It demonstrates good-faith efforts to obtain 
counseling and resolve his financial problems. Applicant also provided a print-out 
showing that he purchased identity-theft insurance in the amount of $25,000. (AE B)  
 
 Applicant moved in with his parents in 2011 after college because he required 
surgery for a life-threatening condition. (Tr. 23) After recovering, he got a job as an IT 
specialist but was laid-off in 2013. Next, he tried various jobs outside of his skill set 
including a home improvement store etc. (Tr. 24) He testified credibly that he is trying to 
get a deferral on the student-loan debt in the amount of $11,971 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
3 
 
 
(Tr. 30) He was unable to make payments due to his medical condition and periods of 
unemployment. Applicant produced post-hearing documentation including a January 
2019 credit report reflecting several student loans owed to a creditor in the approximate 
amount of $17,000. (AE C) These loans were opened from 2004 to 2008 and are 
presumed to be the same student loans at SOR 1.a. The credit report shows they are all 
in forbearance until February 2019. Additionally, he testified that he owes approximately 
$22,000 to Navient for student loans that are in good standing, and not alleged in the 
SOR. (Tr. 54) It is unclear what payments Applicant is making monthly on any of his 
student loans to Navient.  
 
 Applicant testified that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c in the amount of $2,181 is 
also for a student loan issued by a bank. Applicant’s mother was the primary signatory 
on the loan and he was a co-signor. They have now paid that creditor in full according to 
documents produced post-hearing. (AE C) Applicant has also testified credibly and 
produced documentation showing that the past-due debt for $1,427 at SOR ¶ 1.f has 
been satisfied with one final payment of $382. (Tr. 35-36) This was a loan in the amount 
of $8,307 for home furnishings.  His post-hearing documentation also reflects that his 
well-known credit repair agency has recently challenged items on his credit report that 
are alleged in the SOR. Validation of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶1.b and 1.g was 
requested on his behalf on January 4, 2019. (AE C)   
 
 Applicant testified that he was ready to pay the credit-card debt placed for 
collection in the amount of $587 at SOR ¶ 1.d. He was negotiating a payment of $320 to 
settle it at the time of his hearing. (Tr. 34) It still appears on his January 2019 credit 
report. SOR ¶ 1.g arose from Applicant’s inability to make rental payments after he was 
laid off by the state bar association. It was placed for collection in October 2017, and his 
recent credit reports reflects “account information disputed by debtor.” (AE C)   
 
 He earns $5,500 to $5,800 a month after taxes and he does have a budget. (Tr. 
47) He usually has approximately $1,000 left over each month, after paying expenses. 
(Tr. 48-49) He had financial counseling from his credit-repair agency that he relied on to 
help him improve his credit and resolve his financial problems. Applicant stated that his 
wife recently obtained employment as a consultant earning $2,200 a month. (Tr. 49). 
This should help their financial situation. He provided no character references or 
performance evaluations. He demonstrated that he has either successfully disputed or 
satisfied (or deferred) six of the seven debts alleged in the SOR.             
 
          Policies 
  
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Code of Federal Regulations Title 32 – National Defense, part 154.13 and part 
154, Appendix J – ADP Position Categories and Criteria for Designating Positions)  
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.” The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and 
 
4 
 
 
Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in DOD Directive 5220.6 before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding information. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the government’s exhibits support the following AG ¶ 
19 disqualifying conditions:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and  
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant admitted the seven delinquent debts alleged in the SOR totaling 
approximately $37,890. The government exhibits admitted at the hearing together with 
Applicant’s admissions substantiate these debts. There is sufficient evidence to support 
the application of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns arising from financial 
difficulties are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;   
 
(c) the individual has received, or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant provided testimony and documentation to show that he satisfied SOR 
¶¶ 1.c and 1.f, totaling $3,608. He disputed SOR ¶ 1.b and SOR ¶ 1.e is a duplicate of 
1.b (deficit balance on repossessed vehicle). He stated that he intended to pay his 
alleged debt at SOR ¶ 1.d imminently and he was negotiating a price with the creditor at 
the time of the hearing. Intentions to pay debts in the future are not a substitute for a 
track record of debt repayment or other responsible approaches. See ISCR Case No. 
11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 23, 2013). He also successfully disputed SOR ¶ 1.g. 
Applicant obtained deferral of his student loan debts. Additionally, he is already making 
payments to Navient, the creditor on other student loans. He employed a credit-repair 
agency, which reached out to creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.g to obtain validation of 
these debts. Applicant was paying $80 per month for over two years to the credit-repair 
agency in good faith and reliance on its supposed expertise in helping to improve his 
financial situation.  
 
   The delinquencies alleged in the SOR are longstanding. Applicant’s medical 
condition and periods of unemployment were conditions beyond his control. He has 
demonstrated that he acted responsibly under the circumstances in obtaining 
assistance and resolving six of his seven alleged SOR delinquencies. He satisfied some 
alleged debts, successfully disputed others, and received a deferral on some of his 
student loans. He is engaged in a payment plan and demonstrated good-faith efforts to 
repay other student-loan creditors. This evidence is sufficient to show that his financial 
problems have been resolved and are under control. The mitigating conditions 
enumerated above apply.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Applicant is the father of three young children. He 
has endured serious medical setbacks, and periods of unemployment, and struggled 
through a downturn in the economy.  
 
Applicant’s finances no longer remain a trustworthiness concern. He has met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1. b - 1.g:                          For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the interests0 of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a  public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
                                                      Robert J. Kilmartin 
             Administrative Judge 
