1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00659 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob T. Ranish, Esq. 
 01/04/2019
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the sexual behavior and use of information technology 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On May 1, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual 
behavior) and M (use of information technology). Applicant responded to the SOR on 
May 23, 2018, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 13, 2018, and 
reassigned to me on July 26, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 16, 2018, scheduling the hearing for August 
16, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. 
A second witness was unavailable because of an emergency. The case was continued 
until October 4, 2018, at which time the witness testified and AE E and F were admitted 
 
2 
 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the first hearing (Tr.1) on August 23, 
2018, and the continued hearing (Tr.2) on October 12, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old software engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since January 2018. He has worked in the defense industry since about 2001. He seeks 
to retain a security clearance, which he has held since the early 2000s. He has a 
bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 2001, and a master’s degree, which he 
earned in 2006. He is married with four minor children.1 
 
Applicant is an admitted sex addict whose addiction is to pornography.2 He 
started viewing pornography at a young age. His wife is an ordained minister who 
considers pornography and masturbation to be equivalent to infidelity. Applicant’s wife 
discovered on several occasions that Applicant was viewing pornography at home. In 
order to avoid his wife finding out that he was continuing to view pornography, Applicant 
viewed pornography at work using his work computer. He also stored pornography on 
the company’s computer. This was against company policy and went on at various jobs 
from about 2002 through September 2017. He never masturbated at his desk, but if 
there was nobody else in the men’s room, he would sometimes masturbate there.3  
 
Applicant received marriage and other counseling, and he has been under the 
care of a licensed professional counselor since 2012. He started attending Sexaholics 
Anonymous (SA), a 12-Step organization based on the Alcoholics Anonymous model, in 
about 2014.4 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
August 2016. He did not report his counseling because he considered it to be “strictly 
marital” counseling.5 He answered “No” to the use of information technology systems 
questions, including the following:  
 
In the last seven (7) years have you introduced, removed, or used 
hardware, software, or media in connection with any information 
technology system without authorization, when specifically prohibited by 
                                                          
1 Tr.1 at 13-14, 34, 45-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A, C.  
 
2 There is a question as to whether “addiction” to pornography is a true addiction in the same sense as 
drug or alcohol addiction, but it is treated as such by Applicant and Sexaholics Anonymous. See Tr.2 at 9-
10. 
 
3 Tr.1 at 13-14, 21, 51-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE C.  
 
4 Tr.1 at 21-23, 54-56; Tr.2 at 10; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE C, D.  
 
5 Tr. at 58-62; GE 1.  
 
 
3 
 
rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations, or attempted any of the 
above?6 
 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in September 2017. 
The investigator asked him if there was any aspect of his life that could be used against 
him for blackmail, pressure, or coercion. He told the investigator about his pornography 
addiction and participation in SA. He added that it could not be used to blackmail or 
coerce him. He stated that his pornography addiction was hurting his wife, and he was 
trying to stop, but he could not. He admitted that he viewed pornography at work, but he 
told the investigator that he had not viewed pornography in the previous 18 months. He 
stated the previous 18 months was the longest he went without viewing pornography 
since he was in the seventh grade. He credited his abstinence to SA and therapy.7 
 
Applicant informed his employer about his pornography addiction about six days 
after his background interview. He told his employer that there was a loophole in the 
company’s IT system that permitted him to view pornography at work.8 
 
Applicant contacted the background investigator a week after his first interview. 
He told the investigator that he had been dishonest when he told the investigator that he 
had not viewed pornography in 18 months. He stated that the last time he viewed 
pornography was at work three days before his first interview. He stated that he 
informed his employer about his pornography addiction the previous day. He told the 
investigator that his goal was to stop viewing pornography altogether, and that he would 
work towards that goal through counseling and therapy.9 
 
Applicant’s employer terminated him because of the pornography issues. He was 
hired by another defense contractor in January 2018. He fully informed his current 
employer of his issues with pornography and why he was terminated from his previous 
job. The employer and Applicant put safeguards in place to deter Applicant from viewing 
pornography at work.10 
 
Applicant has continued to participate in SA and therapy. He testified that he has 
not viewed pornography at work since before his background interview in September 
2017. He admitted viewing pornography at home about two weeks before the first 
hearing in August 2018. He stated that he immediately informed his group, his SA 
sponsor, and his therapist. He testified that therapy and SA “will work to keep [him] from 
                                                          
6 GE 1.  
 
7 GE 2. The SOR did not allege that Applicant intentionally provided false information to the background 
investigator. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification purposes. It 
may be considered in assessing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in 
the whole-person analysis. 
 
8 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2.  
 
9 GE 2.  
 
10 Tr.1 at 22-24, 67-70, Applicant’s response to SOR.  
 
4 
 
repeating [his] behavior.” He has the complete support of his wife, who has full 
knowledge of his pornography issues.11   
 
Applicant received an evaluation from a forensic psychologist. The forensic 
psychologist diagnosed him with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and persistent 
depressive disorder, which “means that he functions normally but often feels depressive 
symptoms and derives less enjoyment from life than most individuals.”12 The forensic 
psychologist concluded: 
 
With regard to his masturbation in rest rooms at the workplace and 
viewing pornography on workplace computers, [Applicant] recognizes this 
to be a serious problem. Although masturbation in private is considered 
absolutely normal, using workplace computers to look at pornography is 
not acceptable. Based on [Applicant’s] understanding of the gravity of this 
behavior, he committed himself to SA four years ago. He is diligent in his 
attendance at SA meetings. He reports that he has not engaged in 
inappropriate masturbation for the past year. 
 
To a great degree of psychological certainty, I have concluded that. 
[Applicant] has remediated the problem of viewing pornography and 
masturbating at the workplace. With that problem remediated, I found no 
other problems that would interfere with [Applicant’s] ability to work in a 
secure environment. He continues to receive ongoing mental health 
treatment to assist with his depression, and he receives support through 
his church activities.13 
 
Applicant submitted documents and letters attesting to his excellent job 
performance. He is praised for his honesty, trustworthiness, reliability, patriotism, 
responsibility, moral character, work ethic, dependability, technical expertise, and 
integrity. He is credited with commendable actions that have greatly benefited his 
community and likely saved some lives. He is recommended for a security clearance.14  
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
                                                          
11 Tr.1 at 12-43, 54-55, 71, 76-77; Tr.2 at 9-10; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE C, D.  
 
12 Tr.1 at 12-43, 54-55, 71; Tr.2 at 6-27; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE C-F.  
 
13 AE F.  
 
14 Tr.1 at 15-21; AE B, C.  
 
 
5 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
 The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of 
judgment or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, 
may raise questions about an individual’s judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information. 
Sexual behavior includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, 
electronic, or written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the 
standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual 
orientation of the individual. 
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high-risk sexual behavior 
that the individual is unable to stop; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
 Applicant viewed and stored pornography on his company computer from about 
2002 until September 2017. He knew that was against company policy. His behavior 
reflected a severe lack of judgment and made him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, 
and duress. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate sexual behavior security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 14. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress;  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet; and 
 
 
7 
 
(e) the individual has successfully completed an appropriate program of 
treatment, or is currently enrolled in one, has demonstrated ongoing and 
consistent compliance with the treatment plan, and/or has received a 
favorable prognosis from a qualified mental health professional indicating 
the behavior is readily controllable with treatment. 
 
 Applicant used his work computer because he did not want to get caught by his 
wife, an ordained minister who considers pornography and masturbation to be 
equivalent to infidelity. He never masturbated at his desk, but if there was nobody else 
in the men’s room, he would sometimes masturbate there. Although he disclosed his 
conduct during his background interview in September 2017, he also lied and told the 
investigator that he had not viewed pornography for 18 months. To his credit, shortly 
thereafter, Applicant informed his employer of his conduct, and he contacted the 
investigator and corrected his lie.  
 
 Applicant’s employer subsequently terminated him. His current employer is fully 
aware of his issues with pornography and why he was terminated from his previous job. 
Safeguards are in place to deter Applicant from viewing pornography at work. 
Applicant’s testimony that he has not viewed pornography at work since before his 
background interview in September 2017 is accepted, but with some reservation 
because of his previous lie. I also accept most of the forensic psychologist’s opinion, 
whose conclusions include that “[a]lthough masturbation in private is considered 
absolutely normal, using workplace computers to look at pornography is not 
acceptable.” Applicant is in his current situation not because he viewed pornography 
and masturbated in the privacy of his home. He is here because he would not or could 
not stop himself from doing it at work. 
 
 I find that Applicant’s conduct continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. While nobody ever discovered Applicant viewing 
pornography, it cannot be considered strictly private or discreet because it occurred on 
his work computer. AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(d) are not applicable. AG ¶¶ 14(c) and 14(e) 
have some applicability, but they are insufficient to mitigate Applicant’s years of 
unacceptable conduct and rules violations. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology  
 
The security concern for use of information technology is set out in AG ¶ 39: 
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
 
8 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system. 
 
 Applicant knew he was violating company policy when he accessed pornography 
on his employers’ computers for about 15 years. The above disqualifying condition is 
applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate the use of information technology systems security 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 41. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  
 
 The above analysis under sexual behavior also applies here. Applicant’s conduct 
continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
41(a) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines D and M in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s strong 
character evidence. 
  
 
9 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the sexual behavior and use of information technology security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
