 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01241 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 11, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On June 11, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On May 25, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD 
CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
effective within the DoD after July 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 24, 2018. He requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.) On 
July 11, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing 6 Items, was mailed 
to Applicant on July 12, 2018, and received by him on August 1, 2018.  The FORM 
 
2 
 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM.  
Applicant failed to respond to the FORM.  DOHA assigned the case to me on December 
3, 2018.  Applicant had no objection to the Government’s Items.  Accordingly, Items 1 
through 6 are admitted into evidence and hereinafter are referred to as Government 
Exhibits 1 through 6.   
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 38 years old.  He is divorced since 2011, and has four children.  It is 
unclear what position he holds with the defense contractor who has sponsored him for 
his security clearance or when he was hired.  He is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified thirteen debts totaling in excess of $39,000.  (Government 
Exhibit 1.)  Applicant denies eight of the alleged accounts, which total approximately 
$1,670.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  Applicant states that these accounts, specifically 
subparagaphs 1.h. through 1.m. are not his, but are his father’s that have been mixed 
up in his credit report.  There has been no evidence presented by the Applicant that he 
has disputed these debts on his credit report.  Applicant currently resides with his 
parents in their home since December 2010.     
 
Applicant attributes his delinquent debt to a two year period of unemployment.  
(Government Exhibit 3.)  In his e-QIP, he lists two periods of unemployment from 
September 2007 until January 2008, and May 2013 until when the application was 
completed in 2015.  The record is not clear as to when Applicant began working for his 
current employer.  Applicant failed to provide any documentation showing the current 
status of any of the debts alleged.  He also failed to provide any evidence to show that 
he has contacted any of his creditors to set up payment plans or otherwise resolve the 
debt.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated June 23, 2015; and February 20, 2018, 
confirm that Applicant has not resolved any of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  
(Government Exhibits 5 and 6.)   
 
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant has done nothing to resolve his delinquent 
debt.  There has been no evidence presented that demonstrates that Applicant has 
taken any steps to resolve the debt by setting up payment plans or otherwise 
demonstrate an established track record of debt resolution efforts.  Applicant states that 
he has worked with an accountant to create a budget and plans to become debt-free  
within the next 12 months and that he has not accrued any new debt in the last five 
 
3 
 
years.  The personal financial statement he submitted shows a $1,700 net monthly 
remainder after payment toward his child support accounts and those debts listed in 
1.c., 1.d., 1.f., and 1.g.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  He states that he is in the process of 
making arrangements to satisfy those debts listed in subparagraphs 1.c. through 1.g., 
but failed to provide documentation to corroborate this.  No further details were 
provided. The following debts listed in the SOR remain owing:  
  
(a) a debt for child support arrears in the amount of $16,928 remains delinquent. 
Applicant attributes his delinquent child support debt to a two year period of 
unemployment  
 
 (b)  a debt for child support arrears in the amount of $10,342 remains delinquent. 
Applicant attributes his delinquent child support debt to a two year period of 
unemployment.   
 
 (c)  a debt owed to a creditor was placed in collection in the approximate amount 
of $2,599.  The debt remains delinquent. 
   
 (d) a debt owed to a creditor was placed in collection in the approximate amount 
of $909.  The debt remains delinquent.    
 
 (e) a debt owed to a creditor for a medical bill was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $179.  The debt remains delinquent. 
 
 (f) a debt owed to a creditor was charged off in the approximate amount of 
$6,757.  The debt remains delinquent.   
 
 (g) a debt owed to a creditor was charged off in the approximate amount of $431.  
The debt remains delinquent. 
 
 (h) a debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate amount 
of $300.  The debt remains delinquent. 
 
 (i) a debt owed to a creditor was placed in collection in the approximate amount 
of $300.  The debt remains delinquent.    
 
 (j) a debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate amount 
of $250.  The debt remains delinquent. 
 
 (k) a debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate amount 
of $100.  The debt remains delinquent.   
 
 (l) a debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate amount 
of $55.  The debt remains delinquent. 
 
 (m) a debt owed to a creditor was placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $55.  The debt remains delinquent. 
 
4 
 
 There is nothing in the record to show that the Applicant has carried his burden 
of proof to establish mitigation of the government security concerns under Guideline F.   
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant is delinquently indebted in excess of $39,000.  His actions 
demonstrated both a history of not addressing his debt and an inability to do so. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating condition under the Financial Considerations is 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
  It is unclear from the record how long the Applicant has been working with his 
current employer.  What is clear, however, is the fact that he has not addressed his 
 
6 
 
delinquent debt in any form or fashion.  There is no evidence that he has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.   His inaction is an action which casts doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k.:  Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.l.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.m: Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
