1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00333 
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns about 
his numerous unpaid debts, and about an arrest in February 2016. His request for 
continued security clearance eligibility is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On May 26, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew his eligibility for a security clearance required 
for his employment with a federal contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not 
01/10/2019
 
 
2 
 
 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant 
to have a security clearance.1 
 
 On March 5, 2018, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns under the adjudicative guidelines for financial considerations 
(Guideline F) and criminal conduct (Guideline J). Applicant timely responded to the SOR 
(Answer) and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on August 9, 2018, and convened the requested hearing on 
November 29, 2018. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel proffered 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 – 4. Applicant testified and proffered Applicant Exhibits (AX) 
A – D. All exhibits were admitted without objection. I received a transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on December 7, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline F, the Government alleged Applicant owed $43,404 for ten 
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a – 1.j). Under Guideline J, it was alleged that on 
February 28, 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with first-degree assault and use 
of a firearm (SOR 2.a). Applicant admitted with explanations and supporting documents 
all of the SOR allegations. In his e-QIP, he disclosed most of the information addressed 
in the SOR, and the Government’s exhibits support each of the SOR allegations. (Answer; 
GX 1 – 4) In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He has a bachelor’s degree in computer science and is 
working toward his master’s degree in that field. He also recently obtained several work-
related certifications in the information technology (IT) field. Since at least 2006, he has 
worked for several companies in IT positions, including federal contractors in positions 
that require a security clearance. He most recently held a top secret clearance with 
eligibility for access to sensitive compartmented information (TS/SCI). Applicant attributes 
his financial problems to a period of unemployment and under-employment after he was 
laid off in February 2013. Applicant’s employer lost a contract for classified work and could 
not retain him. Applicant was unable to find IT work that required a TS/SCI clearance and 
had to settle for a variety of jobs, both in IT and others, that did not last long and which 
did not pay very well. Applicant reports being unemployed for all of 2014. In September 
2015, he was hired as a desktop analyst by the company that sponsored his current 
application for clearance. (Answer; GX 1; AX D; Tr. 8) 
 
 Before he was laid off in 2013, Applicant had no difficulty meeting all of his financial 
obligations and was financially well-off, earning as much as $95,000 annually at one time. 
In late 2011, he started his own marketing business while still working full-time. To support 
his business venture, he relied on credit and overdraft protection accounts he had opened 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
at his credit union between 2005 and 2011. Those accounts were in good standing until 
about September 2013, when they became delinquent. They are addressed in SOR 1.a 
– 1.d. Since late 2016, Applicant has been making nominal monthly payments on those 
debts as part of an organized effort to resolve all of his debts. He has paid the debt at 
SOR 1.d. (Answer; GX 1 – 3; AX C; Tr. 48, 72 – 75) 
 
 Applicant also established in his response to the SOR that he has paid the debts 
at SOR 1.f – 1.i, and that he consistently is making monthly payments to the debt at SOR 
1.e according to a settlement plan he negotiated with that creditor. The debt at SOR 1.j 
arose from injuries suffered in a car accident that was not Applicant’s fault. At the time it 
happened, Applicant did not have medical insurance. He is currently waiting for proceeds 
to be paid in response to a claim he filed against the other driver’s insurance. (Answer) 
 
 Applicant was earning about $65,000 annually and had no financial problems 
before he was laid off in 2013. In October 2015, he found work that paid him enough to 
move out of his parents’ home and to buy a car. Since then, he has paid his rent and car 
loan as required. Applicant also presented information showing he completed a well-
known financial management course that has helped him effectively attack his debts and 
reduce his expenses. Using the lessons from that course, Applicant paid off those debts 
that were within his means to do so; he negotiated with his creditors to establish 
repayment agreements; and he has positioned himself to start paying more money to 
SOR 1.a – 1.c, the largest of his remaining debts. Applicant adheres to a detailed monthly 
budget and has eschewed building savings in favor of paying his debts. (Answer; Tr. 46 
– 72, 75 – 81) 
 
 On February 28, 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with first-degree 
assault and use of a firearm. The charges were brought by Applicant’s former girlfriend 
and stemmed from an argument they had the day before. Both parties had called the 
police as the argument escalated, but no arrests were made that day. Applicant denied 
assaulting his ex-girlfriend, claiming instead that she repeatedly struck him on the back 
of the head as he was leaving her house. He required medical attention that evening. He 
admits he damaged his ex-girlfriend’s cell phone during the altercation. He also admits 
he legally owns a registered firearm, but avers it was at his parents’ house, where he lived 
at the time. His ex-girlfriend decided that evening to file a criminal complaint against 
Applicant, and local sheriff’s deputies arrested Applicant at his house on February 28, 
2016. (Answer; GX 1; GX 2; GX 4; AX A; Tr. 20 – 46) 
 
 Applicant never appeared at a hearing to answer the charges, which he has 
adamantly denied. On July 26, 2016, prosecutors dismissed the charges as being 
unsupported by any evidence. Available information also shows that Applicant’s ex-
girlfriend has filed numerous other groundless complaints against other boyfriends and 
against family members. (Answer; AX A; Tr. 63 – 68) 
 
  
Policies 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,2 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).3 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) 
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:  
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information.  
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security 
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access 
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based 
on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access in favor of the Government.6 
                                                 
2 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
3 The current adjudicative guidelines were issued by the Director of National Intelligence on December 10, 
2016, to be effective for all adjudications on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations  
 
 The Government established Applicant accrued the delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR. When the SOR was issued, most of those debts had not been resolved. That 
information reasonably raised a security concern about Applicant’s finances that is 
articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
More specifically, available information supported application of the disqualifying 
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). By contrast, Applicant established that his financial problems arose 
from unexpected periods of unemployment and under employment starting in February 
2013. In response to those circumstances, Applicant took whatever work he could, while 
at the same time reducing his living and other expenses. In late 2015, he was able to earn 
enough money to support himself and begin addressing his debts. He has been 
addressing most of his debts since 2016, and he has paid five of the debts alleged in the 
SOR. Of the remaining five debts, he is in repayment of four debts through plans 
negotiated with those creditors. The debt at SOR 1.j is a medical debt likely to be satisfied 
through insurance payment from the at-fault driver in a recent accident with Applicant. 
 
Applicant also showed that he completed a well-known financial management 
course. He is acting on the lessons learned from that course by managing his finances 
through a detailed monthly budget. He also has significantly reduced expenses in order 
to pay down his debts in a reliable and systematic way before setting aside money for 
savings. All of the foregoing supports application of the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating 
conditions: 
  
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; and 
  
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 On balance, I conclude the record as a whole is sufficient to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by the Government’s information about Applicant’s finances. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The Government established that Applicant was arrested as alleged in the SOR. 
That information reasonably raised a security concern about criminal conduct that is 
articulated at AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The only specific disqualifying condition to be considered here is at AG ¶ 31(b) 
(evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, and matters 
of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual was formally 
charged, prosecuted, or convicted). Available information showed that Applicant was, in 
fact, charged with assault and a firearm offense. However, the record does not contain a 
police report or other reliable information about what Applicant did or did not do. By 
contrast, Applicant established that the charges were dismissed before trial. Applicant 
has no further connection to his accuser and it is unlikely that the circumstances leading 
to that altercation will recur. AG ¶ 31(b) does not apply because available information 
does not include evidence or even a credible allegation of wrongdoing by Applicant. 
 
In the alternative, this record requires application of the following mitigating 
condition at AG ¶ 32(c) (no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense). I conclude that all available information probative of this issue shows that any 
security concerns about Applicant’s arrest are mitigated. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Particularly noteworthy is the information regarding Applicant’s response to 
adverse financial circumstances. It reflects well on Applicant’s judgment and reliability. A 
fair and commonsense assessment of the record evidence as a whole shows the security 
concerns about his finances are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
