1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00559 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On March 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 19, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2018. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 12, 2018. 
I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 7, 2018. The Government offered 
01/24/2019
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6.1 Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through G. There were no objections to any exhibits offered, and all were admitted into 
evidence. The record remained open until November 26, 2018, to permit Applicant to 
provide additional documents, which he did. They were marked AE H through AE U. 
There were no objections, and they were admitted into evidence. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript on November 16, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 1981. He served in 
the military from 1982 to 1989 and was honorably discharged. He is pursuing a bachelor’s 
degree. He married in 1982. He has two adult children, ages 35 and 23 years old. Both 
live with him. His oldest child, a daughter, has three children. She is separated from her 
husband. She and her children live with Applicant. His daughter does not receive child 
support. She sporadically contributes to the household.2  
  
 Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties in 2015. He purchased a house 
in July 2015. Shortly thereafter, he and his wife had marital problems. He moved out of 
the house in December 2015. His wife has medical issues and is unable to work. In 
January 2016, his daughter lost her job and moved in with Applicant’s wife. Applicant 
started supporting two households, which included his daughter’s family. This had a major 
impact on his finances. He lost his job in August 2017. He maintained the two households 
until he and his wife reconciled in November 2017, and he moved back into their house.3  
 
In 2014, Applicant moved to a different state for a job. He withdrew money from 
his pension plan and believed the federal income tax was paid at the time of his 
withdrawal. In 2015, he learned that he owed more federal income taxes as the amount 
was not fully paid (SOR ¶ 1.a-$21,578). He testified that he contacted the company that 
was handling his pension plan and was told that only a percentage of the tax was paid. 
He contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and arranged an installment agreement 
to pay the taxes owed. The agreement was to pay $300 a month. The IRS involuntarily 
withheld subsequent annual tax refunds and applied them to the balance. He testified that 
he started the installment agreement sometime in 2015 and made the payments until he 
stopped in late 2017 when he lost his job. He said he contacted the IRS, but did not make 
another payment until March 2018. In October 2018, he entered into a new installment 
agreement with the IRS to pay $150 a month until December 2019, when the amount will 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is the exhibit list and II is the discovery letter.  
 
2 Tr. 17-24. 
 
3 Tr. 24-27, 35-36. 
 
3 
 
 
increase to $375. He makes an automatic monthly payment. He provided proof of his 
most recent payment.4 It is being resolved. 
 
In November 2016, Applicant fell behind on his mortgage payments because he 
was maintaining two households (SOR ¶1.b-$10,725). He contacted the mortgage 
company and entered a loan modification agreement in May 2017. He made timely 
payments on the new mortgage agreement until he lost his job in August 2017. He 
contacted his mortgage company again and a new loan modification was approved in 
February 2018. He made a lump-sum payment of $8,038 in October 2018 to catch up, 
and has been making the new payments. He provided proof of his November 2018 
payment. He testified he obtained the lump-sum amount from a loan that he is repaying. 
He provided proof that he is paying the loan. Applicant and his wife have decided to sell 
the house and are working with a realtor to put it on the market. They intend to downsize 
and purchase a more affordable house. The mortgage in SOR ¶ 1.b ($10,725) is being 
resolved. 5 
 
 The credit-card debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($14,802) was used by Applicant when he was 
separated from his wife to help him pay expenses. He said he made some payments to 
the collection company. He provided a copy of a recent payment plan with the collection 
company, which required he pay $2,000 in November 2018 and monthly payments 
thereafter of $500 a month. He provided proof of his $2,000 payment.6 The debt is being 
resolved. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($2,802) became past due when Applicant lost his job. He 
has a payment plan with the creditor that agrees to monthly automatic withdrawals of 
$231. He provided documented proof of the agreement with the creditor and his 
November payment.7 The debt is being resolved. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,159) is a debt that became delinquent when Applicant 
lost his job. He provided documented proof that he is making payments to resolve the 
debt. He testified that he believed the remaining balance owes is about $700.8 This debt 
is being resolved.  
 
 Applicant was unaware he owed the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($89). He paid the 
debt in April 2018. He provided documented proof.9 This debt is resolved.  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 32-35, 49-56; Answer to SOR; AE A, J, O. 
 
5 Tr. 37-49; Answer to the SOR; AE B, L, P, Q, T.  
 
6 Tr. 59-62; Answer to SOR; AE C, K, M. 
 
7 Tr. 63-65; AE D, S. 
 
8 Tr. 66-68; AE E, F, R. 
 
9 Tr. 68; AE G. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant provided a detailed copy of a budget he has been using for a couple of 
months. It includes all of his payment plans and debts. He testified that he and his family 
have significantly cut their expenses. They do not go out to eat. He does not take his 
grandchildren out for entertainment because he cannot afford it. In his post-hearing 
submission, he stated that his son and daughter are now paying the house’s utility bills to 
help with the expenses.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
                                                          
10 Tr. 56-59, 69; AE H, N. 
 
5 
 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely pay a federal tax debt for the early withdrawal from his 
pension. Applicant lost his job and was unable to pay some bills, which became 
delinquent in about 2016. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial problems when he and his wife separated 
in late 2015; his daughter and her family then moved in with his wife; and he lost his job 
in 2017. Applicant also incurred a tax debt from an early withdrawal from his pension plan. 
He believed the tax was withheld, but later learned he owed the tax. Applicant is resolving 
all of the debts alleged in the SOR, but at this juncture, they remain ongoing and recent. 
AG 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 As explained above, Applicant’s financial problems were beyond his control. For 
the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant obtained loan modifications to ensure he could become current 
on his mortgage. He contacted the IRS when he became aware of the deficiency. He 
arranged an installment agreement with the IRS. When he lost his job, he could not make 
the payments. He has a new agreement that he is paying. He contacted other creditors 
and negotiated repayment agreements and is making payments to resolve the debts. 
Applicant did not ignore his financial obligations, but addressed them as best he could at 
the time. I find he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence that Applicant sought financial counseling, but there 
are indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply. There is sufficient evidence that Applicant is adhering to repayment plans that he 
 
7 
 
 
initiated in a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors. He is making payments on his 
installment agreement with the IRS and is paying his mortgage after receiving a loan 
modification. He is paying his other creditors. AG ¶ 20(d) applies.  
 
 Applicant contacted the IRS when he learned he owed additional taxes on his 
pension plan withdrawal. He made payments until he experienced financial difficulties 
after losing his job. He negotiated a new installment agreement with the IRS and provided 
sufficient proof that he is in compliance. AG ¶ 20(g) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. Several circumstances contributed to his financial 
difficulties: unexpected problems after he purchased a house; his and his wife’s 
separation; and the loss of his job. He subsequently maintained two households, when 
his daughter and her three children moved in with his wife. All of these factors caused 
him to get behind on his obligations. Applicant was not living beyond his means during 
that time, and he did not ignore his debts. He has payment arrangements with his 
creditors. He obtained a loan modification for his mortgage and has a new installment 
agreement with the IRS. Applicant’s finances are coming under control, and he is acting 
responsibly by addressing his debts. He intends to sell his house and in the interim has 
lowered his expenses. He has a detailed budget that accommodates his expenses and 
debts. Applicant’s past financial problems no longer raise questions about his judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness. The record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts 
 
8 
 
 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
