1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 18-00336 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicole A, Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has 
not mitigated foreign influence concerns raised by his family in Sudan. His request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
Statement of Case 
On July 19, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (Item 3). 
On February 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B for foreign influence. The SOR further informed Applicant that, based 
on information available to the Government, DoD adjudicators could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 1, 2018 (Answer), and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.
(Item 2.) On August 14, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
01/22/2019
 
 
2 
 
 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, 
was received by him on September 17, 2018. The FORM notified Applicant that he had 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. He did not respond within the time 
allotted. On January 16, 2019, the case was assigned to me. Items 1 through 3 are 
admitted into evidence.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
Sudan. Department Counsel provided a five-page summary of the facts, supported by 
five Government documents pertaining to Sudan, marked as Item 4. The documents 
provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take administrative notice of the 
facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of general 
knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of 
Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.j. The facts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He was born in Sudan and earned a bachelor’s degree 
from a university in Sudan. He immigrated to the United States in 2005 and was 
naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2010. He is married and has one child. Applicant has 
been employed by a government contractor since October 2014. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a citizen and resident in Sudan. She has never been to the 
United States. She works as a teacher in Sudan, for the Ministry of Education. Applicant 
has applied for her to immigrate to the United States. Applicant and his wife have a five-
year-old child, who resides in Sudan with Applicant’s wife. Applicant communicates with 
his wife and child on a weekly basis. He sends them $200 in support monthly. (Answer; 
Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents in Sudan. His father is 84 years old 
and his mother is 64 years old. They are cared for by Applicant’s younger brother, who 
is also a citizen and resident of Sudan. In addition to caring for their parents, Applicant’s 
younger brother is a student. (Answer; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s four sisters are citizens and residents in Sudan. They are married and 
Applicant has casual and infrequent contact with them. (Answer; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents in Sudan. 
His father-in-law is 62 years old and is employed by the Ministry of Health in Sudan. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is approximately 54 years old and is a homemaker. (Answer; 
Item 3.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s brother-in-law is a citizen and resident in Sudan. He is employed  by 
the Sudanese Ministry of Interior. Applicant reported that his contact with them is “very 
casual and infrequent.” (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant’s sister-in-law is a citizen and resident in Sudan. She is married to a 
Sudanese man. Applicant reported that his contact with them is “very casual and 
infrequent.” (Answer.) 
 
 Applicant maintains contact with a friend from Sudan that resides in Egypt. His 
friend lives as a refugee in Egypt, after fleeing Darfur. He cannot return to Sudan “for he 
will be in danger if he chooses to go back.” (Answer.) He is “currently working on 
establishing citizenship other than Sudan.” (Answer; Item 3.)  
 
Sudan 
 
 Sudan is governed by an authoritarian President. The National Congress Party 
has held near-absolute power in Sudan for almost 30 years. Since 1993, Sudan has 
been designated by the U.S. Department of State as a state sponsor of terrorism, due to 
concerns about Sudanese support to international terrorist organizations including Abu 
Nidal Organization, Palestine Islamic Jihad, Hamas, and Hezbollah. The U.S. 
Department of State warns U.S. citizens not to travel to Sudan due to risks of terrorism, 
armed conflict, and violent crime. Westerners and Western interests are targeted 
through suicide operations, bombings, shootings, and kidnappings. Violent crimes 
targeting Westerners including kidnappings, armed robberies, home invasions, and 
carjacking occur throughout Sudan. Arbitrary detentions of foreigners have been 
reported. 
 
 In 2003, non-Arabs in the Darfur region of Sudan rebelled against the Sudanese 
government, protesting decades of political and economic neglect. The government 
responded with brutal force, and more than 300,000 people were killed in the ensuing 
conflict. More than two million people have been displaced as a result of that conflict. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
 
 
4 
 
 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
 
 
5 
 
 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant’s wife, parents, parents-in-law, siblings, and siblings-in-law are all 
citizen and residents in Sudan. His ties to his Sudanese friend in Egypt also create a 
risk of exploitation, should his friend return to Sudan. His wife is employed by the 
Ministry of Education. His father-in-law works for the Ministry of Health. His brother-in-
law works for the Ministry of Interior. There is an articulated heightened risk associated 
with having relationships with family members in or tied to Sudan, due to Sudan’s 
sponsorship of terrorism, its authoritarian government, and the threats to Westerners in 
Sudan. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the agency head or designee; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 None of the above conditions are mitigating in this instance. Applicant is in close 
contact with his wife and child, communicating with them weekly and sending them 
money monthly. While his contacts with the rest of his family and his friend are less 
frequent, they are still bonds that tie him to Sudan. A potential for a conflict of interest is 
present due to his ties to his family in Sudan, the nature of the Sudanese government, 
and the unrest in Sudan. He failed to demonstrate deep and longstanding loyalties to 
the United States. The record contains little information on assets, or physical or 
emotional bonds to the United States. Without more information, it cannot be 
determined that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered 
 
 
7 
 
 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all pertinent facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt 
as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. He failed to meet his burden to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for foreign influence. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
