 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01999 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
January 28, 2019 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On June 20, 2017, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP).  
(Government Exhibit 1.) On August 20, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 14, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 6, 2018.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on November 
15, 2018, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on December 6, 2018. The 
Government offered six exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6, which 
 
2 
 
were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered one exhibit, referred to as 
Applicant’s Exhibit A which was admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his 
own behalf. The record remained open until close of business on December 13, 2018, 
to allow the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  
Applicant submitted one document, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A, 
which was admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on December 17, 2018. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 30 years old.  He is not married and has no children.  He has a high 
school diploma.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a field technician.  He is 
seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified twelve delinquent debts totaling in excess of $42,000.  
Applicant admits each of the allegations set forth in the SOR, except 1.a.  Credit reports 
of the Applicant dated June 24, 2017; and October 29, 2018, reflect that the debts are 
still owing.  (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.) 
       
 Applicant admits that over the years he has lived beyond his means.  He has 
spent money he really could not afford, on his hobby, which is electronics.  He 
explained that he enjoys buying computer parts in order to prepare to do graphic design 
and web design.  Until July 2015, he was able to pay his bills.  In July 2015, he was laid 
off from a previous job, and he did not find work for about three to four months.  (Tr. p. 
47.)  During this period, his credit cards were his only source of income and he 
continued to use them as though his income had not been effected.       
 
 Applicant started working for his current employer in 2017.  He states that he 
could not find anyone affordable to help him with his finances until recently.  In October 
2018, Applicant hired a credit counselor to help him resolve his debt.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit A.)  However, during his interview with an investigator in July 2017, when his 
delinquent debts were brought to his attention, Applicant stated that he was planning to 
pay his debts in full and/or would be setting up payments plans for his delinquent 
accounts by the end of 2018.  (Tr. p. 33, and Government Exhibit 2.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 The following delinquent debts, consisting of bank and department store credit 
cards and personal loans, are still owing: 
 
1.a. Applicant is indebted to BMW Financial for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $14,874.  Applicant states that he co-signed for a friend for a car 
loan that his friend could not afford to pay.  (Tr. pp. 25 -26.)         
 
1.b.  Applicant was indebted to Portfolio for an account that was placed in collection in 
the approximate amount of $7,845.  (Tr. pp. 31 - 33.)    
 
1.c.   Applicant was indebted to Wells Fargo Bank for an account that was charged off in 
the approximate amount of $4,880.  (Tr. pp. 33 - 34.)          
 
1.d.  Applicant was indebted to Portfolio for an account that was placed in collection in 
the approximate amount of $3,442.  (Tr. pp. 34 - 35.)           
 
1.e.  Applicant was indebted to Wells Fargo Bank CD SVC for an account that was 
charged off in the approximate amount of $2,643.  (Tr. pp. 35 - 36.)        
 
1.f.  Applicant was indebted to SYNCB/PayPal for an account that was charged off in 
the in the approximate amount of $413.  (Tr. p. 35.) 
 
1.g. Applicant is indebted to Portfolio for an account that was placed for collection in the 
approximate amount of $2,373.  (Tr. pp. 36 - 37.)        
 
1.h.  Applicant was indebted to Midland MCM for an account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $1,500.  (Tr. p. 37.)    
 
1.i.   Applicant was indebted to TBOMMILSTN for an account that was past due in the 
amount of $160 with a total approximate balance of $509.  Applicant states that he 
settled the debt for about $350.  (Tr. p. 37.)        
 
1.j.  Applicant was indebted to Midland MCM for an account that was placed in 
collection in the approximate amount of $474.  (Tr. p. 39 - 40.)           
 
1.k.  Applicant was indebted to SD County for an account that was charged off in the 
approximate amount of $232.  (Tr. p. 40.)      
 
1.l.  Applicant was indebted to Midland Funding for an account that was placed for 
collection in the approximate amount of $3,654.  (Tr. p. 41.)  
 
       Applicant admits that he got into this financial situation because he was spending 
beyond his means.  He still has a lot of responsibilities that include helping his parents 
pay the rent and taking care of other expenses, besides his own bills.  At the end of the 
month he is left with a very small amount of money that he has to manage to use for 
gas, food and other things.  (Tr. p. 46.)  Applicant states that he is currently trying to find 
 
4 
 
a better paying job.  He wants a stable income where he can use a portion of that 
income to pay his bills and place the rest in savings.  (Tr. p. 50.)   
 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has spent beyond his means and now has twelve delinquent debts.  He 
remains delinquently indebted in the amount of approximately $42,000.  Of the twelve 
debts listed in the SOR, he has paid one of them.  Even his smaller debts have not 
been paid.  The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating conditions under the Financial Considerations guideline 
are potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and   
   
 
6 
 
  (d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  But for a three or four month period following Applicant’s job lay-off, Applicant 
has been consistently employed and has received income.  Even so, since obtaining 
full-time employment with a defense contractor in 2017, Applicant has done little to 
show that he can or will resolve his debts.  He states that he hired a debt counselor, yet 
there is nothing in the record to show that they have done anything to help him resolve 
his debts.  Applicant has settled one debt, but the other eleven remain owing.  Even the 
smaller debts that one would assume he could pay if nothing else, have not been paid.  
He has not set up payment plans with the creditors that he is following, nor has he paid 
off the outstanding debt.  There is no clear evidence in the record that he has acted 
reasonably and responsibly under the circumstances.  His actions reflect unreliability, 
untrustworthiness, and poor judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
7 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
