1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 18-00160 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the alleged financial trustworthiness concerns. Based on a 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for a position of trust is 
granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On January 25, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on May 8, 2018, and elected to have 
her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
its file of relevant material (FORM) on August 23, 2018. Applicant received it on 
September 19, 2018. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 8. The 
01/16/2019
 
 
2 
 
 
FORM notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant submitted responses to the FORM on October 17 and 18, 2018 (Reply). Items 
1 through 8 and Applicant’s Reply are admitted into the record, without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on January 8, 2019.                           
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, with explanations. 
(Answer.) The allegations are supported by credit reports dated November 21, 2017, and 
June 7, 2018. (Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is 23 years old. She is single and resides with her mother to save money. 
She was enrolled in classes from June 2013 to May 2014 at a university, and then 
transferred to a college in October 2015. As of July 2016, she was still enrolled in classes 
at the college. She worked part time as a clerk in a discount retail store from November 
2014 to present. Prior to that, she was an unemployed student. (Reply; Answer; Item 4; 
Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a lease agreement in the amount of $5,771, as stated in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. This debt was for student housing while attending the university and became 
delinquent in 2014. Initially, she did not realize that this loan was separate from her 
student-loan accounts addressed below. However, when she realized it was a separate 
debt, she contacted this creditor and set up an arrangement to pay $150 monthly until 
this debt is resolved. She provided the name of her point of contact and a phone number 
to verify her payments under the agreement. While she did not provide documentation of 
payments under this agreement, she appears to be resolving this debt. (Reply.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on three student-loan accounts held by the same creditor in 
the total amount of $10,547, as stated in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e. These loans became 
delinquent in 2016 and 2017. Applicant entered into a repayment agreement with this 
creditor to resolve these delinquencies through monthly payments of $149. She did not 
establish a repayment agreement until after receiving the SOR, because she originally 
thought that he mother was repaying this debt. She documented that she has made six 
monthly payments according to this agreement. These debts are being resolved. (Reply; 
Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted on a charged-off account in the amount of $369, as stated 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. This was a credit card account that became delinquent in 2016. Applicant 
settled this debt for less than the balance due, as documented in a May 2018 letter from 
this creditor. It is resolved. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is addressing her delinquent debts as best she can with the funds that 
she has available. She lives “paycheck to paycheck” but is dedicated to resolving her 
debts in full. (Reply.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture. 
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person applying for a position of trust seeks to enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national security 
eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  
 
  
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant was delinquent on three student loans, a lease agreement, and a credit 
card in the total amount of $11,022. Her oldest debt has been delinquent since 2014. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns. I 
considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20, including the following: 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has resolved her credit card debt, and documented that she is making 
payments on her three student loans. She has made six payments under that agreement. 
While she failed to document payments on the lease, she provided contact information to 
verify her payments and credibly averred that she is paying that debt. There is evidence 
of mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d), with respect to these debts. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The Appeal Board has 
addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases, stating:  
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and every 
debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrates 
that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial problems and 
taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably 
consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in 
evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his 
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2 (a) 
(“Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a 
determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.1 
 
                                                 
1ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant was young when she incurred the alleged delinquencies and relied on 
her mother to manage her finances. She has since matured and began addressing her 
delinquent accounts. She provided sufficient evidence to demonstrate a plan to resolve 
her outstanding delinquent debts within the standard defined in the above case. The 
likelihood that financial problems will recur, or Applicant will stop making payments on the 
plans she has initiated, is minimal based on her efforts to date and her knowledge that 
similar problems could jeopardize her employment. The potential for pressure, coercion, 
or duress is eliminated by Applicant’s efforts to resolve her debt. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for 
a position of trust. She met her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising 
under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant                    
                    Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
          Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
          Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. 
National security eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
                                               
  
 
Jennifer Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
