1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00989 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline E, 
personal conduct, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On June 7, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E and Guideline J. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective June 8, 2017 (AG). 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 11, 2018, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on October 11, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings 
01/16/2019
 
2 
 
 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 18, 2018, and the hearing 
was convened as scheduled on November 28, 2018. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence. The Government’s exhibit list was 
marked as a hearing exhibit (HE I). Applicant testified, called two witnesses, but did not 
offer documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 
7, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer (Answer), he denied the allegations in the SOR. After a 
thorough and careful review of all the pleadings and evidence, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old. He is married, but has been separated from his wife for 
five years. He has three children. He has worked for his current federal contractor since 
2013. He has worked for other federal contractors since 1998. He served in the Air 
Force from 1982 to 1987. He received an honorable discharge. He has two associate’s 
degrees.1   
 
 The personal conduct allegations raised in the SOR include: (1) In December 
2016, being charged with Assault-Unlawful Force, which was later reduced to Attempted 
Assault (See SOR ¶ 1.a); (2) In November 2012, being charged with Hit and Run, Duty 
of Driver to Stop, which was later reduced to Reckless Driving (See SOR ¶ 1.b). The 
same allegations were also cross-alleged as criminal conduct concerns (See SOR ¶ 
2.a). 
  
 In December 2016, Applicant had a dispute with his then-girlfriend with whom he 
was living at the time. The dispute started because Applicant received a phone call from 
an ex-girlfriend. Applicant’s girlfriend demanded that he leave the home. As Applicant 
was attempting to gather his possessions, he and his girlfriend had a physical 
altercation. She called the police, who arrived shortly thereafter. She claimed that 
Applicant grabbed her by the throat and threatened her. The police noted in their report 
that the girlfriend was belligerent towards them and Applicant, and that Applicant 
remained calm and cooperative during their presence. Applicant claimed that his 
girlfriend blocked his way when he attempted to gather his possessions and he pushed 
her resulting in her falling down. There were two witnesses to the altercation. Both 
verified that Applicant pushed his girlfriend to the ground to get past her. One heard a 
threat by Applicant, but the other did not.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with Assault-Unlawful Force or Violence. In 
April 2017, he appeared in court and pleaded guilty to the lesser offense of attempted 
assault. He was sentenced to 90 days of jail (suspended), a fine, and 12 months’ 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5-6, 25, 27, 32; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer; GE 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
probation. He was also ordered to complete a domestic violence class. Applicant 
successfully completed his probation and also completed a 16-week domestic violence 
program. He has had no further contact with his ex-girlfriend. Aside from being 
questioned by a detective on an unrelated matter, Applicant has had no further law 
enforcement involvement since this arrest in December 2016. He reported both the 
arrest and the conviction to his security officer.3 
 
 In November 2012, Applicant was involved in an incident with another driver. 
Applicant hit another vehicle while attempting to pass. He did not immediately stop after 
the incident but drove down the road for some distance. The police arrived and 
Applicant was arrested for Hit and Run and Duty of Driver to Stop offenses. Later in 
2013, the prosecutor dropped those two charges and Applicant pleaded nolo 
contendere to Reckless Driving. He paid a fine and reported the incident to his security 
officer.4 
 
 Applicant presented the testimony of two witnesses. One witness has worked 
with Applicant for a number of years. He testified that Applicant is a valued employee 
who handles his job with great care and diligence. He has never seen Applicant become 
violent or aggressive in the workplace and he was in a position to observe such things if 
they had happened. He recommended that Applicant retain his clearance.5  
 
 The second witness is a friend who knows Applicant on a personal basis and has 
lived with him for the past several months. She also never observed Applicant showing 
a temper.6 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
                                                          
3 Tr. 28-31, 33-35; Answer; GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. 23; Answer; GE 3. 
 
5 Tr. 46-48. 
 
6 Tr. 52, 54. 
 
 
4 
 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . . 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
5 
 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information 
 Appellant had two criminal incidents against him in 2013 and 2017. While they 
may or may not arise to the level of criminal activity sufficient to cause concern under 
the criminal conduct guideline, they do raise the issue of Applicant’s judgment. AG ¶¶ 
16(c) applies. 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for personal conduct under 
AG ¶ 17 and considered the following relevant:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur. 
 Appellant satisfied his probation obligations from the 2016 arrest and also 
completed a domestic violence class, which are positive steps to alleviate future 
incidents. He no longer has contact with the victim of that incident and is arrest free 
since that time. It is unlikely this behavior will recur and Appellant’s reliability and 
trustworthiness have not been impacted. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted.  
 
Appellant was convicted of reckless driving in 2013 and attempted assault in 
2017. AG ¶ 31(b) applies.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and considered the following relevant: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 The most recent criminal charges against Appellant occurred in 2016 (date of 
incident) and involved a dispute with an ex-girlfriend. Police reports describe possible 
culpability by both parties. Applicant pleaded guilty to attempted assault. He 
successfully completed his probation and participated in 16 domestic violence classes. 
No repeat incidents have occurred since that time. He has had no further involvement 
with his ex-girlfriend since his 2016 arrest. He has had no additional driving offenses 
since the reckless driving charge in 2012. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.               
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service, the recommendation from his coworker, and the testimony of his friend.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the Guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs   1.a – 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph    2.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
