1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00517 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. He failed to provide sufficient documentation to establish 
mitigation with respect to his student loan debts and delinquent federal taxes. National 
security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On April 9, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(December 10, 2016), implemented effective June 8, 2017.  
01/11/2019
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant submitted an Answer to the SOR on May 7, 2018, and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
its file of relevant material (FORM) on June 6, 2018. Applicant received it on June 15, 
2018. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant submitted 
a one-page response to the FORM (Response). Items 1 through 6 and the Response are 
admitted into the record without objection. The case was assigned to me on January 8, 
2019.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He is a high school graduate, and attended some college 
classes between 2007 and 2010. He has worked for his employer, a federal contractor, 
since October 2016. He is unmarried and has a ten-year-old child. He is current on his 
child support obligation. (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant was employed from 2012 to 2016 as a forklift operator. Before that, he 
worked in retail from 2008 to 2012. He also worked at a fast food restaurant in 2008. 
These jobs were low paying positions and did not afford him sufficient income to repay 
his student loans that he incurred while attending college. (Item 2; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is alleged to be indebted on 11 delinquent student loan accounts (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a-1.d, and 1.f-1.l) owed to the U.S. Department of Education, totaling $32,442. He 
presented a payment agreement with a collection agency for the U.S. Department of 
Education dated April 26, 2018, with his Answer to the SOR. That letter authorized 
recurring payments to be withdrawn from his account, but did not state a payment amount 
or otherwise document any payments were made under that agreement. In Applicant’s 
Response, he indicated that he consolidated his delinquent student loans into one 
account and that since April 2018, he has remitted $22 per month as required in the 
repayment agreement. His June 5, 2018 credit report reflects multiple accounts owed to 
the Department of Education as past due with the date of last payment as April 2018. It 
is unclear if he made any payments after his the April 2018 payment, which was 
presumably the first payment under his repayment agreement. His June 5, 2018 credit 
report also shows multiple other student loans were transferred or sold. Applicant did not 
provide enough evidence to establish a track record of responsibility for these delinquent 
student loan accounts. These debts are unresolved. (Answer; Response; Item 3; Item 4; 
Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant also owes approximately $2,812 (SOR ¶ 1.e) to the university he 
attended for another student loan. His Answer and Response indicate that all of his 
student loans have been “consolidated into one monthly payment plan” but there is no 
evidence that indicates this debt was included in that agreement. This debt became 
 
3 
 
 
delinquent in 2011. It is identified on his June 5, 2018 credit report as past due and no 
recent payments are reflected. This debt is unresolved. (Answer; Response; Item 3 at 7; 
Item 4; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Additionally, Applicant is indebted to the IRS in the amount of $5,284 for tax years 
2014, 2015, and 2016, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m. He filed his tax returns for those years 
in a timely manner, but had insufficient funds to pay the balance owed. Tax transcripts for 
those tax years reflect that he established an installment agreement with the IRS to 
resolve his delinquencies in April 2017, but was no longer in installment status in March 
2018. (Item 3.) He documented that he re-engaged the IRS in April 2018 and established 
a new agreement to pay $64 per month. (Answer.) In his Response, he indicated he was 
current with that agreement, but provided no documentation to show a track record of 
payments under that agreement.  
 
 Applicant’s June 5, 2018 credit report reflects that he has an additional delinquent 
account, owed to a payday-loan vender in the amount of $616. (Item 6.)1 He admitted this 
debt in his Response and explained: “In my current financial situation, I am living 
‘paycheck to paycheck’, meaning, after I am finished paying my monthly rent and utilities 
and other expenses that are required raising my son, I am not left with extra funds.” 
Despite his shortfall, he intends to pay all his delinquent debt when he is able. 
(Response.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
1 These debts were not alleged on the SOR and are not considered under the disqualifying conditions, 
below, but are appropriate to examine when analyzing mitigation. 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under the financial considerations guideline is set out in AG 
& 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
  
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant has over $35,000 in delinquent student loan debt, plus over $5,000 in 
delinquent tax debt. He has been delinquent on his student loans since at least 2011. 
Despite being fully employed since 2016, he has insufficient income to address these 
liabilities. There is sufficient evidence to establish disqualification under AG ¶¶ 19(a), 
19(c), and 19(f). 
 
 The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant has insufficient income to meet all of his financial obligations. He has 
incurred additional delinquent debt, not alleged in the SOR. There is no evidence that he 
will be able to avoid delinquent accounts in the future. He remains indebted for federal 
taxes and student loans. His debt is ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to underemployment. That is a 
circumstance beyond his control. However, he has been fully employed since 2016, and 
continues to be unable to meaningfully address his delinquent accounts. The record lacks 
documentation to show he reasonably and responsibly addressed his delinquencies. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established.  
 
 Applicant provided no documentation of financial counseling. There is minimal 
evidence to conclude that his financial problems are under control. He has established 
payment agreements with the collection agent for the majority of his student loans and 
with the IRS. However, he did not provide documentation to demonstrate a track record 
of payments in accordance with those agreements. The evidence does not establish full 
mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or 20(d).  
 
 Applicant did not claim to dispute any of his alleged delinquencies. AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has established an installment agreement to resolve his federal tax 
liabilities. However, he defaulted on a previous installment agreement. He failed to meet 
his burden to establish compliance with his current repayment agreement, beyond his 
bare averment. Documentation of compliance with those arrangements is necessary. AG 
¶ 20(g) does not mitigate the security concern. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is credited with his 
recent efforts to make payment arrangements to resolve his delinquencies with his limited 
income. However, he failed to support his statements with proof of concomitant action. 
He has no track record of payments to his creditors and his most recent credit report 
reflects a new delinquent account. He may be eligible for national security eligibility in the 
future if he is able to document reasonable and responsible actions to maintain solvency. 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
