1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
 ) ISCR Case No. 18-01541 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant used marijuana from January 2010 to at least November 2018, since July 
2018 with a state-issued medical marijuana card. He is not committed to abstention despite 
knowing that marijuana remains illegal under Federal law. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On June 20, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement and substance misuse, and explaining why 
it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
01/04/2019
2 
 
On July 17, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
On September 7, 2018, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. On October 5, 2018, I scheduled a hearing for November 16, 
2018. 
 
 I convened the hearing as scheduled. Two Government exhibits (GEs 1-2) were 
admitted in evidence. An August 9, 2018 letter forwarding the proposed GEs to Applicant 
and a list of the GEs were marked as hearing exhibits (HEs I and II) for the record but not 
admitted in evidence. Six Applicant exhibits (AEs A-F) were admitted in evidence. Applicant 
testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on November 29, 2018. I held the record 
open for three weeks after the hearing for additional evidence from Applicant. No 
documents were received, and the record closed on December 7, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency (SOR ¶ 1.a) and purchased marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.b) from January 2010 to at 
least March 2018, and that during a March 6, 2018 interview with a DOD authorized 
investigator he stated an intention to continue using marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.c). When he 
responded to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations without comment. After 
considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old mechanical designer with post-high school certifications in 
mechanical drafting technology and computer-aided drafting. His first marriage ended after 
only two years. He was married to his second wife from July 1989 to February 2008. 
Applicant has a 27-year-old son and a 23-year-old daughter. An innovative mechanical 
designer, Applicant spent much of his career in the medical device industry, and he holds 
patents involving medical methods and devices. Applicant has worked for his defense-
contractor employer in computer-aided design since March 2015. He seeks a security 
clearance for his position, although he understands that he can continue to work for his 
employer without a clearance. (GEs 1-2; AEs B, E-F; Tr. 26-29.) 
 
In 2007, Applicant was diagnosed with a degenerative eye disease. (AE C; Tr. 36.)   
At the suggestion of his godson, Applicant began using marijuana in January 2010, initially 
for degenerative discs and to relieve pressure in his eyes. (GE 1; Tr. 25-26, 55.) Applicant 
continued to use marijuana approximately twice weekly as needed for pain or to sleep to at 
least November 2018. He traveled to Asia for his then employer for seven weeks in April 
2012. He did not use any marijuana during that trip. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 35, 64.) Applicant 
purchased marijuana from his friends until July 2018. (GE 2; AE D.) 
 
In January 2015, Applicant began outpatient psychotherapy with a licensed clinical 
social worker for diagnosed depression and anxiety. He was honest with his therapist about 
his use of marijuana. He advised her that he used marijuana at times when experiencing 
3 
 
heightened anxiety or depression not adequately addressed by his psychiatric 
medications.1 (AE A.) 
 
Applicant took a pre-employment drug screen to work for his employer in early 2015. 
He refrained from using marijuana before the test because he knew he would be drug 
tested, and “because every now and then, it’s nice to give [himself] a little break.” He 
passed the drug screen. (Tr. 30-31.) Applicant understands that his employer has a policy 
prohibiting illegal drug use by its employees, although the company has publicized that 
medical marijuana use would be handled akin to alcohol abuse. (Tr. 30-32.) 
 
Two years into his job with his current employer, Applicant completed and certified 
to the accuracy of a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on November 8, 
2017. He responded affirmatively to an inquiry concerning whether he had illegally used 
any drugs or controlled substances in the last seven years, and disclosed that marijuana 
“was and is sometime used” to control pain and stomach issues and relieve pressure in his 
eyes. He gave estimated dates of January 2010 for his first use and September 2017 for 
his most recent use. He answered “No” to whether he intended to use marijuana in the 
future, but then stated “depends on the level of pain and discomfort I experience. I always 
use this as a last resort because I cannot take vicoden [sic] for pain or discomfort because 
it tears my stomach apart.” Applicant responded negatively to an inquiry into whether he 
had been involved in the illegal purchase, manufacture, cultivation, trafficking, production, 
transfer, shipping, receiving, handling or sale of any drug or controlled substance in the last 
seven years. (GE 1; Tr. 33.) 
 
On March 6, 2018, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). He admitted that he used marijuana since 
January 2010 for pain related to his medical issues and for a sleep aid because his 
stomach does not tolerate prescription medications. He expressed an intention to continue 
to use marijuana for pain, and a high likelihood that he would use marijuana in the future 
due to the pain associated with his medical conditions. He disclosed that he obtained his 
marijuana illegally through friends who legally cultivate marijuana. He obtained a half 
ounce of marijuana every other month at a cost of $70 each time. Applicant denied 
socializing with any individuals who use drugs illegally. (GE 2.) 
 
Applicant now acknowledges that he used marijuana probably a couple of times a 
week since 2010. (Tr. 47.) He attempted to reduce or cease his marijuana use over the 
past year, but he continued to use the drug to at least November 14, 2018. (Tr. 34-35.) On 
July 20, 2018, he obtained a state-issued medical marijuana card authorizing him to use 
marijuana legally in the state for the next year under its medical marijuana program.2  (AE 
                                                 
1 Applicant’s medications are currently being monitored by a psychiatry practice. He has been in treatment with 
that provider since May 2016. (AE B.) 
 
2 The state’s medical marijuana act was passed in 2005. Section 21.-28.6-4 of state law provides in part: 
 
(a) A qualifying patient cardholder who has in his or her possession a registry identification 
card shall not be subject to arrest, prosecution, or penalty in any manner, or denied any right 
or privilege, including, but not limited to, civil penalty or disciplinary action by a business or 
4 
 
D.) Since obtaining his medical marijuana card, Applicant has purchased his marijuana 
from an authorized dispensary. (Tr. 42.) He acknowledged that he had previously 
purchased the drug illegally in half-ounce quantities every two months for $70 from friends 
that grow marijuana for “compassion science.” (Tr. 48.) Applicant obtained his medical 
marijuana card because after he applied for a security clearance, he wanted “to try to do 
everything as legally as [he] can.” (Tr. 46.)  As to why he waited to late July 2018 to obtain 
a medical marijuana card given he applied for a clearance in November 2017, Applicant 
responded: 
 
Because it wasn’t—I think the dispensaries may have just came around at 
that point. I probably didn’t have the extra $300. And it really wasn’t an issue. 
I was so low-keyed and I try to keep everything under wraps that—I just 
didn’t see a need for it. But now that I’m here and everything, I want 
everything to be—lay it out—I want to be honest. I want to be as legal as I 
can. And that’s part of my problem is I’m way too honest. (Tr. 46-47.)  
 
Applicant understands that marijuana use is still illegal under Federal law, and that 
he had used marijuana illegally. The state in which he lived from December 2004 to May 
2017 did not legalize recreational use of marijuana until December 2016.3 Applicant’s 
current state of residency has not legalized recreational use of marijuana. Applicant looked 
into the laws governing marijuana, but he did not see the illegality as an issue because he 
was using marijuana for medical reasons in his home “to control things that [he has] no 
control over.” (Tr. 52-53.) Applicant intends to continue to use marijuana, but not at great 
frequency. He has never used marijuana at work. (Tr. 59-60.) 
 
Applicant has not advised anyone at work about his marijuana use (“It’s used for 
medical purposes. I don’t tell them all my medicines I take.”). (Tr. 32-33.) Applicant 
continues to take medications for his eyes, but they create a burning sensation. (AE C; Tr. 
                                                                                                                                                             
occupational or professional licensing board or bureau, for the medical use of marijuana; 
provided, that the qualifying patient cardholder possesses an amount of marijuana that does 
not exceed twelve (12) mature marijuana plants that are accompanied by valid medical 
marijuana tags, two and one-half (2.5) ounces of usable marijuana, or its equivalent amount, 
and an amount of wet marijuana to be set by regulations promulgated by the departments of 
health and business regulation. Said plants shall be stored in an indoor facility. 
 
(b) An authorized purchaser who has in his or her possession a registry identification card 
shall not be subject to arrest, prosecution, or penalty in any manner, or denied any right or 
privilege, including, but not limited to, civil penalty or disciplinary action by a business or 
occupational or professional licensing board or bureau, for the possession of marijuana; 
provided that the authorized purchaser possesses an amount of marijuana that does not 
exceed two and one-half (2.5) ounces of usable marijuana, or its equivalent amount, and this 
marijuana was purchased legally from a compassion center for the use of their designated 
qualifying patient. 
 
3 Effective January 2, 2009, that state decriminalized possession of an ounce or less of marijuana and 
imposed a civil penalty of $100 and forfeiture of the marijuana. Effective January 1, 2013, the state established 
a medical marijuana program. Applicant’s eye disease is one of the covered conditions under the program. 
The state legalized possession of one ounce of marijuana for recreational use by persons age 21 and older 
effective December 15, 2016, but .   
5 
 
38.) He shared with his optometrist during an appointment one Saturday that he had 
smoked marijuana three hours before his appointment. She advised him that the relief in 
eye pressure from marijuana was only temporary. His optometrist is not licensed to 
prescribe medical marijuana. (Tr. 39-40.) She corroborates his eye condition, which is 
stable and currently being managed with topical medications. (AE C.) 
  
Applicant’s outpatient psychotherapist indicated that, to her knowledge, Applicant’s 
use of marijuana, “about once a week,” has not interfered with his work performance. She 
has not seen any behavior by Applicant that makes her concerned. He has always been 
trustworthy, stable, and responsible, and she has not identified anything about his 
marijuana use that, in her opinion, contributes to any security concerns. (AE A.) 
 
Applicant’s psychiatric provider also attested to Applicant primarily using marijuana 
for relief of pain and pressure related to his eye disease, and she added that the medical 
literature supports use of marijuana for the condition. She also noted that Applicant finds 
marijuana helpful with anxiety but that it was not the primary reason why Applicant uses 
marijuana. She considers Applicant’s mood to be stable and his psychiatric symptoms well 
managed. (AE B.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concerns about drug involvement and substance misuse are set forth in 
AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. 
  
With the exception of a seven-week business trip to Asia in 2012, Applicant used 
marijuana approximately twice a week and purchased marijuana once every two months 
from January 2010 to at least November 2018. His use and purchase after July 20, 2018, 
was with a medical marijuana card obtained legally in his state.4 Disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶¶ 25(a), “any substance misuse (see above definition),” and 25(c), “illegal possession 
of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;” apply. Moreover, Applicant has candidly 
admitted that he intends to continue to use medical marijuana in the future, albeit not at 
great frequency, to cope with his medical conditions. AG ¶ 25(g), “expressed intent to 
                                                 
4 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I drug. Despite some states providing for medical marijuana use or the 
decriminalization or legalization of recreational use of minor amounts of the drug, marijuana remains a 
Schedule I controlled substance under federal law. Such drugs have a high potential for abuse, no currently 
accepted medical use in treatment in the United States, and lack accepted safety for using the drug under 
medical supervision. 
  
7 
 
continue drug involvement and substance misuse, or failure to clearly and convincingly 
commit to continue such misuse,” also applies. 
 
Applicant bears the burden of establishing that matters in mitigation apply. AG ¶ 26 
provides for mitigation as follows: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on an individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all illegal drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility;  
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness during 
which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended: and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including, 
but not limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without 
recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant used marijuana with the same 
consistency for almost nine years in knowing violation of Federal law. For all but the last 
few months, his use and purchase was also illegal under state law. Applicant candidly 
admits that he intends to use and purchase marijuana with his medical marijuana card in 
the future, fully aware that state laws permitting medical marijuana do not alter the federal 
prohibition or existing national security guidelines concerning marijuana use.  Applicant 
denies any dependency on marijuana. Both his therapist and his psychiatric provider are 
aware of and are not concerned about his marijuana use to alleviate pain and pressure 
from his eye disease and other medical conditions. However, Applicant cannot satisfy AG ¶ 
26(b) as long as he intends to continue to use marijuana. The drug involvement and 
substance misuse security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept  
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
8 
 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).5 In that regard, Applicant’s marijuana use is troubling because of his mature age and 
knowing disregard of the drug laws for several years. He rationalized his illegal drug use as 
necessary to avert the negative side-effects of his medications. He knew that he could 
have obtained a medical marijuana card that would have legalized his use and purchase in 
the state, but he saw no need for it until the SOR was issued. Even now, he continues to 
act in self-interest. The Government must be able to rely on the persons entrusted with the 
Nation’s secrets to comply with their clearance obligations, which include following Federal 
law and DOD policy against marijuana use, including medical marijuana. Applicant has 
raised considerable doubts in that regard. Although his candor about his marijuana 
involvement weighs in his favor, for the reasons noted, I find that it is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant security clearance eligibility for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
                                                 
5 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows:  
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
