1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------- ) ADP Case No. 18-01096 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his eligibility 
for a public trust position. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the trustworthiness concern stemming from his problematic 
financial condition. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86 format) on February 8, 2017.  On June 13, 2018, after reviewing the application 
and the information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility sent Applicant a statement of reasons 
(SOR), detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F for financial considerations.1 
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here.    
01/04/2019
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 8, 2018, and requested a decision based on the 
written record without a hearing.   
 
On August 7, 2018, Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant and material 
information (FORM).2  Included in the FORM were six items of evidence. Items 1 and 2 
are the SOR and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, respectively. Since those are the 
pleadings, they are already part of the record.3 Items 3 through 5 are admitted without 
objection. Item 6 is discussed below. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on August 8, 
2018, who received it August 12, 2018. Applicant’s response to the FORM was due on 
September 26, 2018. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to 
me on December 10, 2018.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 The FORM included Item 6, which is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing 
Applicant’s interview that took place during the June 2018 background investigation. The 
ROI is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.4 Department 
Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote advising Applicant that the summary was not 
authenticated and that failure to object may constitute a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. The footnote is prominently prefaced with a bolded, upper case notice to 
Applicant and flagging for Applicant the importance of the footnote, which then explains 
the concepts of authentication and waiver. Nevertheless, I am not persuaded that a pro 
se applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM, which response is optional, equates to a 
knowing and voluntary waiver of the authentication requirement. The record does not 
demonstrate that Applicant understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and 
admissibility. It also does not demonstrate that he understood the implications of waiving 
an objection to the admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Item 6 is inadmissible, and I have 
not considered the information in the ROI.    
  
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is 45 years old and married with two biological children and a grown 
step-child. He has an associate’s degree, and since November 2015, Applicant has been 
employed by a federal contractor. He reported periods of unemployment from November 
2007 to June 2010, while he attended school, and another from February to June 2002. 
Applicant is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a position of public trust, because his 
                                                          
 
2 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation.  
 
3 I have marked the attachments to the Answer as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E. 
 
4 See generally ISCR Case No. 12-10933 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2016) (In a concurring opinion, Judge Ra’anan 
notes the historical concern about reports of investigation in that they were considered by some to present 
a heightened problem in providing due process. Judge Ra’anan raises a number of pertinent questions 
about using an unauthenticated ROI in a non-hearing case with a pro se applicant.). 
 
3 
 
sponsor is the Defense Health Agency. Eligibility is necessary because a job with his 
sponsor would involve access to sensitive but unclassified information.5 
  
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged 13 delinquent debts totaling about $46,928, 
made up of $32,919 in consumer debt and about $14,032 in student loan debt.6 Applicant 
admitted all of those debts.7 Four attachments to Applicant’s answer documented that he 
had resolved four SOR debts. Those debts are SOR ¶¶ 1. i, j, k, and l ($548, $430, $410, 
and $350, respectively, totaling $1,738).8  
 
The status of Applicant’s delinquent student loans warrants discussion, as that 
status is unclear. SOR ¶¶ 1. c, d, and g alleged three delinquent student loans ($6,841, 
5,809, and $1,362, respectively, totaling $14,012). One of the attachments to Applicant’s 
answer notified Applicant on March 12, 2018, that his student loans had been assigned 
to a collection agency. That attachment set forth a plan whereby Applicant would arrange 
for automatic withdrawals of $5.00 per month to be made beginning March 15, 2018, 
through November 15, 2018. As of March 12, 2018, the current balance (including 
interest, fees, and costs) was $28,250.9 It is unclear which of the student loans this 
arrangement addressed, or whether this was a consolidation of those three loans. In 
addition, Applicant submitted no documentation showing that he adhered to that plan.  
 
Putting aside the student loans and the four SOR debts that Applicant has resolved 
(totaling $15,750), there remains $31,178 of unresolved delinquent debts. Those debts 
remain unresolved as recently as April 3, 2018.10  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
                                                          
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Item 1.  
 
7 Item 2.  
 
8 AE B through E. 
  
9 AE A. The loan amounts alleged in the SOR are taken from the April 3, 2018 credit report. Item 5.  
 
10 Item 5.  
4 
 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations  
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations,11 the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
           Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect . . .  sensitive 
                                                          
11 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 
 
5 
 
information. Financial distress can also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus 
can be a possible indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse 
or dependence. An individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of 
having to engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a security 
concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including espionage.12 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions or factors:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear victimization by 
predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has had a problematic financial 
condition sufficient to raise a trustworthiness concern under Guideline F.  AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and (c) apply. A trustworthiness adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant's debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant's judgment, 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 
 
reliability, and trustworthiness.13 The next inquiry is whether any of the mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
 Applicant has resolved four of the debts (SOR ¶¶ 1. i, j, k, and l). They have, 
therefore, been mitigated under AG ¶ 20(d). As to the remaining unresolved debts, there 
is no evidence that they were infrequent, or were caused so long ago, that they were 
caused by conditions largely beyond Applicant’s control, or that he has received credit 
counseling. Therefore, AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), (c), and (d) do not apply.  
  
The record creates doubt about Applicant’s trustworthiness, good judgment, and 
ability to protect sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence 
as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable 
evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.14 
Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
show that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant him eligibility 
for access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.- h.:                 Against Applicant 
              
Subparagraphs 1.i.- l.:                         For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.m.          Against Applicant                
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas  
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008).   
 
14 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9).  
7 
 
 
