1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01532 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Kelly Folks, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Tokay T. Hackett, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct, alcohol consumption, and 
criminal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On July 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct), G (alcohol consumption), and J (criminal conduct). Applicant responded to the 
SOR on August 14, 2018, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
The case was assigned to me on November 1, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 19, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for December 14, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection.  
01/10/2019
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2015. He seeks to retain a security clearance. He has a 
bachelor’s degree, which was awarded in 2003. He has never married, and he has no 
children.1 
 
 Applicant was involved in several alcohol-related criminal incidents. He was cited 
in 1998 for minor in possession of alcohol. He was 18 years old at the time. He pleaded 
guilty and paid a fine. Applicant testified that he was at a party when the police arrived. 
He stated that he was not drinking, but there was alcohol at the party. He pleaded guilty 
because his parents told him to accept responsibility.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2008 and charged with driving while impaired by 
alcohol (DWI). He pleaded guilty and received probation before judgment for one year 
and a $500 fine. The charge was dismissed after he successfully completed the terms 
of his probation.3 
 
 Applicant testified that he had two beers with dinner over the course of about two 
to three hours. He thought that he was fine to drive. He stated that he did well on the 
field sobriety test, but there was a malfunction with the breathalyzer, so there were no 
blood alcohol concentration (BAC) results. He followed his attorney’s advice and 
accepted the guilty plea and probation before judgment with the knowledge that the 
charge would be dismissed if he completed the terms of the probation.4 
 
 Applicant submitted Questionnaires for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
2009 and 2014. He reported the above two incidents in both SF 86s. He wrote that a 
DUI “will not happen again.”5 
 
 Applicant was arrested in May 2017 and charged with driving under the influence 
of alcohol (DUI). In November 2017, he pleaded guilty to DWI, and the DUI charge was 
dismissed. He was sentenced to 60 days in the county detention center, with all 60 days 
suspended, and supervised probation for 18 months. As part of his probation, he was 
ordered to attend a victim impact panel. His state required him to install an interlock 
system on his car’s ignition for one year, which he successfully completed without any 
violations. He will remain on probation until May 2019.6 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 38, 45-46, 71-72; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
2 Tr. at 46-48, 62-63; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE D. 
 
3 Tr. at 48-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4; AE D. 
 
4 Tr. at 48-51, 61; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE D.  
 
5 Tr. at 63; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 51-56, 65-66; GE 5, 6; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B-D. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant testified that he went to dinner with a friend, and he had two large shots 
of tequila over the course of a long evening. He again felt that he was fine to drive. He 
was stopped after making a right turn while at a red light. He stated that he did not see 
that there was a no turn on red sign. He believes he passed the field sobriety test, but 
he refused to take a breathalyzer. He testified that he had friends who were lawyers 
who advised him that if he was ever stopped by the police, he should refuse the 
breathalyzer.7 
 
 Applicant attended and completed alcohol counseling from June 2017 to 
November 2017. He completed 26 sessions, which included group and individual 
sessions. His counselor, a licensed clinical social worker (LCSW), reported that 
Applicant showed marked improvement throughout the course of treatment, and that 
Applicant “showed sincere remorse and shame about the fact that he did not learn from 
his first offense which led to his second arrest.8 The LCSW concluded: 
 
As with any human behavior, no one person has a crystal ball. The best 
we can do is look for sustained improvement in behavior and judgment. It 
is in my professional opinion that [Applicant] not only successfully 
completed treatment but went on to demonstrate to me that he has 
learned from his mistakes and genuinely expresses sincere motivation to 
continue in his commitment to sobriety.9 
 
 Applicant informed his supervisor at work that he was arrested for DUI. Applicant 
testified that he benefited greatly from the counseling. He decided to completely abstain 
from alcohol. He has not had a drink since January 2018. He assures that he has 
learned from his mistakes, and the conduct will not be repeated.10 
 
 Applicant is highly regarded, as reported by three witnesses. He is praised for his 
excellent job performance, trustworthiness, responsibility, work ethic, and integrity. The 
witnesses recommended that he retain his security clearance11 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 51-55, 64-65; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE D. 
 
8 Tr. at 56-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE D. 
 
9 AE D. 
 
10 Tr. at 24, 56-60, 66-71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6; AE D. 
 
11 Tr. at 14-44. 
 
 
4 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder.  
 
Applicant was cited in 1998 for minor in possession of alcohol, and he had two 
alcohol-related driving offenses. AG ¶ 22(a) is applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant completed alcohol counseling in 2017. His LCSW opined that Applicant 
successfully completed treatment, learned from his mistakes, and expressed sincere 
motivation to continue in his commitment to sobriety. Applicant has abstained from 
alcohol since January 2018. He assures that he has learned from his mistakes, and the 
conduct will not be repeated. 
  
 
6 
 
 Applicant appears to be sincere, but I believe he was also sincere in 2009 and 
2014 when he wrote that a DUI “will not happen again.” He remains on probation until 
May 2019. I find that Applicant’s conduct continues to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) is not applicable. AG ¶¶ 
23(b) and 23(d) have some applicability, but they are insufficient to overcome concerns 
about his alcohol-related criminal conduct.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 Applicant’s two alcohol-related driving offenses were cross-alleged under 
criminal conduct. He will be on probation until May 2019. The above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a strong work record and favorable character evidence. However, 
he is still on probation for his most recent offense. I have unmitigated concerns under 
the same rationale discussed in the alcohol consumption analysis. 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant’s alcohol-related criminal conduct is cross-alleged under Guideline E. 
That conduct reflects questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. It also created vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. 
AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. AG ¶ 16(c) is not perfectly applicable because Applicant’s 
conduct is sufficient for an adverse determination under the alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct guidelines. However, the general concerns about questionable 
judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations contained in AG ¶¶ 
15 and 16(c) are established.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
8 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant informed his supervisor at work that he was arrested for DUI. That 
eliminated his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is 
applicable. However, concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment 
remain. Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated under the same rationale 
discussed in the alcohol consumption analysis. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E, G, and J in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s 
excellent character evidence, but he has two alcohol-related driving offenses, and he 
remains on probation until May 2019. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct, alcohol consumption, and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
