 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 05-04059 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole L. Noel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Applicant’s spouse 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Personal and Criminal 
Conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF-86), on January 16, 
2004. On February 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines 
E (Personal Conduct) and J (Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 14, 2008. He answered 
the SOR in writing on February 26, 2008, and elected to have his case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 11, 2008, the Government exercised its 
 
2 
 
 
right under the Directive’s Additional Procedural Guidance to request a hearing. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 7, 2008, and I received the case 
assignment on April 10, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 16, 2008, 
scheduling the case to be heard on May 7, 2008. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled.  
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
received without objection. GE 1 through 3 were identified by the Government’s List of 
Exhibits, Exhibit (Ex.) I. Applicant testified on his own behalf. He offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were received without objection. I held the record open 
until May 16, 2008 to afford Applicant the opportunity to submit additional material. 
Applicant timely submitted AE C through R, which were forwarded by Department 
Counsel Memorandum dated May 19, 2008 (Ex. II), and received without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 15, 2008. 
 
 
PROCEDURAL RULINGS 
 
Request to Amend the SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by changing the date in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. and 1.b. of “October 1999” to “October 1990.” Without objection from the Applicant, 
I granted Department Counsel’s motion. Tr. 10-12.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the allegations. After a 
thorough review of the record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old telecommunications foreman, who has been employed 
by a defense contractor since November 1999. He is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance. GE 1, Tr. 49-50.  
 
Applicant dropped out of high school in the 9th grade, and was awarded his GED 
“in either 1994 or 1995.” He has been married since February 1995. He and his wife 
have two children, a nine-year-old son, and a six-year-old daughter. GE 1, Tr. 31-32. 
 
When Applicant completed his SF-86, and executed it on January 16, 2004, and 
re-affirmed it on August 11, 2004, he provided incomplete information in response to 
Question: 
 
21. Your Police Record – Felony Offenses Have you ever been charged 
with or convicted of any felony offense? (Include those under the Uniform 
Code of Military Justice.)(emphasis added). For this item, report 
information regardless of whether the record in your case has been 
“sealed” or otherwise stricken from the record. The single exception to this 
 
3 
 
 
er was: 
                                                          
requirement is for certain convictions under the Federal Controlled 
Substances Act for which the court issued an expungement order under 
the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607.  
  
Applicant answered “Yes” and listed an October 1999 (1990) arrest1 for theft 
over $300/uttering. He failed to list that he was charged in June 1993 of Assault, Intent 
to Injure with a Deadly Weapon, Maiming-Malicious Injury, and Reckless 
Endangerment. He was convicted of the offense of Assault only. GE 3. SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 
1.b. His explanation for an incorrect answ
 
Whenever I fill out an application whether it be for a job or – I always get, 
have you ever been convicted of. I had misread the question as been 
charged with. You know I just misread it and just misunderstood the 
question. And I just didn’t put the other one down because it was a simple 
– what I was always told was that it was assault, a simple assault is that I 
was always told. And that’s why I never put that down because I didn’t 
know it was a felony or not and to this day I still don’t know if it is. Tr. 40. 
 
Applicant further stated and reemphasized he now understands the question 
included “charged with” and “convicted of” a felony (emphasis added). Knowing what he 
knows today, he would have answered the question differently. Tr. 41-43. 
 
Applicant’s wife testified that she helped her husband complete his SF-86 and 
consulted with her father, who is a retired police lieutenant from a major U.S. city. She 
stated her father advised her that her husband’s assault charge was a misdemeanor. 
She further stated, “It was not our intent to lie on the application. Certainly we knew that 
they were going to do a background check and so we included that we thought was the 
felony and again I just misread and didn’t realize that it was also any type of charges, 
felony charge.” Tr. 19.  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law testified on his behalf. As indicated supra, his father-in-
law is a retired police lieutenant from a major U.S. city. He stated, “when my daughter 
called me and asked me about the question, the conviction for a felony I instructed my 
daughter that his conviction in [major U.S. city] was not a felony conviction.” Tr. 59. He 
further stated in response to a question whether he recalled which of the original 
charges, if any, were felonies, he said, “I believe it was assault with the intent to maim. I 
believe that’s what it was. I know it was a felony assault charge. The conviction was a 
common law misdemeanor assault.” Tr. 61. Applicant provided a table of applicable state 
law pertaining to assault. The table indicated that assault, 2nd degree, was a 
misdemeanor under applicable state law. AE B. 
 
At the time Applicant was convicted of assault, he was 22 years old. He served 
“[c]lose to a year” in prison. He completed all court-ordered probation, which included 
making restitution to the victim. In the 15 years since he was released from prison, he 
1 Applicant erroneously listed an October 1990 arrest as an October 1999 arrest. See Motion to 
Amend SOR supra.  
 
4 
 
 
has not been involved in any sort of trouble, and has been a model citizen. He is 
involved in his children’s baseball and football programs, golfs, and works on home 
projects. Tr. 48-50, 54.     
 
Applicant submitted seven reference letters. Extracts of those letters follow. His 
mother-in-law stated, “I don’t think my husband and I could have found a better spouse 
for our daughter.” AE C. His brother-in-law stated, “I have no reservations about 
[Applicant’s] character and trust him with my greatest possessions on this earth, my 
children.” AE D. His Outside Plant Manager stated, “[Applicant] has been a foreman on 
several of my jobs and has always shown his dedication and reliability.” AE E. His 
company President stated, “[Applicant] is an asset to our company, and I respect his 
strong work ethic, dedication to our company, and reliability over the years.” AE F.  
 
Another company Director stated, “[Applicant] is a very loyal employee who has 
great work ethics and is extremely dedicated to the company and his job.” AE G. His 
company Vice President stated, “[Applicant] is an excellent worker with outstanding 
ethics and overall skills. . . . I would give him the highest of recommendations.” AE H. His 
Human Resources Manager stated, “[Applicant] is very hard working, committed to the 
job and our people, honest and very trustworthy.” AE I. Applicant also submitted work 
performance evaluations covering the period of 2001 to 2007. The evaluations document 
Applicant’s sustained solid performance punctuated with above average performance. 
AE J – R. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
5 
 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
 
Posing potential security concerns are Applicant’s documented omissions of his 
felony charge in 1990 from his SF-86 completed in January 2004. His omissions are 
attributable to his misunderstanding of the question asked. I note Applicant’s formal 
education ended before he completed the 9th grade. Applicant sought his wife’s 
assistance in completing the SF-86, and it is clear from testimony submitted that they 
misunderstood the question. Their misunderstanding was further corroborated by 
Applicant’s father-in-law. He correctly answered the assault conviction was a 
misdemeanor, but added when asked that the assault with intent to maim charge was a 
felony. I found Applicant and his witnesses to be credible and were acting in good faith. 
While Applicant could reasonably have been expected to be more diligent when 
answering Question 21, his judgment lapses and confusion are not enough to impute 
knowing and willful falsification under Guideline E.  
 
Applicant’s explanation of his omissions is persuasive enough to avert inferences 
of knowing and willful omission. There being no misconduct substantiated, there is no 
need to discuss Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the Guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 For reasons discussed supra, Applicant’s conduct did not rise to a level of 
knowing and willful falsification and accordingly did not violate 18 U.S.C. § 1001, as 
alleged. Accordingly, further discussion of Criminal Conduct Disqualifying or Mitigating 
Conditions under Guideline ¶¶ 31 and 32 is not warranted. 
 
  
Whole Person Concept 
  
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the facts of the case and nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(a) supra. Falsifications are a core security concern. Inasmuch as Applicant’s 
behavior was not deliberate or willful, no misconduct was established precluding the 
applicability of further discussion under the Whole Person Concept. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole person factors”2 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – b.:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
  
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
