                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 05-01554 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Fahryn E. Hoffman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is an Iraqi born, naturalized U.S. citizen, who has lived in the United 
States since 1992, when he came to the U.S. as a refugee. He supported military 
operations in Iraq on multiple occasions deploying with U.S. Army units. Applicant’s 
siblings are citizens and residents of Iraq. He has substantially more connections to the 
United States than to Iraq. After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, 
and evidence, I conclude Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 8, 2005, detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
 
 On August 20, 2005, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On March 3, 2008, I was assigned the case. On May 7, 
2008, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on May 20, 2008. 
The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through E, which were 
admitted into evidence. The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional matters. On May 26, 2008 and May 29, 2008, additional documents were 
received. Department Counsel did not object to the material and it was admitted into 
evidence as Ex. F and G. On June 5, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. Applicant did not object to administrative notice. The 
request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included 
in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) I─VI. The facts administratively noticed are set 
out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b of the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old linguist and cultural advisor who worked for a defense 
contractor and is seeking to maintain a security clearance. Applicant was a dedicated 
and tireless worker who was willing to perform any assignment 24 hours a day. (Ex. D) 
As an Arabic interpreter for coalition forces in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom his 
quick thinking and ability to translate Arabic into English made him an integral part of 
the success of the unit. He was a great asset to his unit. He received a certificate of 
appreciation for his work from January 2003 to May 2003. (Ex. E) 
 
 An FBI special agent, assigned to Baghdad, Iraq states Applicant is a hard 
working family man who is very loyal and grateful to the U.S. for allowing him to relocate 
here as a refugee. (Ex. F) The special agent believes Applicant would be an asset to 
any U.S. military unit he would be assigned as a linguist.  
 
 In 1963, Applicant was born in southern Iraq an anti-Saddam part of Iraq. (Tr. 18, 
76) After completing primary school and high school, Applicant went to a military 
academy. In 1985, after nine months he graduated and became an officer in the Iraqi 
army. Because of the shortage of officers due to the Iraq/Iran war, the training period 
 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
was reduced from three years to nine months. (Tr. 23) In 1991 was promoted to first 
lieutenant. In 1991, when Saddam invaded Kuwait, Applicant went home to southern 
Iraq and did not participate in the war. (Tr. 25) In 1991 following the defeat of the Iraqi 
military, Applicant joined the unsuccessful uprising against the Saddam Hussein regime. 
(Tr. 19) The uprising lasted two weeks before it was forcefully and brutally suppressed. 
Facing execution if caught, Applicant left the country by surrendering to coalition forces. 
(Tr. 77) He was 28 years old. (Tr. 49) When Applicant left Iraq he automatically lost his 
Iraqi citizenship under Iraqi law. (Tr. 52)  
 
Applicant stayed in a POW camp in Saudi Arabia for 17 months before coming to 
the U.S. as a refugee in August 1992. (Tr. 19) In May 1998, he became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen. His parents are deceased. His father was a farmer and his mother a 
homemaker. (Tr. 57, 58) In 1997, he married a native born U.S. citizen and they have 
two children born in the U.S., a boy age seven and a half and a girl age six. (Tr. 47, 81) 
Applicant has a U.S. passport, which is the only passport he has ever had. (Tr. 22, 50) 
Applicant has one younger sibling and six older siblings who are citizens and residents 
of Iraq. His youngest brother was imprisoned during the Saddam regime for taking part 
in the failed uprising. (Tr. 56, 70)  
 
Applicant oldest brother owns a truck and his wife is a homemaker. (Tr. 59) 
Another brother is missing from the 1980 Iraq/Iran war. (Tr. 61) It was reported that his 
brother refused to go to war and was killed by Iraqi forces. (Tr. 61) Another brother is a 
retired clerk for a construction company run by the government. (Tr. 62) He has a 
brother who is an unemployed truck driver and another who is a welder. (Tr. 67, 69) His 
two sisters are homemakers. Applicant’s youngest brother was given a government job 
as a form of compensation for his imprisonment during the Saddam regime. (Tr. 70) 
Applicant talks with his siblings weekly. (Tr. 73)  
 
His nephews are a teacher, taxi driver, students, truck driver, security guard, 
policemen, and auto parts store employee. (Tr. 60, 63-67) One nephew is presumed 
deceased having been “taken by Saddam,” meaning he disappeared during the 
Saddam regime. (Tr. 65) 
 
 In 2002 or 2003, Applicant, at the encouragement of the U.S. government, 
became a member of the Iraqi National Congress in Washington, D.C. The Iraqi 
National Congress also had an office in London. He was contacted by the U.S. 
Government and asked if he was willing to assist in the change of regime in Iraq. (Tr. 
20) Applicant joined the Free Iraqi Forces to free Iraq and make it a better country. 
Applicant received training from the U.S. State Department and the U.S. Army in Texas 
and Hungary. (Tr. 30)  
 
In February 2003, Applicant graduated from the Free Iraqi Forces Training and 
having successfully completed all requirements of the Task Force Warrior Officer 
Candidate School, was promoted to first lieutenant. (Exs. A, B) The certification of 
promotion and was signed by a U.S. Army major general who was the Task Force 
Warrior Commander. (Ex. C) In February 2003, Applicant moved to Kuwait and started 
 
 
 
4
training U.S. military personnel about Iraqi culture, language, and religion until March 
2003 when the war started.  
 
As the U.S. military moved into Iraq, Applicant was part of a U.S. Army civil 
affairs unit. (Tr. 31) In May 2003, Applicant finished his job with the Free Iraqi Forces, 
retuned to the U.S., and applied for a job as a translator. In August 2003, Applicant 
finished his training as a translator and returned to Iraq to commence work with the U.S. 
military units in Iraq. He and the U.S. forces he was with came under hostile fire and 
road side bombs during their missions, which included missions in Fallujah. (Tr. 84) He 
worked as a translator until November 2003, when, on a trip to the market, he was shot 
and injured. (Tr. 20) He was immediately taken to a hospital before being transported to 
Germany and then transferred to Walter Reed in Washington, D.C. (Tr. 36, 37 
 
From March 2004 to June 2004, Applicant returned to his job as translator in 
Iraq. He returned to the U.S. to buy a house and in August 2004, was ready to return to 
Iraq. At that time, he was asked to complete a new security application. His application 
was rejected because he had siblings in Iraq. Applicant is anxious to return to Iraq to 
again work with the U.S. military. (Tr. 86) 
 
Applicant owned a home in the U.S. with a fair market value of $147,000. (Tr. 44) 
He has $4,000 in a 401 (k) retirement plan with his job. (Tr. 45) His bank accounts are 
located in the U.S. He owns no property outside of the U.S. 
 
Iraq 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Iraq is a constitutional, 
parliamentary democracy with a federal system of government. (Hex I) It is a republic 
with a freely elected government led by a Prime Minister. (Hex I) The 2005 Iraqi 
Constitution guarantees all Iraqis basic rights in many areas. Iraq’s legislative branch 
consists of an elected Council of Representatives. Iraq’s judicial branch is independent, 
and is under no authority but that of the law. The focus of the United States policy in 
Iraq remains on helping the Iraqi people build a constitutional, representative 
government that respects the rights of all Iraqis and has security forces capable of 
maintaining order and preventing the country from become a safe haven for terrorists 
and foreign fighters. The ultimate goal is an Iraq that is peaceful, united, stable, and 
democratic, with institutions capable of providing just governance and security for all 
Iraqis.  Iraq and the United States are allies  in the war against terrorism.  
 
The risk of terrorism directed against U.S. citizens and interests in Iraq remains 
extremely high. (Hex III) The Department of State continues to strongly warn U.S. 
citizens against travel to Iraq, which remains very dangerous. (Hex V) There is credible 
information that terrorists are targeting civil aviation. All vehicular travel in Iraq is 
extremely dangerous. The government was only recently able to diminish violent 
attacks, using extensive implementation of better security measures. (Hex V) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
6
 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant’s seven siblings are citizens and residents of Iraq. Applicant left Iraq 
fleeing the Hussein regime by going to a POW camp in Saudi Arabia. In 1992, he came 
to the U.S. as a refugee. In 1998, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has been 
deployed to Iraq twice, working with the U.S. military forces. His deployment was 
interrupted when he was shot and had to be medically returned to the U.S. Once 
healed, he returned to Iraq to complete his deployment. 
 
Having considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, applicable 
conditions that could possibly raise a security concern are AG & 7(a) “contact with a 
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who 
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” and AG & 7(b) 
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and the individual=s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information” apply. 
 
The new Iraqi government relies upon the U.S. for support as it moves forward 
with its new form of government. While Iraq=s human rights record under Saddam 
Hussein was very dismal and some problems continue, its human rights record is slowly 
improving under the new government.  
 
In every case where a sibling lives overseas, there is a risk of pressure on this 
relative and through them upon the holder of a security clearance. Under the facts of 
this case, a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, manipulation pressure, or 
coercion is substantiated. However, Applicant has significant ties to the U.S. and few 
ties to Iraq. While he still has seven siblings living in Iraq, he lives with his native born 
wife in the U.S. His two children were born in the U.S. He has no financial or property 
 
 
 
7
interests in Iraq. He owns a home in the U.S. and his ties with the U.S. are much 
stronger than his ties with Iraq. 
 
Applicant’s work as an interpreter supported the U.S. military mission in Iraq. He 
worked long hours in austere conditions with an ever present risk of hostile fire and road 
side bombs. The Army holds his work in a combat zone high regard. He provided more 
than language interpretation skills. He explained local cultural nuances and practices 
which greatly assisted the military in accomplishing its combat mission. During his time 
in Iraq, he worked very hard to help the Army and developed a high level of trust with 
the Army.  
 
Applicant has partially mitigated the concern related to family members in Iraq 
under AG & 8(a) “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
and the interests of the U.S.” he has fully mitigated concerns under AG & 8(b) “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” 
 
None of Applicant siblings work for a foreign government and none are involved 
with organizations which seek to harm the U.S. Some of his nephews are policemen 
and security guards. Applicant talks with his siblings, but has limited contact with his 
nieces and nephews. 
 
Applicant has no love for the former Iraqi regime, which killed one of his brothers, 
a nephew, and another imprisoned his brother. He and his brother responded to the 
U.S. call to rise up against the former dictator of Iraqi. When that uprising failed, he 
would have been executed if caught. When he left Iraq, he lost his Iraqi citizenship. 
Applicant again responded to the U.S. call to the change of regime in Iraq. He became a 
member of the Iraqi National Congress in Washington, D.C. and joined the Free Iraqi 
Forces to free Iraq and make it a better country. Applicant was trained by the U.S. State 
Department and the U.S. Army. Having completed all requirements of the Task Force 
Warrior Officer Candidate School, he was promoted to first lieutenant and started 
training U.S. military personnel about Iraqi culture, language, and religion.  
 
He was shot while in Iraq attached as a translator with the U.S. Army. There is 
little likelihood that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between 
the interests of the U.S. and a foreign entity. Likewise, because of his close ties and his 
loyalties to the U.S., including his wife and two children (all U.S. born citizens), he would 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
                                                          
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iraq and the heavy burden 
an Applicant carries when he has family members in a foreign country.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
In the more than 17 years since he left Iraq, Applicant returned three times, each 
time working closely with the U.S. military. First as a lieutenant in the U.S. backed Free 
Iraqi Forces, then as a translator, and the third time when he returned to Iraqi as a 
translator following his recovery from his shooting. Because he guided the Army 
personal on local customs and nuances related to the spoken word and responded very 
well in highly dangerous situations, the Army views him as a valuable resource in 
helping it achieve its mission in Iraq.2  
 
While danger certainly exists for all who go to Iraq, Applicant and his siblings are 
in no greater danger than any other individual living and working in Iraq. The U.S. and 
Iraq governments have developed a close and positive working relationship. Iraq 
2In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006), the Appeal Board recognized an 
exception to the general rule in Guideline B cases when “an applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and regulations occurs in the context 
of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the 
national security . . . [and therefore he] can be relied upon to recognize, resist and report a foreign 
power=s attempts at coercion or exploitation.” 
 
 
 
9
depends upon the U.S. to help in its fight to combat the developing insurgency and 
terrorist forces. The Iraq government is moving forward with democracy and developing 
a rule of law, with the assistance of the U.S. 
 
Applicant has no love for the former brutal regime. The Hussein regime killed his 
brother and nephew, imprisoned his brother, and he was able to escape the country 
only by surrendering to the U.S. military and going to a POW camp. When he left Iraq, 
he was no longer an Iraqi citizen. Frequently, Applicant has gone in harms way to assist 
the U.S. Army in performing their duties in Iraq. He did this not once, but three times. 
The only reason he is not there now is because he lost his clearance because of his 
siblings living in Iraq. 
 
I have carefully weighed the evidence in favor of Applicant against the 
government=s concerns about Applicant=s ability to protect classified information. I find 
that there is little potential for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, or exploited because 
he has siblings living in Iraq. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions 
or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
