 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-02841 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the Personal Conduct and Use of Information 
Technology Systems security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
On February 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct and Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
Systems. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on March 13, 2008, and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on May 6, 2008. DOHA issued 
 
2 
 
a notice of hearing on May 12, 2008, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
June 17, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 24, 2008.  
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. GE 1, 2, and 4 through 8 
were received without objection. Applicant originally objected to GE 3, a report of 
investigation (ROI) of an interview. The objection was sustained. Applicant later 
withdrew his objection and GE 3 was admitted. Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
and offered Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were received without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been with 
his current employer since 2002. He obtained a bachelor’s degree in 2005. He is 
married with two children, ages 12 and 10.1  
 
 Applicant was a systems administrator for a company (company A) from about 
1998 to 2000. Part of his responsibilities included monitoring the employees’ e-mail 
traffic for viruses and unauthorized or illegal usage. Employees were informed that their 
e-mails were subject to monitoring. Applicant periodically read more of the e-mails than 
was necessary to accomplish his job of monitoring the system.2  
 
 Applicant worked for another company (company B) from about 2000 to 2002. 
He was in charge of the Information Technology (IT) department of the company. 
Applicant was again responsible for monitoring the company’s e-mail and internet traffic. 
Applicant again read more of the employees’ e-mails than his job required. While 
working at companies A and B, Applicant installed company software on his home 
computer without the proper authorization.3  
 
 Applicant started working for his current employer (company C) in 2002. He does 
not have the same responsibilities of monitoring the company’s e-mail and internet 
traffic that he held at the previous companies. On at least one occasion, he accessed 
and read his supervisor’s e-mail without permission or authorization. Applicant testified 
that he has since told the supervisor what he did and the supervisor was “comfortable 
with it.” Applicant introduced a character letter from this supervisor. The incident is not 
mentioned in the letter. Applicant has never been reprimanded or otherwise disciplined 
for any of his actions at the three companies.4  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 58-59, 63-64; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 33-35, 56-57, 68-79; GE 1, 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 35-38, 40-44, 79-81, 81-87; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 38-40, 62, 70, 81-82, 114-115; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3; AE C. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant provided differing accounts of the above events. He provided a written 
statement to a background investigator on May 7, 2003. He discussed his employment 
at company A: 
 
At no such time at [company A] or since then have I illegally accessed 
data or not complied with computer or company security policies. I have 
not used any information that may have been available to me in the 
course of my position and network security rights for any personal gain, or 
malicious intent.5 
 
Applicant denied that he intentionally misled the investigator by failing to discuss the 
incidents with his employers. He testified that he does not feel he ever illegally 
accessed data or e-mail as his job required him to monitor the e-mails.6  
 
 Applicant also discussed his marijuana use in the 2003 statement. He admitted 
to using marijuana on three occasions in 2001 and 2002. He wrote that his use in 2001 
was the first time he used marijuana. He also wrote that he had “not used any other 
drugs.” In a later statement, he admitted that he used marijuana and other illegal drugs 
as early as 1991.7  
 
 Applicant was interviewed on October 14, 2004, in conjunction with a polygraph, 
for a determination by another government agency of Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI). A written statement was not taken, but the 
interviewer summarized the interview in a report of investigation (ROI).8 There was no 
evidence introduced about how and when the report was prepared. Applicant admitted 
that he misused his responsibilities at company A and crossed the line out of curiosity 
once or twice a day for a month or two near the end of his term of employment. He 
admitted to looking at his supervisor’s e-mail to see what she thought of him. He also 
admitted to looking for general office gossip. The report further noted: 
 
When confronted with the above information from the background 
investigator, SUBJECT stated HE was not honest. HE was surprised when 
confronted with the information. HE did not tell them because HE was 
embarrassed and surprised.9 
 
                                                          
5 GE 7. 
 
6 Tr. at 44-48; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
7 GE 7, 8. Applicant’s drug use was not alleged in the SOR and is not considered for disqualifying 
purposes. It was also not alleged that he falsified the 2003 statement regarding his drug use, and that is 
also not considered for disqualifying purposes. The entire statement is considered when gauging 
Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in the whole person analysis.  
 
8 Tr. at 40; GE 3. The results of the polygraph were not offered into evidence. The polygraph is 
only considered for the impact, if any, it had on Applicant’s statement.  
 
9 GE 7. Emphasis in original. 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant testified that he was discussing the 2003 statement when he made the above 
comments to the investigator.10   
 
 Applicant admitted during the October 14, 2004 interview that while with 
company B, he looked at his supervisor’s e-mail and other employees’ e-mail 
approximately 50 times over two years. He admitted that he read the e-mail of his 
supervisor at his current employer about five times since he started in 2002. He stated 
he did it to see what was going on and to keep him up-to-date as his supervisor did not 
check his e-mail everyday. He admitted that he installed company software on his home 
computer both with and without permission. He estimated that he installed about ten 
applications without permission. He also admitted driving while intoxicated 
approximately once per year over the previous five years.11 Applicant was denied 
access to SCI by the other government agency in 2004.12  
 
 Applicant provided a written statement to a background investigator on August 9, 
2007. The investigator had either a copy of the 2004 ROI or the denial of Applicant’s 
SCI, which summarized the ROI, or both, prior to the interview and written statement. 
Regarding his actions at company A, he wrote his “position at this work was to review e-
mails that went through the company’s system. I believe I went over the line of 
reviewing e-mail or reading more of the specifics of e-mails than I was required to do.” 
He discussed his actions at company B, and wrote the company “did not know that I 
was doing this action at their facility, however, I believed at the time that this was my 
responsibility for working at this facility. I did not believe I broke any policy for my job 
title nor responsibilities.” Further in the statement he wrote that his “violation was 
reading more e-mail than [he] was requested to do.” It is not perfectly clear which 
company this statement referred to, but immediately before the sentence he discusses 
the time period of “2000 to 2002,” which coincided with his employment at company B. 
He also admitted to misusing network security privileges at his current company 
between September 2002 and approximately March 2003.13  
 
 Applicant also wrote in the August 2007 statement: “I admit to driving while 
intoxicated one time over the last five years.”14 I do not find this statement to be 
inconsistent with Applicant’s prior admission in October 2004, that he drove while 
intoxicated approximately once per year over the previous five years.  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 87-89. 
 
11 GE 3, 7. Applicant’s driving while intoxicated was not alleged in the SOR and is not considered 
for disqualifying purposes. It is considered solely for the purpose of deciding whether he provided false 
information about his drinking and driving in a subsequent statement.  
 
12 GE 2, 4-6. 
 
13 Tr. at 90; GE 8. 
 
14 GE 8. 
 
 
5 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the SOR dated March 13, 2008, he denied the 
allegations in the SOR that reflected his unauthorized access of e-mails at companies A 
and B. Regarding company A, he wrote “[a]t no time did I access another person’s e-
mail without permission. I received permission from my supervisor when she asked me 
to be in charge of the network and security for [company A].” He provided a similar 
denial regarding company B, stating his actions were pursuant to his responsibilities. 
These statements may be technically true. However, they are incomplete and 
misleading. He admitted to SOR ¶ 1.c, which alleged the access of his supervisor’s e-
mail at his current employer without permission. He stated it was a one-time incident 
that occurred more than five years previous and has not been repeated since then. This 
is inconsistent with Applicant’s previous admissions that he read his current supervisor’s 
e-mails on about five occasions. 
 
 Applicant testified he was authorized to install the applications on his home 
computer, as the companies had sufficient licenses from the software companies and 
he was the one who decided who could have the software placed on their home 
computers. He initially admitted during testimony that he looked through his current 
supervisor’s e-mail a “handful” of times, which he thought was “less than five.” He later 
testified that he only looked at his supervisor’s e-mail without authorization on one 
occasion, but that he accessed his computer about three or four times.15 
 
 Character letters on Applicant’s behalf describe him as loyal to the United States, 
professional, honest, ethical, truthful, dedicated, efficient, competent, responsible, and 
reliable. His performance appraisals are excellent.16  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 81-87, 114-115. 
 
16 AE C-J. 
 
 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
Systems is set out in AG ¶ 39: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
7 
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof;  
 
(c) use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access 
to another system or to a compartmented area within the same system; 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
Applicant was in charge of monitoring the e-mail and internet for viruses and 
unauthorized use at his first two companies. Viewing employees’ e-mail was part of his 
job. Once he verified that there was nothing of concern with the e-mails, that should 
have been the end of it. Instead, he would periodically read employees’ e-mails for his 
own reasons. He did not have the same responsibilities at his current employer, but he 
again read his supervisor’s e-mail without permission or authorization. His actions at the 
three companies establish AG ¶¶ 40(a), (c), and (e). 
 
Applicant installed company software on his home computer. He has vacillated 
between stating it was without permission and it was authorized. I find his statement 
pursuant to a polygraph that it was without permission to be the most credible. AG ¶ 
40(f) has also been established. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the Use of Information Technology Systems 
security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 41: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and   
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor.  
 
It has been a number of years since Applicant committed the IT conduct alleged 
in the SOR. Because Applicant has not been totally truthful, I am unable to find that the 
conduct is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. AG ¶ 41(a) is not applicable. The actions were intentional and they 
 
8 
 
were not done in the interest of organizational efficiency and effectiveness. AG ¶¶ 41(b) 
and (c) have no applicability in this case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant’s actions at his current and two prior companies raised Information 
Technology concerns, as addressed above. Those same actions are sufficient to raise 
AG ¶ 16(e), as personal conduct that created a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally omitting the information about his actions at his last 
three companies from his May 7, 2003 statement. After considering all the evidence, I 
find that it was an intentional omission designed to deceive the investigator. AG ¶¶ 
16(a) and (b) have been established for SOR ¶ 1.e.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a finding that Applicant falsified the August 9, 
2007 statement, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. While I find the 2007 statement to be 
somewhat disingenuous, there is also insufficient evidence that he falsified the 
 
9 
 
statement, as specifically alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g are concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
 The fact that Applicant was denied access to SCI in 2005, based upon much of 
the conduct that is addressed in these proceedings does not independently raise any 
disqualifying condition. SOR ¶ 1.h is concluded for Applicant. 
Conditions that could mitigate Personal Conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 Applicant no longer works for two of the companies involved. That significantly 
reduces his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is 
applicable for SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d. He still works for the company and supervisor 
that were involved in part of his personal conduct. While he testified that he told his 
current supervisor that he read his e-mail, the supervisor’s letter does not mention this 
fact. AG ¶ 16(e) is not applicable for SOR ¶ 1.c. Because Applicant has been less than 
totally truthful throughout the process, I am unable to find any other mitigating condition.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s IT issues all occurred 
several years ago. He is highly regarded at his current company and presented very 
favorable character evidence. However, he presented false, incomplete, and misleading 
information throughout the process. The most accurate information was obtained while 
Applicant was under the scrutiny of a polygraph. Without the sword of a polygraph 
hanging over his head, Applicant cannot be trusted to provide truthful responses.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Personal Conduct and Use of Information 
Technology Systems security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.h:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
11 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
