KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The value of an applicant expertise to a defense contractor or military service is not
relevant or material to determining the applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-20062.a1
DATE: 07/15/2008
DATE: July 15, 2008
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-20062
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 22, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
The Board may not consider new evidence.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Therefore, information not already in the1
record, including changes in account balances due to the passage of time, may not be taken into consideration.  
2
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested the case be decided on the written record.  On April 7, 2008, after considering the record,
Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  
Applicant argues that the Judge should have found her financial situation to be mitigated.
Applicant identifies a number of statements in the Judge’s decision which she considers to be error.
Applicant also points out her abilities and contributions to the defense of the United States.  She
requests in the alternative that she be granted “approval with [a] warning that future incidents of a
similar nature may result in revocation of access.”  Applicant’s Brief at 3, quoting Directive ¶
E2.2(f).
In her response to the government’s SOR, Applicant admitted all but four of the alleged
debts.  Her admissions established the government’s case.  The burden then shifted to Applicant to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts she admitted.  The ultimate burden of persuasion to
obtain a favorable security clearance decision rested with Applicant.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  In her
responses, Applicant provided information about the origin of her financial difficulties.  She stated
that she was paying her current obligations in a timely manner, but (with the exception of one debt
not listed in the SOR) was not making payments on her past-due debts and intended to allow them
to drop from her credit report with the passage of time.  At that time, she also noted some attempts
to improve her financial situation, including consultation with a credit counselor, who advised her
to allow the old debts to drop off, as noted above, as a strategy to raise her credit score. 
In her decision, the Judge referred to the information Applicant provided.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant’s financial situation was not mitigated because of  “insufficient information
to establish that Applicant showed good faith in the resolution of her debt.”  Decision at 6.
Applicant contends that the Judge did not give sufficient weight to Applicant’s mitigating evidence.
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00553 at 2 (May 23,
2008).
In her appeal brief, Applicant identifies a number of statements in the Judge’s decision which
she considers to be errors.   Applicant is correct that the Judge erred in stating that Applicant made1
As regards the obtaining of a security clearance, Applicant’s reliance on the advice of her credit counselor is2
misguided.  A Judge is not bound to accept such advice as relevant to Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance,
since a strategy to raise a credit score does not necessarily satisfy the government’s security concerns.       
3
payments on a particular debt (not listed in the SOR) only until July 2004.  Decision at 2.  Applicant
told an investigator that she made payments only until July 2004 on a related but separate debt (SOR
¶ 1.m).  The identified error is harmless in light of Applicant’s overall financial situation, since it
is unlikely that correction of that error would have lead to a different result in Applicant’s case.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-20638 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 22, 2005).  The other statements cited by
Applicant are not in error, since they are reasonable characterizations or are otherwise supported by
record evidence.2
Applicant also argues that she has unique abilities and that denial of her security clearance
will be detrimental to the government in waging the Global War on Terror.  The Board has held that
the value of an applicant’s expertise to a defense contractor or military service is not relevant or
material to determining the applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
99-0109 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2000).  An applicant’s expertise is not a measure of whether that
applicant demonstrates the high degree of judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness that must be
reposed in persons entrusted with classified information.  Id.
In the alternative, Applicant requests that she be granted “approval with a warning that future
incidents of a similar nature may result in revocation of her clearance.”  Directive ¶ E2.2(f).  The
Board does not have authority to review cases de novo to consider such a request.  Accordingly,
because the Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable, the Board need not reach this issue.  
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
      
Signed: Michael D. Hipple        
Michael D Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: Jean E. Smallin            
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
