                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-02961 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rita C. O’Brien, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline F (Financial Considerations) security 
concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 13, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On August 6, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him,2 pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
1  Item 4.  
 
2  Item 1 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated Aug. 6, 2007). Item I is the source for the facts in 
the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.3 The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).4 The SOR detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On August 31, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 3). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated November 1, 2007, was provided to 
him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.5 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. On June 
16, 2008, a DOHA employee contacted Appellant, and learned he received the FORM 
and did not have a response. The case was assigned to me on June 23, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($5,854), 1.b ($3,602), 1.c ($11,542), 
1.e ($1,131), 1.f ($1,031), and 1.g ($1,017). He denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
($157), 1.h ($103) and 1.i ($50), stating that he had insufficient information about those 
debts. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of 
fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old aerospace products technician.6 He married in 1988. 
His children were born in 1987, 1989, 1990 and 1995. He served in the Navy from 1980 
to 1984.7 He has specialty and college education. He has never been fired from a job. 
He has no police record. He has not used illegal drugs in the last seven years, and has 
3  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
4  When he completed his SF 86, he admitted that he had: (1) a lien placed against his property 
for failing to pay his taxes, but explained it was paid in full; (2) debts delinquent over 180 days in the last 
seven years; and (3) debts currently delinquent over 90 days. See Item 4, Sections 27c, 27d, 28a and 
28b.    
 
5  Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated Nov. 1, 2007. The 
DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit 
information. 
 
6  Item 4 (2005 security clearance application) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless 
stated otherwise. 
 
7  The file does not contain his Naval or enlistment records.  
 
3 
 
 
never used illegal drugs while in a sensitive position. From 1986 to the present he has 
been continuously employed by a defense contractor working in aerospace products.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The following table shows the status of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR: 
 
SOR ¶ and Type Debt  Amount Status 
¶ 1.a Financial Account  $5,854 Debt charged off in Feb. 2000 
(Items 1, 3) 
¶ 1.b Financial Account $3,602 Debt placed for collection in Sep.  
2000 (Items 1, 3) 
¶ 1.c Auto Loan  $11,542 Debt charged off in July 2004 
(Items 1, 3) 
¶ 1.d Financial Account $157 Not substantiated (Items 1, 3 at 2)  
¶ 1.e Department Store 
Account 
$1,131 Collection account reported in 
Nov. 2005 (Items 1, Item 3 at 2)  
¶ 1.f Department Store 
Account 
$1,031 Collection account reported in 
Nov. 2005 (Items 1, 3 at 2)  
¶ 1.g Department Store 
Account 
$1,017 Collection account reported in 
Nov. 2005 (Items 1, 3 at 2)  
¶ 1.h Financial Account $103 Not substantiated (Items 1, 3 at 2) 
¶ 1.i Medical Account $50 Not substantiated (Items 1, 3 at 2) 
 
On June 11, 2007, Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories asking about 
the status of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He stated one was charged off. 
Regarding most of the other delinquent debts, he stated he did not have the funds to 
pay them. A review of Applicant’s credit reports shows he has had delinquent debts 
since 2000, which remain unpaid to the day he received the FORM. Other debts 
became delinquent as recently as 2005. Applicant noted he served four years in the 
U.S. Navy, and he promised he would never jeopardize the security of the United 
States. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”8 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).9 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
8  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
9  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
5 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, his response 
to DOHA interrogatories and his SOR response. He admitted responsibility for six 
delinquent debts, totaling approximately $24,000. His debts became delinquent 
between 2000 and 2005, and continue to be delinquent. The government established 
the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,10 I conclude that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show he has dealt 
responsibly with his financial obligations. Applicant presented little or no evidence about 
how he acquired the debts, why did they become delinquent, or what efforts he has 
taken over the years to pay, contact creditors, or to otherwise resolve any of the debts 
since he acquired them. He presented little or no evidence to show he dealt responsibly 
with his financial obligations after receipt of the SOR (i.e., paid debts, settlements, 
documented negotiations, payment plans, budgets, financial assistance/counseling). He 
failed to disclose any circumstances beyond his control (i.e., such as loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation) that caused his financial problems.11 Nor is there any evidence that he 
has participated in any financial counseling. 
 
I conclude Applicant’s six delinquent debts, totaling about $24,000 are still valid, 
and Applicant is responsible for them. His overall conduct with his creditors casts doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He should have been 
more diligent and made greater efforts to resolve his delinquent debts, especially after 
receipt of the SOR.  
 
Applicant’s financial history and lack of favorable evidence preclude a finding that 
he has established a track record of financial responsibility, or that he has taken control 
of his financial situation. Based on the available evidence, his financial problems are 
continuing and likely to recur and to be a concern in the future. Moreover, his financial 
problems are recent, not isolated, and ongoing. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
10  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis, all debts are considered as a whole. 
 
11  “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
Applicant’s record of good employment weighs in his favor. There is no evidence 
of any security violation. Aside from his delinquent debts (which is a civil, non-criminal 
issue), he is a law-abiding citizen. He served in the Navy for four years. These factors 
show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. The overall amount of his 
delinquent debt at about $24,000 is relatively low, and some of his debts may be barred 
from legal enforcement by the statute of limitations.   
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. 
Considering Applicant’s age, education, and employment history, he was well aware of 
his financial responsibilities. He failed to satisfactorily explain why he could not develop 
a payment plan and begin payment to his creditors. He learned of the security 
significance of these delinquent debts in August 2007 when he responded to the SOR. 
His efforts to resolve his delinquent debts were insufficient, and his actions were not 
adequate to fully resolve security concerns. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns pertaining to financial 
considerations.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”12 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
12  See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.e to 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.h to 1.i:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Juan J. Rivera 
Administrative Judge 
