DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )             ISCR Case No. 07-05686
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 16 November 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines B, L, E, and J.  Applicant answered the SOR 24 December 2007, and1
requested a hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 31 January 2008, and I convened
a hearing 2 April 2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 10 April 2008.
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted that his sister is a resident citizen of Russia (SOR 1.a.), and
that he traveled to Russia in 2007 to visit her (SOR 1.b.). He denied the remaining
Technically, Applicant and his wife are co-owners of a limited liability corporation subcontracted to the2
defense contractor sponsoring Applicant’s clearance request. However, only Applicant is personally employed
on that contract.
2
allegations of the SOR under Guidelines B, L, E, and J. He is 40-year-old software
architect employed by a defense contractor since February 2005.  He has not2
previously held a security clearance.
Applicant was born in Russia, then part of the Soviet Union in June 1967. He
grew up and was educated there, and performed two-years compulsory military service
in his early 20s. His ultimate dream growing up was to immigrate to the U.S. In 1990, he
immigrated to Israel with his wife because they were unable to obtain visas to immigrate
to the U.S. However, in 1996 he immigrated to the U.S. on a skilled-worker visa. He
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2003, and obtained his U.S. passport in July
2003.
Applicant and his wife have two children: a daughter born in Israel in 1995 and a
son born in the U.S. in 2001. Applicant’s parents immigrated to the U.S. in 2001. His
parents-in-law immigrated to the U.S. in 2002. His only relatives still living in Russia are
his sister and her family. His sister is a pediatrician working in a medical clinic. It is not
clear whether the clinic is government-run or a private concern. Her husband manages
a garage.
Applicant has tried, without success, to persuade his sister and her family to
immigrate to the U.S. He flew to Russia in October 2007 to try to persuade her in
person, again without success. He does not expect to travel to Russia again, and has
not called her since his return to the U.S. However, she calls him every few weeks to
see how his family is doing.
 Applicant is alleged to have falsified his March 2006 clearance application (G.E.
1), by answering “no” to question 17A (SOR 3.a.), summarized on the application print-
out as “foreign property, business connections, or financial interests?” This answer is
alleged to be false because a U.S. company co-founded by Applicant 1) had business
clients in Italy, Spain, Russia, Japan, Israel, and India and 2) Applicant had business
partners at this company and a second company he co-founded who were resident
citizens of Russia. These same corporate connections were alleged to be disqualifying
because of security concerns under foreign influence (Guideline B) and outside
activities (Guideline L). Applicant denied the allegations, and the government failed to
establish the facts necessary to support the allegations.
First, the companies at issue are, without question, U.S. corporations, having
been founded in the U.S. with U.S. addresses. Second, the government produced no
guidance that a U.S. corporation with business clients overseas has “foreign property,
business connections, or financial interests” within the meaning of question 17A. Third,
Applicant’s evidence established that his two business partners in this first company
were naturalized U.S. citizens before the founding of the company, based on the July
3
1998 and February 1999 issue dates on their U.S. passports (A.E. D). Applicant’s
business partner in the second company had been a legal permanent resident (LPR) of
the U.S. since August 2002 (A.E. D), and had received notice to attend his
naturalization oath ceremony in April 2008 (A.E. E). Finally, Applicant terminated his
interest in both companies once he became aware of the government’s security
concerns (A.E. B, C)
The facility security officer at Applicant’s company reports that Applicant is highly
regarded at the government agency where he works (A.E. A). The agency confirms that
Applicant is attentive to the agency’s security requirements. 
Russia—a former Soviet Republic—is a nominal democracy with a mixed human
rights record. It has been the target of terrorist activity in recent years. Russian federal
forces pursuing terrorists act with impunity while engaging in torture, summary
executions, disappearances, and arbitrary detentions. Additional problems include
corruption, media suppression, life-threatening prison conditions, and corruption in law
enforcement.
Russia has an active and significant information collection program focusing on
the U.S. As of 2005, Russia was one of the two most aggressive collectors of sensitive
and protected U.S. technology and accounted for much of such targeting. However,
Russia has not been demonstrated to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected
information. Furthermore, the U.S. and Russia cooperate over a broad spectrum of
foreign-policy issues, particularly counter-terrorism efforts.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guidelines are Guideline
B (Foreign Influence), Guideline L (Outside Activities), Guideline E (Personal Conduct),
and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6.4
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(a).5
4
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.3
Analysis
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and
interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign
financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign influence adjudications can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is known
to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information4
requires careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target
protected information, and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that
information, and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive.
More specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk or foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.5
In this case, the government failed to establish a case for disqualification under
Guideline B. Considering first the country involved, Russia and the U.S. enjoy
competitive foreign relations, although they cooperate on a wide variety of issues. While
Russia is actively engaged in the collection of U.S. information, there is no evidence
suggesting that it targets its expatriate citizens such that would make Applicant or his
sister likely targets for coercion, duress, or influence.
Considering Applicant’s circumstances, the government produced no evidence
that there was a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion because of his family contacts. Applicant’s foreign travel to Russia
in 2007 has no independent security significance. Applicant’s sister has no
demonstrated connection to the Russian government. Department Counsel has
¶16.(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel6
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .;
5
articulated no sensible reason I should consider her as a potential source of influence
on Applicant. I conclude that it is unlikely he can be pressured based on his contacts
with his sister. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline B for Applicant.
The government failed to establish a case for disqualification under Guideline L.
The two companies co-founded by Applicant were U.S. corporations. His co-founders in
both companies were either U.S. citizens or LPRs of the U.S. The fact that those
companies had clients who were foreign corporations does not on its face implicate any
disqualifying condition under Guideline L, and the government offered no independent
evidence to connect Applicant to a foreign entity within the meaning of the guideline.
Nor did the government produce evidence to show that Applicant was required to
disclose these outside companies, regardless of clientele. Finally, Applicant disposed of
his interest in both companies out of an abundance of caution. I resolve Guideline L for
Applicant.
The government failed to establish a case for disqualification under Guidelines E
and J.  This conclusion does not flow from any analysis of Applicant’s credibility6
regarding why he failed to list his two outside companies on his clearance application,
but from the government’s failure to produce facts demonstrating that these two
companies or their client list constituted “foreign property, business connections, or
financial interests” within the meaning of the relevant question on the clearance
application. I resolve Guidelines E and J for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline L: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Paragraph 3. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
6
Paragraph 4. Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.   
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
