KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant’s statements of intent to pay his delinquent debt are entitled to little weight
without corroborating evidence.   Applicant has submitted little evidence of responsible conduct
regarding his finances.  Even if a debt is legally unenforceable, the government may consider the
facts and circumstances applicant’s conduct in incurring the debt and failing to satisfy it in a
timely manner.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 07-08049.a1
DATE: 07/22/2008
DATE: July 22, 2008
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-08049
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
Department Counsel does not appeal the Judge’s findings and conclusions under Guideline E.1
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 4, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On April 10, 2008, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Mary E. Henry granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Department Counsel timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s application
of Guideline F Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FCMC) found in ¶ 20 of Enclosure
2 of the Directive (¶ E2.20) is arbitrary, capricious, and unsupported by the record evidence; and
whether her whole-person analysis is unsupported by the record evidence.   Finding error, we reverse1
the Judge’s decision.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
The Judge made the following relevant factual findings: Applicant married in 1997.
He and his wife separated and maintained two households for about a year in 2006 and then
reconciled about four months before the hearing.  
Applicant and his sister established an office cleaning business which was incorporated under
state law.  For incorporation purposes, the business had only two officers: Applicant’s sister as
president and Applicant as operations manager.  The business operated out of Applicant’s rental
home and ceased after three years.  Applicant’s sister handled all the paperwork for the business, and
she did not inform Applicant of the outstanding tax issues of the business or her failure to properly
dissolve the corporation.  Applicant was unaware of multiple state tax liens and one federal tax lien,
possibly because he moved several times after closing the business.  When Applicant learned of one
of the state tax liens, he resolved it in 2002; but he was still unaware of the other tax liens until he
learned of them, as well as other delinquencies, as part of the security clearance process.  In October
2007, Applicant hired a tax representation firm to help him resolve his tax problems.
After Applicant moved to another state in 2003, two events affected his financial situation
in a negative way.  When Applicant’s son caused a fire in the family’s apartment, the management
3
company charged Applicant for the damages, and Applicant had no insurance to cover the cost.  In
2006, Applicant was laid off as a truck driver when his employer ceased operations in his area.  In
addition to Applicant’s tax liens, the SOR includes three other debts.  In the past, Applicant’s wife
has handled the family finances.  Applicant attributes his former lack of knowledge of his past-due
debts in part to that fact, and he is now playing a more active role in the family finances.  When he
has learned of the debts, he made some payments on them.
B. Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”
Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility
of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative
agency’s finding from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give
deference to the Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
To the extent that the Judge’s findings are relevant to the assigned error, they will be
discussed below.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
 A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3. 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913
F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After the government presentsth
evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish any appropriate
mitigating conditions.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and mitigating
conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply
to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of sound discretion
in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec.
20, 2006).
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are arbitrary or capricious, the Board
will review the Judge's decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails
“[T]he behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is2
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment[.]”
“[T]he conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of3
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under circumstances[.]”
4
to articulate a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of
judgment; it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision
that runs contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere
difference of opinion.  In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are contrary to law,
the Board will consider whether they are contrary to provisions of Executive Order 10865, the
Directive, or other applicable federal law.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2,
2006).
The Judge found that Applicant’s financial situation raised security concerns.  Decision at
7.  However, she found those concerns to be mitigated.  Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s
findings of mitigation are arbitrary, capricious, and unsupported by the record evidence.  Department
Counsel’s arguments have merit.
The Judge applied FCMC 20(a).   The Judge found that Applicant’s tax liens arose between2
nine and 14 years ago and were the result of his former business, rather than failure to pay personal
income tax.  She found that liens were unlikely to recur, since Applicant no longer owns or operates
his own business.  Applicant provided no information about his former business.  Moreover, the
federal tax lien makes no mention of Applicant’s former business, and Applicant testified that he did
not know whether the federal lien was personal or business-related.  Transcript at 31.  Applicant
hired a tax representation company to help him settle his tax liens, but not until after he received the
SOR; and he has presented no evidence that he or the company has yet taken any tangible steps to
settle them.  While Applicant indicates that he intends to pay off his debts, the Board has held that
such statements of future intent to pay debts, without corroborating evidence such as consistent steps
already taken, are entitled to little weight.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-08410 at 3 (App. Bd. May
8, 2002).  Applicant has very little in savings.  Moreover, he has submitted little concrete evidence
of responsible conduct regarding his finances, and the evidence he submitted indicates that he has
difficulty in paying his monthly expenses on a regular basis.  
The Judge also found mitigation under FCMC 20(b).   In applying this mitigating condition,3
the Judge referred to Applicant’s period of unemployment and the apartment fire which was caused
by his son.  Board decisions indicate that not only the involuntary circumstances, but also an
applicant’s responses to the circumstances, must be considered.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-32606
“[T]he person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that4
the problem is being resolved or is under control[.]” 
 
“[T]he individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts[.]”5
5
at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2004).  As Department Counsel correctly notes, the fire occurred four years
ago, and Applicant was laid off over two years ago.  Moreover, he collected unemployment for the
90 days he was unemployed.  He moved from the apartment building without leaving a forwarding
address.  Applicant took no action to settle the resulting debts until after he received the SOR.
The Judge applied FCMC 20(c),  in part because Applicant hired a tax representation firm4
to help him settle his tax-related debts.  However, neither Applicant nor the firm presented any
evidence of any action that has yet been taken to settle the debts.  The Judge also accepted
Applicant’s testimony that he had been making payments on his other debts without convincing
documentation to prove his payments.  The Judge instructed Applicant to provide such
documentation after the hearing.  The evidence Applicant submitted was entitled to little weight.
As evidence of payment, Applicant submitted a single month’s bank statement which consisted of
a list of check numbers and amounts with little or no identification of the payees.  Applicant put a
mark by eight of the check numbers.  Applicant has not demonstrated a history of payment of his
outstanding debts; and the record demonstrates that his payment of standard monthly expenses is
irregular, calling into question whether his financial problems are under control.
The Judge found mitigation under FCMC 20(d).   Applicant’s limited efforts to pay or5
otherwise settle his debts have been discussed above.  The Judge found mitigation in the fact that
Applicant has already resolved two state tax liens many years ago, although he has other state liens
still outstanding.  She also noted Applicant’s promise to repay or settle with his creditors.  The
limited weight to be accorded such promises is discussed above.  
The Judge also discussed the age of the tax liens against Applicant, stating her view that the
federal government can only collect its lien for another year.  A security clearance adjudication is
not a proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s debts.  Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at
evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  Accordingly, even if a debt is
legally unenforceable, the government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances surrounding
an applicant’s conduct in incurring the debt and failing to satisfy it in a timely manner.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 07-09966 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008).  The Judge’s findings of mitigation are
arbitrary, capricious, and unsupported by the record evidence.
The Judge used the same conclusions in her whole-person analysis as she did in applying
mitigating conditions.  As set forth above, those conclusions are not supported by the record
evidence.  The Judge’s analysis is therefore unsustainable. 
6
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance is REVERSED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple              
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                   
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
