                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-07144
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
July 10, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On October 16, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines E and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 2, 2007, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 8, 2008. Applicant did not file a
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 27, 2008. Based upon
a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
This finding is based on applicant’s admissions to SOR Allegations 2.a., 2.b., and 2.c. The worksheet the
1
Government submitted with the FORM (Exhibit 5) is not a substitute for the actual EPSQ.
The fact that applicant did not disclose his 1996 drug charge in response to this question was not alleged
2
by the Government.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 54 years of age. He has worked for the same defense contractor
employer since 1993. He has been married to his current spouse since 1979.
In 1976, applicant was charged with Brandishing a Firearm. He was convicted of
the charge, fined, and sentenced to 60 days in jail. The jail sentence was suspended.
In 1985, applicant was charged with (1) Felony Possession of Marijuana and (2)
Conspiracy to Distribute and Possess With Intent to Distribute a Controlled Substance
(Marijuana). He was convicted of the latter charge and sentenced to five years in prison.
He served over one year in prison.
In 1996, applicant was arrested and charged with Possession of Marijuana. The
charge was dismissed.
In 1997, applicant was arrested for Assault and Battery on a Family Member. The
charge was dismissed.
Applicant falsified material facts about his criminal history in response to three
separate questions on an Electronic Personnel Security Questionnaire (EPSQ) he
executed on October 18, 2006.   In response to Question 21, which asked: “Have you1
ever been charged with or convicted of any felony offense?” applicant responded “no.”
This response was false because, as noted above, he had been charged with and
convicted of a felony in 1985. In response to Question 22, which asked: ”Have you ever
been charged with or convicted of a firearms or explosives offense?” applicant
responded “no.” This response was false because, as noted above, he was charged
with and convicted of Brandishing a Firearm in 1976. In response to Question 24, which
asked: “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to
alcohol or drugs?” applicant responded “no.” This response was also false because, as
noted above, he was convicted of a drug-related charge in 1985.2
In his response to the SOR, applicant admitted that he falsified material facts on
the EPSQ, but offered the following statements in explanation. With respect to Question
21, he stated: “[the falsification] was not intentional as it had been more than twenty
years and as I understood it, it was to go back ten years.” With respect to Question 22,
he stated: “This occurrence happened thirty-one years ago and I did not realize I had to
disclose it.” With respect to Question 24, he stated: “I did not realize it had to be
disclosed as it happened more than twenty years ago.” In view of the straightforward
nature of the questions, and applicant’s failure to offer any evidence as to how he
allegedly came to believe he was “to go back ten years,” his denial of an intent to
deceive is not credible.
3
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern for criminal conduct is set forth in Paragraph 30 of the AG,
and is as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
10 U.S.C. 986, which barred applicants who had served a year or more in prison as a result of a criminal
3
conviction from receiving a security clearance, was repealed. Accordingly, applicant is no longer subject to
this automatic bar.
4
Paragraph 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying: Under Paragraph 31.a., “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses” may be disqualifying. And, under Paragraph 31.c., an “allegation or admission
of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted or convicted,” may be disqualifying. Applicant’s multiple arrests and two
convictions raise these two disqualifying conditions.3
Paragraph 32 of the AG sets forth conditions that could mitigate security
concerns. Under Paragraph 32.a., it may be mitigating if “so much time has elapsed
since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s last criminal conviction was
over 20 years ago; his last arrest was over ten years ago. This mitigation condition is
applicable. Under Paragraph 32.c. it may be mitigating if there is “evidence that the
person did not commit the offense.” Based on the fact that the charges in 1996 and
1997 were dismissed, this mitigating condition is applicable. Under Paragraph 32.d., it
may be mitigating if “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement.” There is evidence of successful rehabilitation; namely, it has
been over ten years since applicant’s criminal activity, and he has a good employment
record. Accordingly, this mitigating condition is applicable.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set forth in
Paragraph 15 of the AG, and is as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Paragraph16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 16.a., the “deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” may be disqualifying. This
disqualifying condition is applicable because applicant intentionally provided false
material information on the EPSQ.
5
Paragraph 17 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I
considered each of them and conclude none apply.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was young and immature
when he was charged and convicted of the two serious crimes in the 1970s and 1980s.
Even if the two dismissed charges from the 1990s were considered against applicant,
given the passage of time since his last adverse contact with law enforcement, his
stable home life, and his good employment record, he would have received a favorable
decision had his criminal conduct been the only issue raised by the SOR. But it wasn’t.
The Government alleged and proved that applicant intentionally concealed his criminal
history from the Government when he completed the EPSQ in 2006, less than two
years ago. The recency and extent of this dishonest conduct, together with his
incredible explanations for it, preclude a finding that this type of conduct is unlikely to
recur. Based on the foregoing, I conclude that, although applicant mitigated the security
concerns arising from Guideline J, he failed to mitigate the security concerns arising
from Guideline E.
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
