 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-04281 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard Murray, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns arising from 
his relationship and contacts with Indian citizens. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on September 27, 2006. On July 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s 
security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1 The SOR detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it 
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                     
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 10, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on January 28, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 5, 2008. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on February 29, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, 
which were admitted without objection (Tr. 20).2 Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
and presented the testimony of two witnesses and seven exhibits, marked AE A through 
G, which were received without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on March 10, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein 
as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old senior professional staff (scientist) working at a U.S. 
university. He was born, raised, and educated in India. He received his bachelor’s, 
master’s, and PhD degrees in India. His parents paid for his education up to his 
master’s degree. He received a full scholarship from the Indian government to attend 
his PhD studies at a prestigious Indian institute (Tr. 25-26). After completing his PhD, 
Applicant became a member of the faculty (lecturer) at the Indian institute, and worked 
there for five years (Tr. 25, 75-83). He still maintains contact with some of his friends 
from college and with colleagues from his days at the Indian research institute. He has 
telephone contact with his colleagues once a year, exchanges e-mails sporadically with 
them, and he visits them when he is in India (Tr. 95). 
 
In 1983, Applicant took a sabbatical from the Indian institute to attend post-
doctoral studies at a U.S. university. At the end of his studies, he was offered a two-year 
position and then, a permanent job at the university. He traveled back to India to consult 
with his family about his job opportunity. He took the U.S. job and worked at the 
university for a period of time. After working for a second U.S. employer, in 1989, 
Applicant was hired by his current employer (Tr. 30, 75). 
 
In 1979, Applicant married his Indian-born spouse in India (GE 1). She was a 
student at the same university he attended. They have two sons born of this marriage, 
ages 27, and 18 (Tr. 25-26). In 1996, Applicant and his wife became naturalized U.S. 
citizens. They decided to become U.S. citizens because their sons were growing up and 
were being educated as Americans. Their older son came to the United States when he 
was two years old, and their younger son was born in the United States. Applicant 
believes his sons would never leave the United States to go back to live in India (Tr. 
2  GEs 6 & 7 were marked for identification and considered for administrative notice only. 
 
 
3 
 
 
32). Applicant and his wife enjoy living and working in the United States. She has 
worked for a large U.S. bank for the last 20 years. She holds a vice-president position at 
the bank (Tr. 32). 
 
Applicant’s two sons are exceptional students. The eldest attended some of the 
finest graduate and post-graduate institutions the United States can offer, and is 
currently attending post-doctoral studies. The youngest is following in his brother’s 
footsteps (Tr. 60-61). Applicant’s evidence credibly shows his sons were raised as 
Americans and are well integrated into the American culture. They were encouraged to 
participate in school activities, to run for student counsel positions, and to volunteer in 
community activities. Applicant and his wife set the example for their sons with their 
involvement in community activities and their volunteer work (AE D, E, F). 
 
All of Applicant’s and his wife’s immediate and extended family members are 
residents and citizens of India. He has close ties of affection and/or obligation with his 
mother and two sisters. He has telephonic contact with his mother at least twice a 
month. They talk about family issues and her health. They never discuss his business or 
work related matters. Applicant’s sisters (A and B) are both married, each has two 
children and they are homemakers. Sister A’s husband was the general manager for a 
nationalized bank in India. He retired in 2008, and now works in the private sector (Tr. 
40, 78). Sister B’s husband worked as a scientist for an Indian government sponsored 
research laboratory. He specialized in the same scientific field as Applicant. Applicant 
believes he is now retired and works as an emeritus professor for a government institute 
(Tr. 41, 79, 107). Applicant has telephonic contact with his sisters once or twice a 
month; they exchange e-mails sporadically, and he visits with them whenever he is in 
India (Tr. 43, 94). 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is 78 years old, and owns a small pharmacy in India. His 
wife is a 68-year-old homemaker. His wife talks to her parents once a week. Applicant 
partakes in the telephone conversations whenever his wife talks to her parents and he 
is around (Tr. 43). Applicant’s wife has two brothers and two sisters. One of her two 
brothers is a doctor at a private hospital. Her other brother is an accountant who used to 
work for a quasi-government agency. He now works as a private consultant (Tr. 44). 
Applicant’s wife claimed she has contact with her brothers approximately three times a 
year. One of her sister’s husband owns a store. Her sister is a homemaker. The second 
sister and her husband are both deaf and mute (Tr. 116). 
 
In 1998, Applicant’s brother-in-law (a scientist and faculty member of an Indian 
research institute) and the Director of the Indian research institute invited Applicant to 
be the guest speaker at a scientific symposium. The Indian research institute is under 
the auspices of the Indian government. Applicant’s immediate supervisor authorized him 
to attend the symposium. He was required to speak only about information that had 
been published (Tr. 45, 76). There is no evidence Applicant has compromised or 
caused the compromise of classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Around 2001-2002, Applicant opened a bank account in India. The purpose of 
the bank account was to facilitate providing financial support to his parents. He provided 
financial support to his parents since 1985 (Tr. 97). In 2006, he was providing around 
$150-$200 a month. When his father died, he decided to stop providing support for his 
mother because she no longer needed it. He kept money in an Indian bank account in 
the event his mother had an emergency situation. As of the hearing day, the account 
had a value of approximately $6,000. He also opened the bank account to facilitate his 
purchase of real estate property in India (Tr. 48-49, 83).  
 
In 2003, Applicant bought a condominium for his mother’s intermittent use (Tr. 
50). He claimed when his mother no longer needs it, he will dispose of the condo. He 
estimated the value of the condo to be around $80,000 (Tr. 80). Applicant’s father died 
in 2006, and in his will, he left Applicant the family home. His mother lives in the home. 
Applicant has not accepted the inheritance, and is debating whether to do so. He did not 
provide an estimated value for the property he inherited from his father. 
 
Since his arrival to the United States in 1983, Applicant has travelled frequently 
back to India to visit his family and to participate in family events. He travelled to India in 
1986, 1990, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2004, 2006, and 2007. He also plans to visit his mother 
and attend a niece’s wedding during the later part of 2008 (Tr. 56, 89-94). 
 
Applicant never discusses his work with any of his relatives, including his mother, 
siblings, and in-laws (Tr. 66). He also averred he never discusses classified information 
with his brother-in-law (scientist) or any of his friends and colleagues from his days 
working for Indian research institutions. Applicant is a loyal American. He promised to 
report to his employer and the FBI any inquiries about his work and/or any possible 
threat against the United States from any foreigners, U.S. citizens, or from his family 
members (Tr. 66).  
 
At his hearing, Applicant presented the testimony of his supervisor/manager and 
a long-time neighbor. The supervisor has known, worked with, and supervised Applicant 
during the last 10 years on a daily basis. She considers Applicant to be a hard-working, 
ethical, and dedicated employee. He is perceived as being truthful, honest, and 
conscientious about enforcement of security rules. According to his supervisor, 
Applicant has always followed the rules and procedures to protect classified information. 
She recommended Applicant for a security clearance. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. India is a democratic republic 
with a cooperative relationship with the United States. The United States recognizes 
India as a key to strategic U.S. interests, and has sought to strengthen its relationship 
with India. The United States and India have been committed to a strategic partnership 
that has seen expanded cooperation in the areas of civilian nuclear activities, civilian 
space programs, and technology trade. The United States is India's largest trading 
partner and investment partner. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                     
 Notwithstanding, differences remain between the two countries, including 
concerns about India’s nuclear weapons program, abuses of human rights (although, 
the Indian government is considered to generally respect the human rights of its 
citizens), and its refusal to sign weapons non-proliferation treaties. Of grave concern is 
India’s increasing cooperation and partnership with Iran and its military forces. Despite 
advancements in the United States-Indian relations, India has been identified by the 
U.S. intelligence community as one of the most active collectors of sensitive U.S. 
economic, industrial, and proprietary information. The United States has sanctioned 
Indian scientists and chemical companies for transferring to Iran weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD)-related equipment and/or technology. Additionally, there are 
numerous documented cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export of 
U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.3 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”4 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
3  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
4  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 6.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
7 
 
 
                                                     
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign own or foreign operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.5 Applicant has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and/or obligation with his mother, siblings, and his in-laws. His 
mother and siblings are citizens and residents of India. The closeness of the 
relationship is shown by Applicant’s frequent telephone contacts with his mother and 
siblings, his financial support to his parents, and his frequent trips to India to visit his 
family. Additionally, he has a bank account in India, owns a condo (a vacation home), 
and has a potential inheritance of a home in India. 
 
These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is always the possibility that Indian agents may exploit the opportunity to 
obtain information about the United States. His connection to his in-laws and long-time 
Indian friends and colleagues also creates a potential conflict of interest because his 
relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to help 
them by providing sensitive or classified information.  
 
These close relationships create a higher risk of foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation because of India’s cooperation and partnership relationship with Iran, a 
country with interest inimical to the United States. His connections to his Indian family 
also create a potential conflict of interest because his relationships are sufficiently close 
to raise a security concern about his desire to help his family by providing sensitive 
information. Applicant’s frequent travel to India also creates a higher risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion by the Indian government, friends, and 
former colleagues working as scientist for Indian institutions.  
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising these three potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the government. 
 
5  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
8 
 
 
  Six Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U. 
S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) partially apply. Appellant did not establish “it is unlikely 
[he] will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of [his Indian 
family] and the interests of the U.S.” His frequent contacts and close relationships with 
his Indian family members could potentially force him to choose between the United 
States and India. He did not meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that 
[his relationships with his Indian family members] could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.”   
 
Applicant has traveled to India eight times since he immigrated to the United 
States in 1983. He has plans to travel to India in 2008 to visit his mother and attend a 
niece’s marriage. He and his wife became U.S. naturalized citizen in 1996. He has 
contacts and close relationships with his mother, sisters, and with his wife’s family who 
are citizens and residents of India. Applicant also has contacts and close relationship 
 
9 
 
 
                                                     
with Indian friends (university professors and scientist), most of whom he has known 
and has remained in contact with since his college days in India.   
 
The nature of India’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. I considered that 
the Indian government is a democratic republic with a cooperative relationship with the 
United States. India generally respects the human rights of its citizens. India is not a 
hostile country nor are its interests inimical to the United States. The United States and 
India enjoy good relations and the United States is India's largest trading partner.  
 
Notwithstanding, India’s aggressive collection of proprietary and economic 
information, its industrial espionage against the United States and its partnership with 
Iran raises the burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his immediate 
family members in India do not pose a security risk and that he will not be placed into a 
position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and his Indian 
family members.6 India’s partnership with Iran raises further concerns. Iran has an 
adversarial stance with the United States, a negative human rights record, and it is likely 
that Iran would target any citizen in an attempt to gather classified or sensitive 
information from the United States. 
 
Applicant received an Indian government scholarship to attend his PhD studies. 
He worked for a prestigious Indian research institute (under the auspices of the Indian 
government) for five years before coming to the United States to attend post-doctorate 
studies on a sabbatical. His brother-in-law is a scientist working for an Indian research 
institute, and he specializes in the same area Applicant does. Applicant keeps contact 
with college friends and colleagues from his days at the Indian institute. Thus, it is more 
likely the Indian government is monitoring Applicant’s work, his trips to India, and his 
communications with family and friends.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies because Applicant has developed a sufficient 
relationship and loyalty to the United States, that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States’ interests. He has lived in the United 
States for approximately 25 years. He has been a naturalized U.S. citizen for around 12 
years. His children have inculcated U.S. values. Applicant and his wife have established 
themselves as successful American citizens. He has worked hard for numerous 
employers in the United States, and continues his track record of diligent labor.  
 
6 See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) (stating an applicant has “a very 
heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when parents and siblings live in Iran).  
See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (articulating “very heavy burden” 
standard when an applicant has family members living in Iran).   
 
10 
 
 
Available evidence suggests Applicant is truthful, honest, and conscientious 
about security matters. His current supervisor testified he has followed the rules and 
regulations set forth by his company to protect classified information. His participation 
as a guest speaker at an Indian research institute symposium was sanctioned by his 
employer. AG ¶ 8(d) applies with respect to SOR ¶ 1. f.  
 
Applicant’s information suggests his financial and business interests in the United 
States are valued at around $1.3 million. In contrast, the value of his bank account and 
condo in India equals around $86,000. Applicant failed to provide information 
concerning the estimated value of the house he inherited from his father, but has not 
accepted. AG ¶ 8(f) partially applies. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
Applicant strongly averred he and his family are loyal Americans, that they have 
woven themselves into the fabric or America through their long-term participation in the 
community, their volunteer work, and their jobs. Applicant has lived in the United States 
for 25 years and has been a naturalized citizen for 12 years. When he became a U.S. 
citizen, he swore allegiance to the United States. His two sons are also U.S. citizens. 
They were raised and educated in the United States as Americans. They are currently 
attending some of the best learning institutions the United States can offer. Applicant 
credibly testified that he and his wife decided to become U.S. citizens when they 
realized their sons were being brought up as Americans and it was not likely their sons 
would leave the United States to go back to live in India. 
 
Applicant’s statement about his loyalty to the United States is credible. There is 
no reason to believe that he would take any action which could cause potential harm to 
his sons’ and his lifestyle in the United States. There is no evidence he has ever taken 
 
11 
 
 
any action which could cause potential harm to the United States, or that he lacks 
honesty and integrity. He has the respect and trust of his supervisor and U.S. neighbor.   
 
 Numerous circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis: 
India’s relationship with Iran, India’s aggressively seeking sensitive or protected U.S. 
information, that Applicant was born and educated in India, he worked in Indian 
universities and at an Indian research institute for five years, and he maintains contact 
with Indian friends and scientists. In sum, he had significant connections to India before 
he immigrated to the United States – connections that he continues to maintian. 
Applicant has frequent and non-casual contact with his family members living in India. 
These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there 
is always the possibility that Indian agents or others hostile to U.S. interests may 
attempt to use Applicant’s family members living in India to obtain information about the 
United States.  
 
 Applicant also failed to establish the value of the property he inherited in India. 
As such, I cannot determine whether the value of all of his financial interest is such that 
it could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure Applicant. 
 
“Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it 
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by 
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990).  After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude she has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference. The evidence leaves me with doubts 
as to Applicant’s security eligibility and suitability.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the concerns 
arising from her foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.g-1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
