KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant was born in the United States.  She was eight years old when her family
immigrated to Canada.  Applicant became a Canadian citizen.  Applicant married a Belgian
citizen and moved to Belgium with her husband.  She automatically acquired her Belgian
citizenship as a result of her marriage. Except for a period of around seven months in the United
States, Applicant has been a Belgium resident since 1987.  Applicant is required by law to vote in
Belgian elections.  She has voted in five Belgian elections and intends to vote in Belgian
elections in the future. Applicant and her husband have five Belgian-born children.  Her four
older children received their U.S. citizenship in July 2007.  Applicant was not able to transfer her
U.S. citizenship to her children because she did not live in the United States for a period of two
years after age 14.  Her children acquired their U.S. citizenship through their grandparents.  She
is in the process of acquiring U.S. citizenship for her youngest child.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-00434.a1
DATE: 07/18/2008
DATE: July 18, 2008
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-00434
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
2
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Elizabeth L. Newman, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 24, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 24, 2008, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal:  whether the Judge’s findings are based on
substantial evidence; whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision under Guideline C is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
The Judge made the following relevant findings: Applicant is 40 years old.  She has worked
for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) at the professional/managerial level since March
2006.  She has had interim access to NATO classified information for approximately two years.
There is no evidence that Applicant has ever compromised classified information or that she has
failed to comply with rules and regulations concerning the protection of classified information. 
Applicant was born in the United States in 1968.  When she was eight years old, the whole
family immigrated to Canada.  Applicant became a Canadian citizen, and attended high school and
her first year of college in Canada.  Her parents are dual citizens of the United States and Canada and
currently reside in Canada.
In 1987, Applicant married a Belgian citizen and moved to Belgium with her husband.  She
automatically acquired her Belgian citizenship as a result of her marriage. Except for a period of
around seven months from 1999 to 2001, when Applicant was working for a U.S. company in the
United States, Applicant has been a Belgium resident since 1987.  As a Belgium citizen, Applicant
is required by law to vote in Belgian elections.  She has voted in five Belgian elections and intends
to vote in Belgian elections in the future.  Applicant most recently voted in municipal elections in
Belgium in October 2006. 
Applicant and her husband have five Belgian-born children.  Her four older children received
their U.S. citizenship in July 2007.  Applicant was not able to transfer her U.S. citizenship to her
children because she did not live in the United States for a period of two years after age 14.  Her
children acquired their U.S. citizenship through their grandparents.  She is in the process of acquiring
U.S. citizenship for her youngest child.
 
3
Applicant completed the last three years of her bachelor’s degree in Belgium.  Additionally,
she received a master’s in 1995, a doctorate (Ph.D.) in 2000, and another master’s in 2006.
Applicant attended Belgian universities as a Belgian national and received student grants.  As a
Belgian citizen, she is entitled to and has received social welfare benefits such as healthcare,
unemployment benefits, child allowances, and educational grants. She is also entitled to a small
government pension.  Applicant and her husband own no property either in the United States or
Belgium.  She asserted they never intended to live permanently in Belgium and never purchased a
home.  In 1999, Applicant took a job in the United States with the idea of moving permanently to
the United States; however, her husband did not get a job, and they had to return to Belgium. The
opportunity never presented itself again.  Applicant owns bank accounts both in Belgium and in the
United States. She also voted in U.S. elections in 1996 and 2006, and is registered to vote in the
2008 U.S. Presidential election.
Applicant was interviewed in September 2006 by a government investigator.  The
investigator noted in his summary of Applicant’s interview that she was not ready to renounce her
Canadian or Belgian citizenship.  At her hearing, Applicant expressed her willingness to renounce
her Belgian citizenship, but presented no evidence of any efforts taken in that regard.  She also
expressed a preference for the United States.  Applicant held  Canadian and Belgian passports which
she surrendered in 2005.
 
On appeal, Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse clearance decision should be reversed
because the Judge erred as to some of his findings.  She also argues that the Judge’s adverse decision
is arbitrary, capricious and contrary to law because the Judge failed to take into account significant
record evidence, failed to articulate a satisfactory explanation for material conclusions, failed to
consider an important aspect of the case, and reached an overall decision that ran contrary to the
record evidence.  The Board does not find Applicant’s arguments persuasive.
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding from
being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620,
(1966).
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge’s findings are based on
substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be drawn
from the record.  Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of the
case.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the Judge’s material findings of security concern
are sustainable.
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the
4
Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-05809 at 2 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008).
The Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless he specifically
states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-08623 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 29, 2005).  He is not
required to cite or discuss every piece of record evidence.  See, e.g, ISCR Case No. 04-01961 at 2
(App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2007).  A review of the record indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating
evidence offered by Applicant against the length and seriousness of the disqualifying circumstances
and considered the possible application of relevant conditions and factors.  He found in favor of
Applicant under Guideline B.  However, he reasonably explained why the evidence which the
Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome all the government’s security
concerns under Guideline C.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record
evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory
explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice
made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S.
29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962). “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly,
the Judge’s adverse decision under Guideline C is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple      
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
Signed; William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
