KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: The judge found that Applicant has a lengthy and serious history of illegal drug use. 
The Judge’s material findings of security concern are based on substantial evidence or constitute
reasonable inference that could be drawn from the record.  It is not error to consider an
applicant’s past misconduct.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-05613.a1
DATE: 07/22/2008
DATE: July 22, 2008
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-05613
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 29, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
The Judge’s favorable decision under Guideline E is not at issue on appeal.1
2
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement), Guideline
J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case be decided on the
written record.  On April 28, 2008, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Thomas M.
Crean denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to
the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal:  whether the Judge’s findings are based on
substantial evidence; and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision under Guidelines
H and J is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.1
The Judge found Applicant had a lengthy and serious history of illegal drug use.  From 2001
to 2002, while serving on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps, Applicant used ecstasy about 13 to
15  times, marijuana about 50 times, cocaine two times, LSD once, GHB once, and Ketamine once
or twice.  From 2002 to 2006, Applicant used marijuana about 15 times.  His last use of illegal drugs
occurred 18 months before the issuance of the decision in his case.  
While in the Marine Corps, Applicant received non-judicial punishment in December 2001
for driving under the influence of alcohol.  He was found guilty and was sentenced to 45 days of
restriction, 45 days of extra duty, a reduction of one pay grade, and a forfeiture of $900.  Applicant
was also court-martialed for violating Article 112(a) of the Uniform Code of Military Justice for
using controlled substances while on active duty with the Marine Corps.  He was sentenced to
restriction and a reduction in rank.  In August 2002, he was administratively discharged from the
Marine Corps with an Other than Honorable Discharge.
Applicant elected to have his case decided on the written administrative record.  As a result,
the Judge did not have an opportunity to question him and evaluate his credibility in the context of
a hearing.  However, three fellow workers or supervisors provided letters attesting to Applicant’s
honesty and reliability, which the Judge fully considered.
Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse clearance decision should be reversed because the
Judge’s findings contain several errors.  Applicant also argues that his prior drug use does not
present a problem because his last use, which occurred 18 months prior to the decision, was an
isolated incident.  Prior to that use, Applicant had not used drugs for four years.  Applicant’s
arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred.
3
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding 
from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607,
620, (1966).  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge’s material findings of
security concern are based on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable inferences that could be
drawn from the record, and are sustainable.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-21025 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct.
9, 2007).
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the
Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or a party’s ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-26061 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar.
17, 2008).
It is not error to consider an applicant’s past misconduct.  “[T]he security eligibility of an
applicant cannot be meaningfully assessed by looking only at the applicant’s present situation and
ignoring the applicant’s past conduct.  Such a piecemeal approach is not practical and it would be
inconsistent with the ‘whole person’ concept of security clearance determinations.”  See ISCR Case
No. 96-0776 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 5, 1997).  In this case, the Judge properly considered the
significance of Applicant’s pattern of conduct as a whole, rather than analyzing each separate
incident of drug use in a piecemeal fashion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12648 at 3-4 (App. Bd.
Oct. 20, 2006) citing Raffone v. Adams, 468 F. 2d 860 (2  Cir. 1972)(taken together, separate eventsnd
may have a significance that is missing when each event is viewed in isolation).  
The Board has examined the Administrative Judge’s decision in light of the record as a whole
and concludes that the Judge has drawn “a ‘rational connection between the facts found’” under
Guidelines H and J and his adverse decision.  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State
Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United
States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s adverse decision is not arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple         
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin            
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
