 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended and modified (Directive), DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, dated January 1987, as amended
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 07-06350
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
On February 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing to Applicant its trustworthiness concerns.  The1
SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and Guideline
E (personal conduct). Applicant submitted a response to the SOR that she signed on
February 28, 2008. Applicant admitted all Guideline F allegations, denied the lone
Guideline E allegation, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on April 21, 2008. A notice of hearing was issued on
May 7, 2008, scheduling the hearing for June 3, 2008. The hearing was conducted as
scheduled. The government submitted five documentary exhibits that were marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-5. GE 1-4 were admitted into the record without objection.
Applicant objected to a portion of GE 5. That objection was sustained and the remainder
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
of GE 5 was admitted into the record without objection. Applicant testified and submitted
seven documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1-7, and
admitted into the record without objection. The transcript was received on June 18, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is 25 years old, She is employed by a staffing agency and assigned under
a contract to a defense contractor where she has worked as a claims analyst since March
2006. She graduated from high school in June 2000. She thereafter attended college and
was awarded a bachelor of arts degree with a major in psychology in December 2005.
Applicant worked sporadically at fast food restaurants while attending high school and
college. Following her college graduation, she worked for short periods of time in a factory
and in meat processing plants. 
Applicant is single and has one child, age 6. The child’s father has been court-
ordered to pay $180 per month as child support. He has failed to make an undetermined
number of support payments over the years but Applicant testified she has not bothered
to attempt to collect the arrearage owing. (Tr. 31-32)
The SOR alleges nine credit card debts, totaling approximately $16,000, and one
telephone account, owing in the amount of $1,600, that have either been charged off or
submitted for collection. These accounts have been delinquent for many years. Applicant
acquired this debt while she was attending school. She testified she never made any
payment on some of the credit cards she acquired and used. (Tr. 37) She did not take any
action to resolve these debts but instead chose to rely upon the passage of time for them
to be removed from her credit reports. None of these accounts are listed in her most recent
credit report. (AE 2)
The SOR also alleges eight medical bills, totaling approximately $1,700, that have
been submitted for collection. Each of these debts has been delinquent for many years.
Applicant testified she believes some of these accounts do not belong to her and the
remainder should have been paid by medical insurance. (Tr. 34-37) She did nothing to
satisfy or otherwise resolve any of these accounts until shortly before the hearing when she
called a credit reporting service to dispute her liability for the accounts. She testified that
if the challenge to her liability for these accounts is successful they will be removed from
her credit reports about 45 days after the date of the hearing. (Tr. 34)
Applicant consulted with a consumer credit counseling service a few weeks before
the hearing. However, she has not actually entered into a contractual agreement with the
service and she doesn’t have the disposable income needed to comply with the plan the
service proposed on her behalf.  
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P) in March
2006. In response to a question inquiring whether she was then over 180 days delinquent
  Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.2
  Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.
3
 Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) Memorandum, dated4
November 19, 2004.
  Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
5
  Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865. 6
  Directive ¶ E3.1.14.7
  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.8
3
on any financial obligation, she answered “No”. This answer was untrue. Applicant’s
explanations for her untrue answer is: 1) she was in a hurry; 2) she did not read the
question carefully; 3) she had read an earlier question inquiring about whether she had
ever filed for bankruptcy protection to which she correctly answered “No”; and 4) she
somehow inexplicably concluded that because she answered “No” to the bankruptcy
question she should also answer “No” to this question. 
POLICIES
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions.  2
The standard to be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available
information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning the
person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.3
Trustworthiness adjudications apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security
Service and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor4
personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any
final unfavorable access determination is made.5
An Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions
in the Adjudicative Guidelines when evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust
position. The Administrative Judge must also consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. The
entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole
person concept.”  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration,
and any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to sensitive information
will be resolved in favor of national security. Decisions are made in terms of the national
interest and are not determinations as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.6
The Government is required to present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR.  The Applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other7
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel.  The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining8
a favorable trustworthiness decision. 
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant either has or had numerous delinquent accounts, totalling over $19,000,
that were either charged off or submitted for collection. She acquired and used credit cards
when she clearly lacked the financial resources to make payments on the accounts. She
never made any payment on some of the credit card accounts. All of her delinquent
accounts remained delinquent for many years. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability
or unwillingness to satisfy debts; DC 19(b): indebtedness caused by frivolous spending or
irresponsible spending and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the
debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt; and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting
financial obligations apply.
Applicant never took affirmative action to resolve any of her delinquent credit card
or telephone debt. Instead, she chose to wait until they were removed from her credit
reports through the passage of time. Most disturbing about her conduct in regards to that
debt is that she acquired at least some of the credit cards lacking both the ability and intent
to make payment on them. As to the medical expenses, she failed to take any action to
resolve them until shortly before the hearing, and it is unknown whether or not the
challenges to those debts will be resolved in her favor. While she discussed her financial
situation with a consumer credit counselling service, she has not engaged that service and
lacks the financial ability to make the payments that would be required under the plan the
service proposed. 
Mitigating Conditions (MC) 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; MC
20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control  . . . and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; MC 20(c): the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20(d): the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts do not
apply. The remaining mitigating conditions have no applicability to the facts in this case.
Guideline F is decided against Applicant.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Personal conduct is always a concern because conduct involving questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
5
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the (sensitive position eligibility) process or any failure to cooperate with
the (sensitive position eligibility) process.
Applicant submitted an SF 85P in March 2006, and in response to a question
inquiring whether she was then over 180 days delinquent on any financial obligation she
answered “No”. This answer was untrue. Her assertions about why she did not report the
delinquent debts, namely: 1) she was in a hurry; 2) she did not read the question carefully;
3) she had read an earlier question inquiring about whether she had ever filed for
bankruptcy protection to which she correctly answered “No”; and 4) she somehow
inexplicably concluded that because she answered “No” to the bankruptcy question she
should also answer “No” to this question are not credible. In making that determination, I
have considered the substance of her testimony, her appearance and demeanor while
testifying, and the nature of the debts in question. Applicant is clearly an intelligent woman
with the capacity to read and understand the question at issue and discern the information
she was required to furnish. DC 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification
of relevant facts from any personal security questionnaire, personal history statement, of
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities applies. I have considered all mitigating conditions under
Guideline E and find none apply. Guideline E is decided against Applicant.   
 
The objective of a trustworthiness determination is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to sensitive information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
her acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant has failed to mitigate
the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. She has not
overcome the case against her nor satisfied her ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to sensitive
information. Guidelines F and E are decided against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-r: Against Applicant
6
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion  
             
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position.
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
