                                                              
                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ADP Case No. 07-07868 
 SSN: ) 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Applicant’s Companion, Personal Representative 
 
                                                                             
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on January 
4, 2007. On February 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations; Guideline E, Personal Conduct; and Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct, for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended 
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 19, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on March 24, 2008. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 11, 2008, and I received the case 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
assignment on April 16, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 5, 2008, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on May 29, 2008. The government offered Exhibits 
(Gov Ex) 1 through 11, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his 
own behalf, called two witnesses, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-G, which were 
admitted without objection. The record was held open until June 19, 2008. Applicant 
submitted two documents which were admitted as AE H (10 pages) and AE I (2 pages). 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 5, 2008. Based upon a review of 
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, 1.f-1.i, 
1.l, 1,m, 1.o-1.q, 1.t, and 1.u. He denies SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.e, 1.j, 1.k, 1.n, 1.r, 1.s, 2.a, 
2.b and 3.a.  In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old male employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
who is seeking a position of public trust. He has worked for his employer as system 
specialist since October 2001. He is a high school graduate and has some college credit. 
From July 1992 to July 2001, he served on active duty in the United States Navy. He was a 
cryptologic technician. He separated as an E-6 with an honorable discharge. He served in 
the United States Naval Reserves for three years after separating from active duty. He has 
a two-year-old daughter, and lives with the mother of his child who he refers to as his 
common law wife.  She served as his personal representative. (Tr at 6-7, 11, 23-24, 44-46; 
Gov 1; Gov 2 at 12.) In this decision, she is referred to as Applicant’s companion.  
 
On January 4, 2007, Applicant submitted a questionnaire for public trust position, 
Standard Form 85P as part of a routine periodic reinvestigation.  He answered, “No” in 
response to question 22a. which asks, “Your Financial Record. In the last 7 years, have 
you, or a company over which you exercised some control, filed for bankruptcy, been 
declared bankrupt, been subject to a tax lien, or had a legal judgment rendered against you 
for a debt? If you answered “Yes,” provide date of initial action and other information 
requested below.”  He did not list two judgments entered against him which are alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  He also answered , “No” in response to question 22b, which asks, 
“Are you now over 180 days delinquent on any loan or financial obligation? Include loans or 
obligations funded or guaranteed by the Federal Government. If you answered, “Yes,” 
provide the information requested below.” (Gov 1.) He did not list 19 delinquent debts that 
were over 180 days old which are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.s. (Gov 1.) 
 
A subsequent background investigation discovered the following delinquent 
accounts: a $385 judgment entered against Applicant in March 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.a; Gov 4 at 
2); a $3,270 judgment entered against Applicant in September 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.b; Gov 4 at 
4); a $9,216 debt related to a car repossession in December 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.c; Gov 4 at 5); 
a $5,413 government overpayment debt, charged off in July 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.d; Gov 4 at 5); 
a $3,271 debt related to a car repossession in March 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.e; Gov 4 at 6); a 
 
3 
 
$1,210  credit card account charged off in May 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.f; Gov 4 at 6); a $470 cell 
phone account charged off in December 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.f; Gov 4 at 4); a $183 bank 
account, placed for collection in April 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.h; Gov 4 at 6); a $122 telephone 
account, placed for collection in May 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.i; Gov 4 at 7); a $592 telephone 
account, placed for collection in February 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.j; Gov 4 at 10); a $3,216 debt for 
past due rent, placed for collection in February 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.k; Gov 4 at 9); a $2,031 
account placed for collection in November 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.l; Gov 4 at 9); a $941 bank debt 
placed for collection in September 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.m; Gov 4 at 10); a $407 telephone 
account placed for collection in October 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.n; Gov 4 at 11); a $198 telephone 
account placed for collection in July 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.o; Gov 4 at 11); a $178 insurance 
account placed for collection in November 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.p; Gov 4 at 11); a $75 insurance 
account placed for collection in July 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.q; Gov 4 at 12); a $144 cable television 
account placed for collection in December 2000 (SOR ¶ 1.r; Gov 4 at 12); a $74 account, 
placed for collection in June 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.s; Gov 4 at 12); and an $855 account placed 
for collection in November 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.t; Gov 3 at 2).  
 
Applicant claims the accounts did not show up on his trustworthiness application due 
to a typographical error.  He spent a few days filling out the application and listed his debts 
on the electronic application.  He claims that when he hit the tab key to go to the next 
section, the computer program deleted his listed delinquent debts. He did not review his 
trustworthiness application before signing and turning in the document. He did not discover 
the error until he was interviewed by the investigator conducting his background 
investigation in February 2007. (Tr at 86-89.)  
 
Applicant’s companion testified. She has known Applicant since May 2005. She says 
that Applicant is an excellent father and responsible human being. She works in the same 
building as Applicant but in a different department. She states Applicant is professional at 
work. She and Applicant live together with their daughter. (Tr at 44-47.)      She states that 
Applicant recently took out a $3,000 loan from his 401(k) account intending to use the 
money to pay off some delinquent accounts. She encountered a legal issue so most of the 
money had to be used for her legal fees. (Tr at 45-49.) They had discussed resolving the 
delinquent accounts over the past several years but have taken no action.  Most of the 
delinquent debts belong to Applicant. His companion went through a divorce in 2005. She 
filed bankruptcy in October 2006 and her debts were discharged. (Tr at 53-54.)   
 
While on active duty in the United States Navy, Applicant encountered some 
financial problems.  He claims the financial difficulties were caused by the change in pay 
received when he transferred to different locations.  In 1999, his access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI) was suspended as a result of his financial problems. In 
March 2001, he took a class on how the manage his finances. Applicant was unemployed 
for three months after separating from active duty. When he accepted a full-time position 
with his current employer, his annual income was $37,000 a year.  He now earns $48,000 a 
year. (Tr at 60-64, 93; Gov 6.)  
 
Applicant claims the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.j, 1.n. 1.r, and 1.s are paid. (Tr 
at 70-73, 76-78, 80.) He provided proof that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s was paid. (AE I 
 
4 
 
at 2.) He did not provide proof, such as receipts, that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.j, 
1.n, and 1.r  were paid. He disputes the debt alleged in SOR ¶1.k.  This is a debt for unpaid 
rent after breaking a lease.  Applicant was recalled to active duty in February 2002. He 
states he formally notified his apartment office in order to be released from the lease early. 
He claims that he disputed the debt on his credit report. (Tr. at 74-76.) Applicant provided a 
copy of the orders recalling him to active duty. (AE H at 2-5.) He was released from active 
duty on May 26, 2002. (Gov 2 at 12.) He provided no additional evidence such as written 
notification to the apartment that he was being called to active duty.  
 
Applicant has not taken steps to resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 
1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, , 1.l, 1,m, 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, and 1.t.  He admits that they are his debts but 
claims the additional expenses of raising a child has prevented him from resolving these 
accounts. (Tr at 81-83.)  
 
Applicant and his companion operate from a joint budget. (Tr at 70.) A personal 
financial statement Applicant submitted in response to interrogatories on October 29, 2007, 
indicates a net monthly income of $4,341.  Total monthly expenses are $3,560. Applicant 
and his companion have approximately $781 left over each month after expenses. (Gov 2 
at 10.)  Applicant and his companion have a joint savings account with a $700 balance. (Tr. 
at 86.)  He is current on federal and state taxes. In May 2008, he received a $1,200 
economic stimulus check from the federal government. He put $600 in savings and applied 
the rest towards current expenses. (Tr at 65-67.)  
 
A co-worker of Applicant’s testified that he has known Applicant since 2001 when 
they were co-workers for the same defense contractor. Applicant now works for another 
defense contractor but they work at the same location. He has daily contact with Applicant 
at work. He indicates Applicant is extremely professional and has outstanding character. (Tr 
at 36-41.)  Applicant’s performance reviews indicate he meets his objectives. (AE A – AE 
F.)  
  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as Asensitive positions.@  
(See Regulation && C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  AThe standard that must be met for . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person=s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.@ (See Regulation & 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will apply 
to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of Personnel 
Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. (See Regulation & C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant=s suitability for a public trust position, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge=s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole person concept.@ The 
Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting Awitnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .@ The Applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
6 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk 
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.  He encountered financial issues while on active duty in the Navy 
which resulted in his access to SCI being suspended in 1999. Since his separation from 
active duty in 2001, he has incurred 20 delinquent debts, a total approximate balance of 
$33,079.      
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. Applicant’s history of 
financial irresponsibility is too recent to apply this mitigating condition. The majority of his 
delinquent debts remain unresolved.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances) partially applies based on Applicant’s three month period of 
unemployment after he separated from active duty. However, the majority of the delinquent 
accounts appear to have been incurred after Applicant’s full-time employment in October 
2001. His lack of action towards resolving these accounts indicates a lack of responsibility 
and disregard for his financial obligations. FC MC ¶ 20(b) is given little weight.  
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. In March 2001, Applicant attended a financial management class.  His track 
record of financial irresponsibility since that time indicates that he continues to have issues 
with financial responsibility. The majority of his delinquent accounts remain unresolved.  It 
is unlikely his financial situation will be resolved in the near future.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the debt alleges in SOR ¶ 1.s.  Although 
Applicant claims the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.j, 1.n, and 1.r were paid, he provided no proof 
to verify his assertion.  His lack of initiative in resolving the other delinquent accounts gives 
this mitigating condition less weight.  
 
FC MC ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue) 
potentially applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k for breaking his apartment 
 
7 
 
lease. Applicant provided proof that he was recalled to active duty in February 2002. 
However, he did not dispute this debt in his response to interrogatories dated October 29, 
2007. (Gov 2 at 5.) He first raised this issue at hearing and provided no documentation 
such as the copy of the apartment lease and/or a written notice of early termination of his 
lease. He failed to meet his burden to successfully dispute this debt.   
 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.    
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in AG 
&15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list two judgments 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) entered against him within seven years of the date he filled out his 
trustworthiness application in response to question 22a.  He also failed to list his delinquent 
debts that were over 180 days old (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.r) in response to question 22b.  
 
 Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) applies to Applicant’s deliberate 
omissions of his judgments and delinquent debts on his trustworthiness application. 
Applicant claims that the debts were deleted due to typographical error, claiming that he 
typed all of the debts into the electronic questionnaire but the debts were deleted when he 
hit the tab key to move on to the next section. Considering Applicant’s questionnaire for 
public trust position, SF 85P, appears to be typewritten, I do not find his explanation 
credible. (see Gov 1.)    
  
 Personal conduct concerns can be mitigated.  The following Personal Conduct 
Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) does not 
apply.  There is no evidence that Applicant attempted to correct the omission of his financial 
issues on his trustworthiness application until the issue was raised in February 2007 during 
his background investigation interview.  
 
 
8 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) does not apply.  Applicant’s deliberate omission of his delinquent debts was 
serious.  His less than credible explanation as to why he omitted the delinquent debts on 
his security clearance application raised questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.  
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur) does not apply because Applicant has not 
acknowledged that he deliberately omitted his delinquent accounts on his trustworthiness 
application.  
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised under personal conduct. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 30 of the 
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
 willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
There are two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) that apply to 
Applicant’s case. They are CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses); CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted).  Applicant’s 
deliberate omission of his two judgments and his delinquent debts that were over 180 days 
old on his trustworthiness application violated Title 18 U.S.C §1001.  While somewhat 
redundant to the concerns raised under guideline E, personal conduct, his deliberate 
omissions raise a concern under criminal conduct.  When Applicant signed the 
trustworthiness application, he certified that “My statements on this form, and any 
attachments to it, are true, complete, and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief 
and are made in good faith. I understand that a knowing a willful false statement on this 
form can be punished by fine or imprisonment or both. (See section 1001 of Title 18, United 
States Code.)” (Gov 1 at 7.)  Applicant was on notice that any false information provided on 
the application was a crime.  
 
The criminal conduct concern can be mitigated. I find that it is premature to apply 
Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition (CC MC) ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since 
the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) because Applicant’s deliberate falsification was recent and he did not accept 
 
9 
 
responsibility for his deliberate omission.   
 
It is premature to apply CC MC ¶ 32(d) (there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal 
activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement) for the same reasons mentioned above.   
 
At this time, it is premature to conclude that Applicant has mitigated the criminal 
conduct concern. 
   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; 
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole 
person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military service, the 
favorable comments provided by the witnesses, and his six and half year employment 
history with his current employer.  Financial consideration concerns remain due to the 
extensive amount of delinquent debt Applicant has incurred since 2001 and his lack of 
effort towards resolving his delinquent accounts. His deliberate omissions of his delinquent 
accounts on his trustworthiness application raise questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness and judgment. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under financial considerations, personal conduct, and criminal 
conduct. 
                                          
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.t:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.u:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
