                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-09697
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
July 2, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On January 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines E and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 11, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 20, 2008. Applicant did not file a
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 27, 2008. Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 40 year old employee of a defense contractor.
In 1994, applicant was charged with Assault and Battery. She was convicted of
the charge.
In January 2005, applicant was charged with Assault and Battery. When the
alleged victim did not appear in court, the charge was dismissed.
In May 2005, applicant was charged with Assault and Battery. In July 2005, she
was charged with Failure to Appear. Both charges were dismissed in September 2005.
In January 2006, applicant was charged with (1) Assault and Battery and (2)
Profane Swearing or Intoxicated. In April 2006, she was found guilty of both charges,
given a six month suspended sentence, and fined about $400.00.
On January 12, 2007, applicant was charged with Assault and Battery on a
Family Member. In April 2007, the charge was dismissed.
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on January 31, 2007. In response to Question 23.c., which asked: “Are there
currently any charges pending against you for any criminal offense?” applicant
responded “no.” This response was false because, as noted above, she had been
charged with a crime on January 12, 2007, and the charge was not dismissed until April
2007. In her response to the SOR, applicant admitted the SOR allegation that she
falsified material facts on the e-QIP, but stated she “was not aware of charges at that
time.” Given the fact she told an OPM investigator that, on the day of the alleged crime,
she had been (1) brought to the police station, (2) “charged and processed for Assault
and Battery,” (3) given a court date, and (4) “bonded out by her friend,” it is clear she
knew a charge was pending against her when she completed the e-QIP (Exhibits 2 and
6).
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
3
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern for criminal conduct is set forth in Paragraph 30 of the AG,
and is as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Paragraph 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying: Under Paragraph 31.a., “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses” may be disqualifying. And, under Paragraph 31.c., an “allegation or admission
of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted or convicted,” may be disqualifying. Applicant’s multiple arrests and two
convictions for Assault and Battery raise these two disqualifying conditions.
Paragraph 32 of the AG sets forth conditions that could mitigate security
concerns. I have considered each of them and conclude none apply.
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set forth in
Paragraph 15 of the AG, and is as follows:
4
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Paragraph16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 16.a., the “deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” may be disqualifying. This
disqualifying condition is applicable because applicant intentionally provided false
material information on the e-QIP.
Paragraph 17 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I
considered each of them and conclude none apply.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature woman who,
since 1994, has been arrested five times and convicted twice of Assault and Battery.
She offered little to no evidence that would suggest this type of behavior is unlikely to
continue. Based on these facts, and the fact she intentionally concealed from the
Government her most recent Assault and Battery charge when she completed the e-
QIP in 2007, I conclude applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from
Guidelines E and J.
5
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
