 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-07154 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joel R. Rosenberg, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on December 5, 2006. On 
January 28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 1, 2008; answered it on 
February 14, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on February 19, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on March 17, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on March 20, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 27, 2008, scheduling the hearing for April 3, 
2008. Applicant declined to waive the 15-day notice requirement of the Directive ¶ 
 
2 
 
 
E3.1.8, and he requested additional time to retain counsel and prepare for the hearing. 
On March 31, 2008, I granted Applicant’s request. The email correspondence 
concerning a hearing date is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I.  
 
DOHA issued a second notice of hearing on May 12, 2008, scheduling the 
hearing for May 29, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf, presented the testimony of three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through N, which were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until June 30, 2008, to enable him to submit additional 
documentary evidence. Applicant timely submitted AX O through V, and they were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s response to AX O through V is 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit II. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on June 5, 2008. The record closed on June 30, 2008. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations except SOR ¶ 
1.b. His admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my 
findings of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 66-year-old security guard for a federal contractor. He has a high 
school education. He has worked for his current employer since August 1980, and he 
has held a clearance since January 1982. 
 
 Applicant has been separated from his spouse since June 1990. He has four 
adult children and five grandchildren (Tr. 60-61). His spouse is self-supporting, but he 
keeps her on his medical and dental insurance plan because she has no medical and 
dental benefits from her job (Tr. 61). 
 
 A city police detective who has known Applicant for many years considers him 
dependable, responsible, courteous, and trustworthy. He described Applicant as “the 
most honest and dependable person” he knows (AX N). 
 
 Applicant’s daughter testified that her father has a good reputation in the 
community for truthfulness and honesty. He is a very private person, and he is “very 
giving” at Christmas (Tr. 93-94). 
 
 An ordained minister and friend of Applicant who has known him for 29 years 
described Applicant as quiet and reserved. He testified there has never been any 
reason to question Applicant’s honesty or integrity (Tr. 98-100). 
 
 Applicant’s son-in-law has known Applicant for about 13 years. He testified 
Applicant is a wonderful neighbor and a good citizen. “Everybody loves him.” He could 
 
3 
 
 
not imagine Applicant doing anything at work that would affect his employment or any 
governmental interest (Tr. 102-04). 
 
 In 2001, Applicant inherited between $225,000 and $250,000 from his father. He 
promptly began spending money on his children and himself. In accordance with his 
father’s wishes, he gave each of his four children $5,000 apiece (Tr. 62). He bought two 
cars, extensively remodeled his home, bought gifts for his children and grandchildren, 
paid for the weddings of his two daughters, and paid for the honeymoon of one 
daughter. He took his children to the Bahamas, Puerto Rico, and twice to Disneyland 
(Tr. 75). He opened numerous credit card accounts, often because there was a discount 
on the initial purchases if a new account was opened (Tr. 64). He admitted at the 
hearing that at Christmas he “went a little crazy” for his children and grandchildren (Tr. 
64). Without realizing it, he spent more money than he inherited, and he accumulated 
more credit card debt than he could pay. He used a home equity loan to pay about half 
the debt. He began falling behind on his payments in 2005 and 2006 (Tr. 80). 
 
 The SOR alleged 14 delinquent debts totaling about $22,552. Applicant’s credit 
report dated December 22, 2006 reflected that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was in 
good standing (GX 3 at 6), and his credit report dated January 11, 2008 reflected a zero 
balance on that account (GX 2 at 5). Department Counsel conceded that the debt for 
$394, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, had been paid (Tr. 18).  
 
Applicant presented documentary evidence of partial payment of the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b (Answer to SOR; GX 4 at 7-8). He presented documentary and testimonial 
evidence that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.l, and 1.m had been paid in full (Tr. 
71; AX D, G, S, and T). He also presented evidence that monthly payments were being 
made on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.j and 1.k (AX C, F, H, J, P, and Q). He 
presented evidence that other debts not alleged in the SOR were resolved, but he did 
not link the evidence to the debts alleged in the SOR (AX B and C). He asserted that 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.n had been paid in full (Tr. 58; AX A), 
but he presented no documentary evidence to support his assertion. 
 
 Applicant recently started collecting Social Security, increasing his monthly 
income by about $1,724 per month. His monthly net income is about $3,484, his living 
expenses are about $845, his monthly mortgage payment is about $747, and his credit 
card payments are about $630, leaving a net monthly remainder of about $1,261. In 
December 2007, he received a settlement for injuries in a car accident. His net recovery 
was about $41,000 (Tr. 77). 
 
 Applicant has about $12,000 in money market accounts, $3,000 in a savings 
account, and about $2,000 in his checking account (Tr. 59). He owns two cars that are 
paid off, and they are worth a total of about $35,000 (Tr. 60). He owns his home, which 
is worth about $94,000 (Tr. 74). Applicant was on short-term disability from about July 4 
to July 30, 2007 (GX 4 at 29), but the record does not reflect the financial impact, if any, 
of his disability. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@ 
 
 All these disqualifying conditions are raised by the evidence. With respect to AG 
¶ 19(a), it appears that Applicant initially was unable to pay his debts; but he now has 
sufficient savings and income to pay them all, but he has not done so. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (b), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
 
6 
 
 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
The first two prongs (“so long ago” and “so infrequent”) are not established 
because Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts, and some of them are not yet 
satisfied. The third prong (“under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur”) is 
established. Applicant led a modest life until he inherited a large sum of money. He 
spent with abandon until he was deeply in debt. He is not likely to inherit or otherwise 
acquire such a large sum of money again.  
 
The fourth prong (“does not cast doubt”) is not established. Applicant exhibited 
extremely poor judgment by squandering his inheritance and not paying attention to his 
financial situation. Because his exercise of bad judgment was recent, continuing 
through 2005 and 2006, when his debts started becoming delinquent, it raises doubt 
about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). This mitigating condition is not established 
because Applicant’s financial problems were totally the result of his voluntary acts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established. Although he retained legal counsel for his 
hearing, there is no evidence he has sought or received financial counseling. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).   
 
Although Applicant asserted that all debts alleged in the SOR were paid or 
otherwise resolved, he failed to produce evidence to support his assertion that the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.n were paid in full. He has the financial resources 
to pay all his debts in full, but has not done so. He offered no reasonable explanation for 
not paying off the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.j. and 1.k. He bears the burden of 
establishing a mitigating condition, and he did not sustain his burden of establishing AG 
¶ 20(d).  
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult with a long record of faithful service to his employer. 
He has held a security clearance for many years without incident. However, he did not 
exhibit the level of maturity and responsibility expected of a mature adult, a father, and a 
grandfather when he squandered his inheritance and ruined his credit rating. His 
testimony at the hearing was disjointed, and he did not appear to have a good grasp of 
the facts. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:     Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
