                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-09572
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Edward O. Lear, Attorney At Law
July 30, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 14,
2006.  On February 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
G for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 19, 2008. He answered
the SOR in writing through Counsel on March 7, 2008, and requested a hearing before
an Administrative Judge.  The matter was assigned to this Administrative Judge on April
10, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on April 17, 2008, and the matter was
scheduled for hearing on May 29, 2008.  The Government presented thirteen Exhibits,
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 13, which were received without
objection. The Applicant presented two Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A
2
and B, which were received without objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 11, 2008.   I granted
Applicant’s request to keep the record open until close of business on June 5, 2008, to
submit additional documentation.  On June 5, 2008, the Applicant submitted one Post-
Hearing Exhibit, consisting of two pages, that was received without objection. The
record closed on June 6, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is  denied.
Findings of Fact
The Applicant is 55 years old and divorced with three adult children.  He is
employed by a defense contractor as an Electrical Engineer, and is applying for a
security clearance in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses intoxicants.
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR under this
guideline.  (See Applicant’s response to SOR).  He began consuming alcohol to excess
at the age of eighteen in about 1970.  His excessive use of alcohol continued off and on
until at least October 2007.  During this period, he was charged, arrested and convicted
of six alcohol related incidents that include, two Public Intoxication charges, an Alcohol
in a Closed Area charge, and three arrests for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol
(DUI) or Driving While Intoxicated (DWI). 
From 1973 until 1978, the Applicant served in the United States Air Force.  For
the past twenty years, he has been working for his current employer, and has held a
security clearance since 1972.  He is also a part-time musician who has worked in the
studio where he has consumed alcohol to help him relax from time to time.     
The Applicant was arrested and charged with Public Intoxication on two
occasions, August 15, 1972 and two days later, on August 17, 1972.  He was sentenced
to jail time and served about ten days in jail.  (Tr. p. 37 and Government Exhibits 8, 9
and 10 ).  
In October 1977, he was arrested and charged with Driving While Intoxicated.
The Applicant had been drinking alcohol and was pulled over for speeding.  He pled
guilty, was fined approximately $500.00, was required to attend a DWI or George Air
Force Base course.  His drivers license was suspended for six months, and he was
placed on probation for two years.  (Government Exhibits 8, 9 and 10)
In December 1981, the Applicant was arrested and charged with a felony offense
of Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol Involving Injuries.  The Applicant explained
3
that it was Christmas Eve, he had gotten off of work early and had been consuming
alcohol (screwdrivers) most of the day.  He was looking in his glove box for a cassette
tape when a car pulled out in front of him on the highway and he rear ended it, causing
the car to turn over.  Both the driver and the passenger in the other car received skull
fractures.  (Tr. p. 38).  The Applicant’s blood alcohol level was .27%.  He was found
guilty and was sentenced to serve 180 days in jail (on weekends), was fined
approximately $1,300.00, his drivers license was revoked for one year and he was
placed on probation for three years.  Following this incident, the Applicant did not
consume alcohol again for about six years, until 1987.  (Tr. p. 39 and Government
Exhibits 6 and 12).  
In February 1983, the Applicant provided a statement to the Defense
Investigative Service wherein he stated, “Since the incident, I have not drank alcohol,
and it is my intention never to do so again.”  (Government Exhibit 6 and Tr. p. 40).
In about 1987 or so, the Applicant gradually started consuming alcohol again.
His drinking increased to about three times a month and to the point of intoxication
about two times a year.  (Tr. pp. 42-43).  Ten years later, in July 1993, the Applicant
was charged with alcohol in a closed area.  He was found guilty and fined $76.00.
(Government Exhibit 5).  
In March 2006, the Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Driving Under
the Influence - Alcohol, and (2) Driving Under the Influence with Alcohol Over .08%.
The Applicant’s blood alcohol level actually tested at .16%.  The Applicant explained
that he was going to a friend’s house and had been drinking earlier that evening.  He
was driving onto the freeway.  The roads were icy and he lost traction and went off of
the road.  Pursuant to a plea bargain, Count (3) Wet Reckless Involving Alcohol was
added.  The Applicant pled Nolo Contendere to Count (3) and was sentenced to pay a
fine and fees totaling $1,075.00, to complete a 16 week alcohol education program, his
drivers license was suspended for one month, and he was required to make restitution
in the amount of $3,717.47.  He was placed on summary probation for three years,
which will not expire until June 2009.  (Government Exhibits 8 and 11)
Pursuant to court order, the Applicant attended a three month course beginning
in about May 2006, which included 12 hours of Alcohol Education, six hours of self-help
meetings, eight Alcoholic Anonymous meetings and 18 hours of group sessions.  He
successfully completed the program in about August 2006.
Up until three and a half months ago, the Applicant continued to consume alcohol
despite the fact that he is currently on probation.  He does not believe that he is
addicted to alcohol, however, he keeps it in his house for friends who come to visit.  (Tr.
p. 50).  He indicated that he attended and completed the meetings required by the court
but did not find it worthwhile to continue seeking treatment of any kind.  However, upon
receipt of the notice of hearing in this matter, he took several steps to remind himself
not to drink.  He hung several posters in his house, one on his door that says, “Drink
Responsibly”, and another from his employer that says, “Don’t forget who you work for”.
On the refrigerator there is another poster from the DMV that reminds him of the blood
4
alcohol levels.  He also purchased a breathalyzer to test his blood alcohol level.  (Tr. p.
30).  The Applicant states that drinking is not as important to him as the other things that
he has going on in his life.  (Tr. p. 31).  His recent alcohol related arrest and conviction
cost him at least $35,000.00 out of pocket.  (Tr. p. 49).        
He has not consumed any alcohol for the past three and a half months and plans
to continue to remain abstinent.
Twelve letters of recommendation from professional colleagues and long time
friends who have known and/or worked with the Applicant for many years attest to his
professional manner, positive and respectful attitude, honesty, hardworking and
compassionate nature, integrity and trustworthiness.  He is considered to be a
dedicated family man, who is responsible, patriotic, loyal, security conscious, and
honorable in every aspect of his life.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit A (1) through A (12)).    
An affidavit from the Applicant dated May 30, 2008, indicates that as of May 19,
2008, he has eliminated all consumable alcohol from his residence.  (See Applicant’s
Post-Hearing Exhibit).  
The Applicant received an Instant Recognition Award from his employer on
December 4, 2001.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit B).  
Policies
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)
21.  The Concern.  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
22. (a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent;
22. (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent.
5
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The voluntariness of participation
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g. The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
6
Conclusion
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in alcohol abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in alcohol abuse (Guideline G).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline G of the SOR.
Under Alcohol Abuse, Guideline G, Disqualifying Conditions 22(a), “alcohol-
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting,
child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent” and,
22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent” apply. None of the mitigating conditions are applicable. Accordingly
Guideline G is found against the Applicant. 
The Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse began over thirty-seven years ago and
has resulted in at least six alcohol related arrests, including two public intoxication
charges, an alcohol in a closed area charge, and three arrests for DUI.  His last arrest
occurred in 2006, just two years ago, and he remains on probation for the offense until
June 2009.  In 1983, the Applicant told the Department of Defense that he was not
going to consume alcohol again, but he later returned to his excessive drinking habit.
Presently, he has only abstained from the use of alcohol for the past three and a half
months and again he says that he has no intentions of ever drinking.  Hopefully, this
time, the Applicant will be able to completely abstain from excessive alcohol abuse.
      
7
Although there is no formal diagnosis in the record of alcohol dependence, the
Applicant’s pattern of alcohol abuse is clearly indicative of a serious alcohol problem
that he still has not gained an understanding of.  He has again made the commitment to
stop drinking.  In order to stay sober, he has posted reminders around him, on the door
and the refrigerator and has purchased a breathalyzer.  Recently, he has eliminated
alcohol from his home.  However, he is not working a structured recovery program that
includes Alcoholics Anonymous meetings or any other recognized alcohol rehabilitation
program. Three and a half months of abstinence is only the beginning of a long program
of recovery and is no guarantee that he will not return to his old habits.  Based upon his
long history of alcohol abuse and its related effects on the Applicant there is insufficient
evidence in the record to show that he is sufficiently trustworthy at this time.      
I have also carefully considered the favorable statements from his professional
colleagues and friends but that evidence does not come close to mitigating the negative
effect of his numerous alcohol related arrests. 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.   Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
     Formal Findings
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: Against the Applicant.
   
8
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
____________________________
Darlene Lokey-Anderson
Administrative Judge
