                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-06330
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
July 10, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On September 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines E and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 11, 2007, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 8, 2007. Applicant did not file a
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 29, 2008. Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 25 year old employee of a defense contractor.
Applicant used marijuana, with varying frequency, from 1999 through at least
January 1, 2007. He also purchased it.
In about June 2002, applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Possession of
Marijuana and (2) Underage Possession of Alcohol. He was placed in a Diversion
Program and ordered to perform community service.
Applicant executed a Public Trust Position Application (PTPA) in September
2005 and a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (QNSP) in August 2007.
Applicant admitted to marijuana use on both documents.
Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator in March 2007. During the
interview, applicant stated he “has no current plans of stopping usage of marijuana. . . .”
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
At the time the SOR was issued, 10 U.S.C. 986 was the statute that prohibited an unlawful user of a
1
controlled substance from holding a security clearance. On January 1, 2008, this statute was repealed by,
and replaced with, 50 U.S.C. 435 (b). The new statute has the same prohibition.
3
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
The security concern for drug involvement is set forth in Paragraph 24 of the AG,
and is as follows:
Use of an illegal drug . . . can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Paragraph 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying: Under Paragraph 25.a., “any drug abuse” may be disqualifying. Under
Paragraph 25.c., “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution . . .” may be disqualifying. Under Paragraph
25.h., an “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use,” may be disqualifying. Applicant’s use and
purchase of marijuana, and his March 2007 statement that he has no current plans to
stop using marijuana, raise these three disqualifying conditions.
In addition to the AG, current law specifically prohibits the granting of a security
clearance to an “unlawful user of a controlled substance.”  For purposes of this1
prohibition, an “unlawful user of a controlled substance” is a person who uses a
controlled substance and has lost the power of self-control with reference to the use of
the controlled substance, or is a person who is a current user of the controlled
substance in a manner other than as prescribed by a licensed physician. Because the
evidence does not support a finding that applicant has lost his self-control with respect
to his marijuana use, or that he has used marijuana during the past year or so, I
conclude he does not meet the definition of “an unlawful user of a controlled substance.”
Paragraph 32 of the AG sets forth conditions that could mitigate security
concerns. I considered each of them and conclude none apply.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
4
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has used marijuana for
many years. Although he has had the opportunity to foreswear future use of this illegal
drug, he has chosen to do the opposite by stating, in effect, he will continue to use it.
This reflects adversely on his current judgment and reliability. Based on the foregoing, I
conclude that applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from Guideline H.
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
