                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-08038 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 21 past due accounts totaling approximately $109,000. He paid 
five of the debts totaling approximately $55,000, but failed to document payment of the 
remaining 14 debts totaling $40,000. Applicant has failed to successfully mitigate the 
financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 28, 2007, detailing security 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, based on a history of financial 
problems as shown by delinquent debts and Guideline E, personal conduct, for falsified 
material on a Questionnaire for National Security Positions. 
  
 On December 19, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's 
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated February 20, 2008. Applicant was 
sent a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. 
On May 29, 2008, Applicant responded to the FORM. Department Counsel did not 
object to the material. Applicant's response was admitted into the record. On June 9, 
2008, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with explanations the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.t. of the SOR. He denied the factual 
allegations in the remaining paragraphs of the SOR stating a number of the debts were 
duplicates of other listed debts. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance. The admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old software engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 2006, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
Applicant’s mother died of Hodgkin’s lymphoma in 2001 and his father died of 
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma in 2002. Applicant was the primary care giver for his parents 
and moved in with them. During the same time period, Applicant was diagnosed with 
diabetes, which caused him to incur medical expenses. For most of 2002, Applicant left 
work and lived on his retirement savings, which resulted in tax penalties for early 
withdrawal of his retirement funds. Applicant was unemployed in 2003 before moving to 
another state to obtain a job. During the move, most of his financial records were lost 
and Applicant had difficulty in reconstructing his financial record. 
 
Applicant hired a financial specialist to help him resolve his financial liabilities, 
judgments, and incorrect credit report entries. He also hired a tax specialist. Applicant’s 
Federal and state tax liens were paid when he sold his rental property. Applicant 
believes that a number of the entries on his credit report are not his, but belong to 
another individual with a similar name. Other entries were inaccurate. (Item 5)  
 
In response to the financial interrogatories, Applicant submitted copies of a 
residential loan application signed in August 2007. (Item 5) On page 3 of the form under 
“Liabilities” Applicant lists some of the same debts listed in the SOR. Specifically 11 
SOR debts are listed: SOR ¶ 1. b, $8,794 ($8,700 listed on the form); SOR ¶ 1. d, 
$18,211 ($24,862 listed on form); SOR ¶ 1. e, $1,836 ($2,377 listed on the form); SOR 
¶ 1. f, $3,144 (listed twice on the form); SOR ¶ 1. g, $538 ($538 and $3,287 listed on 
 
 
 
3
the form); SOR ¶ 1. h, $139; SOR ¶ 1. k, $124; SOR ¶ 1. p, $148; SOR ¶ 1. q, $279; 
SOR ¶ 1. r, $8,525; and, SOR ¶ 1. s, $122. The documents indicate an application was 
completed. There is no documentation the application was accepted or that payment of 
the listed obligations was made.  
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he asserts a financial service company was 
either disputing or negotiating with a number of the creditors. Applicant failed to 
document any outcome from disputes or negotiations on his behalf. He also asserts a 
number of the debts were removed from his credit report, but provided no credit report 
documenting the removal.  
 
In the sale of the rental property, the debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.b. ($8,794), SOR ¶ 
1.n. ($2,838), and the state tax lien listed in both SOR ¶ 1.o. ($12,606) and SOR ¶ 1.t. 
($21,946) were paid. (See answer to SOR, Answer to FORM) The creditor in SOR ¶ 
1.d. ($18,211) is considering Applicant offer to settle for $9,105. The creditor in SOR ¶ 
1.m. ($14,816) has offered to settle the debt for $3,012. (Answer to FORM) There is no 
indication Applicant has accepted the offer or made payment in compliance with the 
offer.  
 
In October 2007, Applicant completed a monthly personal financial statement 
showing net monthly income of $9,952 and a net monthly remainder of $6,387. His 
annual yearly income was in excess of $120,000. (Item  5) Applicant owns a home 
worth $275,000 on which is owes $174,000. (Item  5) 
 
The SOR alleges 21 delinquent accounts totaling $109,000. Applicant has paid 
five debt totaling approximately $55,000. He indicates a number of the other debts have 
been paid, are duplicate debts, or have been removed from his credit report. However, 
no documentation supporting his assertions was provided. There is no evidence that 14 
debts totaling $40,000 have been paid. A summary of the SOR debt follows: 
  
 
 
Creditor 
 
Amount  
 
Current Status 
 
a 
 
Credit card. 
 
 
$2,367 
 
In October 2007, Applicant stated a financial 
service firm was negotiating a lesser pay off. In 
his answer to SOR, he states the debt was 
removed from his credit report, but provided no 
documentation.  
 
b 
 
Debt admitted by 
Applicant.  
 
$8,794 
 
Paid 11/21/07 as shown in Settlement 
Statement. Applicant had disputed the debt as 
shown on his credit report. (Item 8) 
 
c 
 
Credit Card.  
 
 
$7,215 
 
Applicant asserts this debt is a duplication of 
1.a, but fails to document the same. In response 
to SOR, states it was removed from his credit 
report, but provided no documentation.  
 
 
 
4
 
  
d 
 
Credit card.  
 
 
$18,211 
 
The creditor’s law firm is considering Applicant’s 
settlement offer of $9,105. (Answer to FORM, 
page 11) Applicant asserts this debt is a 
duplication of 1.m, but provides no 
documentation supporting his assertion. 
Applicant had disputed the debt as shown on 
his credit report. (Item 8) 
 
e 
 
Collection agency.  
 
 
$1,836 
 
Listed in Item 5. Applicant asserts it was paid, 
but provided no documentation. He asserts it 
was removed from his credit report, but provides 
no documentation supporting his assertion. 
 
f 
 
Collection agency. 
 
 
$3,144 
 
Listed in Item 5. Applicant asserts it was 
removed from his credit report, but provides no 
documentation supporting his assertion. 
 
g 
 
Department store 
account.  
 
 
$538 
 
Listed in Item 5. Applicant asserts it was 
removed from his credit report, but provides no 
documentation supporting his assertion. 
 
h 
 
Medical account 
 
 
$139 
 
Applicant asserts this debt was paid, but listed it 
under “Liabilities” in Item 5. 
 
i 
 
Medical account 
 
 
$79 
 
Applicant asserts this debt is a duplication, but 
listed it under “Liabilities” in Item 5. 
 
j 
 
Civil judgment filed 
in September 2002. 
(Item 6) 
 
 
 
$5706  
 
In October 2007, Applicant stated a financial 
service firm was negotiating a lesser pay off. In 
his SOR answer, he states it was removed from 
his credit report, but provided no 
documentation.  
 
k 
 
Medical account 
 
 
$124 
 
Applicant asserts this debt is a duplication but 
listed it under “Liabilities” in Item 5. 
 
l 
 
Medical account 
 
 
$113 
 
Applicant asserts this debt is a duplication of 
1.a, but fails to document the same. 
 
m 
 
Admits credit card 
debt. 
 
$14,816 
 
Creditor has offered to settle for $3,012. 
(Answer to FORM, page 10)  
 
n 
 
Civil judgment filed 
in November 2006. 
(Item 6) 
 
$2,838 
 
Judgment paid 11/21/07 as shown in Settlement 
Statement. 
 
 
 
 
 
5
  
o 
 
State tax lien filed 
in June 2005. (Item 
) 6
 
$12,606 
 
PAID. $7,024 paid 11/21/07 as shown in 
Settlement Statement. 
 
p 
 
Medical account 
 
 
$148 
 
Applicant disputes the amount owed. Applicant 
asserts this debt is a duplication, but listed it 
under “Liabilities” in Item 5. 
 
q 
 
Medical Account 
 
 
$279 
 
Applicant disputes the amount. Applicant 
asserts this debt is a duplication, but listed it 
under “Liabilities” in Item 5. 
 
r 
 
Civil judgment filed 
in November 2006. 
(Item 6)  
 
$8,525 
 
Paid. Duplication of 1.b. Paid 11/21/07 as 
shown in Settlement Statement. 
 
s 
 
Medical account. 
 
 
$122 
 
Applicant disputes the amount. Applicant 
asserts this debt is a duplication, but listed it 
under “Liabilities” in Item 5. 
 
t 
 
State tax lien filed 
in April 2007. (Item 
) 6
 
$21,946 
 
PAID. Lien Release dated November 14, 2007. 
 
u 
 
Driver Adj 
 
 
$75 
 
Asserts this utility bill as paid at closing of his 
duplex in April 2007. Currently disputing the 
debt. It does not appear on any of his credit 
reports. (Items 7 and 8) 
 
 
 
 
 
$109621 
 
Total debt listed in SOR 
 
On November 17, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), a Standard Form (SF) 86. (Item 4) In response to 
question 27 concerning his financial record he listed a $2,838 judgment entered in 
2005, a $12,606 state tax lien in 2005, and a $8,201 federal tax lien in 2002. He states: 
 
I have incurred multiple negative entries on my credit rating during the 
time frame I was caring for both my Mother and Fathers (sic) cancer 
treatments and subsequent deaths. . . During the time frame of about 
1998 through 2002 I did not pay particular attention to my finances like I 
should have as I was just to (sic) pre-occupied with caring for my Mom 
and Dad. I am now working with my creditors to finalize balances due and 
payoff thee balances.  
 
Applicant failed to state he had ever been more than 180 delinquent on any debt 
or was currently more than 90 days delinquent on any debt, but did state, “[b]ack in 
1998-1999 I had a credit card account with [bank] that fell behind more than 180 days    
 
 
 
6
. . . I am currently disputing the amount owed. . . “ 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
7
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He owed 21 delinquent debts 
totaling $109,000. Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his SF 86 
(Item 4), his credit reports (Items 7 and 8), the record of his judgments and recorded 
liens (Item 6), and in his residential loan application (Item 5) Throughout this process, 
he admitted responsibility for a number of the delinquent debs. He provided insufficient 
documentation to show payment of other delinquent debts. The government established 
the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” 
and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 
 
 
8
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant disputes owing a $75 utility bill (SOR & 1.u). The record fails to show 
this debt is owed. I find for Applicant as to SOR & 1.u. 
 
Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by his parent’s death, he being 
the primary care giver for his parents before their deaths, and his diabetes. This 
occurred between 1998 and 2002. His parent’s deaths are events that will not recur, 
however, the debts do not appear to be related to the deaths other than he was 
preoccupied with more important matters. Only seven of the debts, totaling $1,000, 
were medically related. AG ¶ 20(a) has limited applicability.  
 
The death of Applicant’s parents is something beyond one’s control, however, it 
has been over five years since their death. It is understandable Applicant’s finances 
were placed behind the more important task of primary care giver for his parents.  
Applicant has acted responsibly in paying $55,000 on the five debts paid. However, 
there is no documentation that 14 debts totaling $40,000 have been paid, which fails to 
show responsible action. The applicability of AG & 20(b) is only partial.  
 
Applicant has obtained the assistance of two tax specialists and was able to pay 
all past due tax obligations and the tax liens were satisfied. He also obtained the 
services of a financial specialist for his other debts. There is no showing of financial 
counseling. More important with no evidence of payment of the $40,000 of debt, 
Applicant fails to show the problem is under control or being resolved. AG & 20(c) does 
not apply.  
 
Applicant has paid five of the debts. AG & 20(d) clearly applies to these debts. 
Another creditor (SOR & 1.m) has offered to settle a $14,816 debt for $3,000. However, 
there is no evidence the offer was accepted or payment made in compliance with the 
offer. AG & 20(d) does not apply to the 14 unpaid debts.  
 
The two debts Applicant disputed, as evidenced by his credit report (Item 8), he 
 
 
 
9
either paid or made an offer to pay. AG & 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline E, personal conduct, the concern is conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. AG ¶ 15. 
 
The allegations under Guideline E, Personal Conduct are unfounded. The 
Government has shown Applicant's answer to questions 27 and 29 were incomplete, 
but this does not prove the Applicant deliberately failed to disclose information about his 
finances. Applicant has denied intentional falsification. Deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement 
to the Government when applying for a security clearance is a security concern. But 
every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and 
material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully.  
 
The purpose of the questionnaire is to inform the government of any adverse 
areas in Applicant’s background. Applicant’s responses on his SF 86 gave adequate 
notice that he had multiple negative entries on his credit report and had not giving his 
finances the proper care necessary when he acted as his parent’s primary care giver 
when they were diagnoses and deaths. In response to question 27 concerning his 
finances, he listed a judgment and two tax liens.  
 
These entries would have put any investigator on notice that Applicant had 
financial problems and Applicant’s financial background needed to be closely reviewed. 
Applicant was not attempting to hide his financial problems. I am satisfied he did not 
intentionally falsify his SF 86. Accordingly, I find for Applicant as to the personal conduct 
security concern.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
 
10
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. From the record it is not possible to 
determine the debts incurred were not the type indicating poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, or that money was not 
spent frivolously. The record does show the two of the largest debt set forth in the SOR 
were not incurred on luxuries, but were state tax liens.  
 
Applicant’s biggest problem is the record. He indicates a number of the debts 
have been paid, are duplicate debts, or have been removed from his credit report. 
However, he provided no documentation supporting his asserts. There is no evidence 
that the14 debts totaling $40,000 have been paid or were duplicates of any other debts.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a life time 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under the Applicant=s current circumstances a clearance is not 
recommended, but should the Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a 
security clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established 
compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise suitably addressed the obligations, he 
may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a 
clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
 To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the financial considerations security concern. Applicant did not meet his 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does not support a favorable decision.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F, Financial:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant    
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
11
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant    
 Subparagraph 1.o:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:    For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E, Personal Conduct: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
