                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17131 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Fahryn E. Hoffman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Taiwan and is a naturalized U.S. citizen, who has lived in 
the United States since 1989. Applicant’s parents, two siblings, and in-laws are citizens 
and residents of Taiwan. He has substantially more connections to the United States 
than to Taiwan. In Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 20, 2008, detailing security 
concerns under Foreign Influence. 
 
 On March 10, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
May 2, 2008, I was assigned the case. On May 7, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing held on May 21, 2008. The government offered Exhibits 
(Ex.) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and submitted Exhibits A through D, which were admitted into evidence. The 
record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional matters. On May 22, 2008, 
an additional document was received. There being no objection, the material was 
admitted into evidence as Ex. E. On June 5, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Taiwan. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) I─VII. 
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a – d of 
the SOR supported a violation of Guideline B, Foreign Influence. 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old principal systems engineer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since May 1995, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Co-
workers state Applicant is extremely trustworthy and honest, diligent, caring, intelligent, 
innovative, dependable, hard-working, dedicated, extremely organized, mission 
oriented, and a person of honor and integrity. (Ex. A) 
 
 In 1965, Applicant was born in Taiwan, Republic of China (ROC). In July 1989, 
Applicant married his wife who was a native of Taiwan. From August 1989 to August 
1994, he attended a U.S. state university receiving a Master of Science degree in 
August 1991 and his PhD. in August 1994. While obtaining his PhD, Applicant decided 
he wished to stay permanently in the U.S. (Tr. 31) In December 2004, both Applicant 
and his wife became naturalized U.S. citizens. (Ex. 1) They have two children, ages 15 
and 17, both born in the U.S. (Tr. 42) Applicant’s sister-in-law, a U.S. citizen, lives in the 
U.S. (Tr. 43, 44)  
 
 Applicant’s parents, brother, and sister are citizens and residents of Taiwan, as 
are his father-in-law and mother-in-law. Applicant calls his father, who is retired school 
teacher, and his mother, a homemaker, once a month or every other month. (Tr. 26, 65) 
Applicant calls his brother and sister two or three times a year. His brother owns a 
construction company. His sister is a homemaker married to a marketing manager for a 
private company. (Tr. 27, 63) Applicant’s father-in-law is a retired elementary principal 
 
 
 
3
and his mother-in-law, a retired elementary school teacher. Applicant has telephone 
contact with them once a year, usually at Chinese New Year. (Ex. 3, Tr. 28) None of his 
relatives or in-laws have ever been affiliated with a foreign government. 
 
 In the past 15 years, Applicant has traveled to Taiwan twice, once in December 
1997 and again in 2007. (Tr. 28) In June 2007, Applicant spent 10 days in Taiwan 
visiting his parents. His father was celebrating his 80th birthday. (Tr. 29) Applicant had a 
Taiwanese passport that expired in December 2004, which he returned to the 
Taiwanese authorities. (Tr. 54) Since becoming a U.S. citizen, the only passport he has 
used is his U.S. passport. (Ex 3, Ex. C) 
 
 All of Applicant’s financial interests are in the U.S. (Tr. 16, 29) Applicant has 
$215,000 in his company’s retirement saving plan, $38,000 with an investment 
company, and $18,000 in another fund, all in the U.S. (Ex B, 21) The assessed value of 
his home is $167,000 on which he pays $1,000 per month. (Ex. B, Tr. 21) He has 
$8,000 in his checking account and also maintains certificates of deposit in the U.S. (Tr. 
37)  
 
 When Applicant became a U.S. citizen, he swore under oath his sole allegiance 
was to the U.S. (Tr. 17, 81) In May 2008, Applicant applied for and was granted a 
certificate of termination of his Taiwan citizenship. (Ex. D, Ex. E) 
 
TAIWAN 
 
Taiwan is a stable democracy with a strong and well-developed economy. (HEx. 
l, Background Note: Taiwan) Taiwan is a multi-party democracy with significant 
economic contacts with China. (HEx. III, Taiwan: Recent Developments and U.S. Policy 
Choices) Taiwan has been a close U.S. alley for many decades and retains strong 
mutual strategic interest with the U.S. for both defense and commercial trade. The 
Taiwan Relations Act signed in 1979 states the U.S. commitment to maintain Taiwan 
defense capability. In 2007, the U.S. announced military sales of $2.2 billion to Taiwan. 
Taiwan is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence and proprietary 
information. (HEx. V. Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage 2000) Although contact with Taiwan may seem to be relatively 
innocuous, it cannot be dismissed without some degree of caution and scrutiny.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
 
 
 
4
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
 
 
 
5
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG & 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual=s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual=s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s parents, siblings, and in-laws are citizens and residents of Taiwan. 
Twice in the last 15 years, he has visited Taiwan. In 1989, Applicant moved to the U.S., 
where he obtained master’s degree and PhD. In 2004, he and his wife became U.S. 
citizens. Both of his children are U.S. citizens having been born in the U.S. Applicant 
has no foreign assets or foreign business interests, and his U.S. assets are in excess of 
$450,000. Applicant has significant ties to the U.S. and none to Taiwan other than his 
parents, brother, and sister living there. None of his relatives or their spouses have 
connections with any foreign government. 
 
Having considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, applicable 
conditions that could possibly raise a security concern are AG & 7(a) and AG & 7(b). 
 
AG & 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of 
loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
 
 
 
6
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
 (f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual.  
 
In every case where parents and siblings live overseas, there is a risk of 
pressure on the relatives and through them upon the holder of a security clearance. 
Under the facts of this case, a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation pressure, or coercion is substantiated. However, Applicant has more 
significant ties to the U.S. than to Taiwan. While he still has parents, two siblings, and 
in-laws living in Taiwan, he lives with wife and two children in the U.S. He has no 
financial or property interests in Taiwan. He owns a home in the U.S. and his ties with 
the U.S. are much stronger than his ties with Taiwan. 
 
AG && 8(a) and 8(c) partially apply. Because of his limited contact with his 
brother, sister, and in-laws, “it is unlikely [he] will be place in a position of having to 
choose between the interest of [his siblings and in-laws] and the interest of the U.S.” His 
infrequent contacts (once or twice a year) and a not particularly close relationship with 
them have a very low potential for forcing him to choose between the United States and 
Taiwan. He met his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationship with 
his brother, sister, and in-law] could create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
Even though Applicant has limited contact with his parents having visited them in 
Taiwan only twice in the last 15 years, with the most recent visit due to his father’s 80th 
birthday, the contact is not considered casual because it is with his parents and siblings. 
However, there is “little likelihood that [his parents] could create a risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation.”  
 
AG & 8(b) fully applies. There is no evidence that his parents, siblings, or in-laws 
are or have been a political activist, challenging the policies of the Taiwanese 
Government. There is no evidence they currently work or ever worked for the 
Taiwanese Government, military, or news media, or that of any other foreign 
government. There is no evidence that the Taiwanese Government has approached or 
threatened Applicant or his relatives or in-laws for any reason. There is no evidence that 
his parents, siblings, or in-laws living in Taiwan currently engage in activities which 
would bring attention to them or that the Taiwanese government is even aware of 
Applicant’s work. As such, there is a reduced possibility that his relatives, in-laws, or 
Applicant would be targets for coercion or exploitation. 
 
AG & 8(f) partially applies because he has no interest in property in Taiwan and 
he has significant U.S. property and assets. These mitigating conditions taken together 
are sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
7
Applicant has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
U.S., [he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” Applicant and his wife came to the U.S. in 1989 and became U.S. citizens in 
2004. Applicant attended U.S. schools to obtain his master’s degree and his PhD. He 
worked for a defense contractor since 1995.  
 
There is little likelihood that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of the U.S. and a foreign entity. Likewise, because of his 
close ties and his loyalties to the U.S. he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Taiwan and the burden an 
Applicant carries when he has family members in a foreign country.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Taiwan and the burden an 
Applicant carries when he has family members in a foreign country. Additionally, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Taiwan and almost 20 
years ago, he came to the U.S. to pursue his education. Applicant has returned twice in 
the last 15 years. He has been working for the same contractor for 16 years. He is an 
established, highly-regarded engineer, with considerable U.S. ties and assets. His 
 
 
 
8
parents and in-law are retired. His brother’s and sister’s jobs are not connected to any 
foreign government. Applicant is a man of integrity and trustworthiness who is loyal to 
the U.S. He takes seriously his pledge of sole allegiance to the U.S., taken when he 
became a U.S. citizen.  
 
Taiwan has been a close U.S. ally for many decades and retains strong mutual 
strategic interests with the U.S for both defense and commercial trade. Taiwan would be 
taking a huge risk to coerce its own citizens in an attempt to force a U.S. citizen to 
commit espionage. It is unlikely Applicant relatives in Taiwan would be placed in a 
position to coerce Applicant and it is also unlikely Applicant would ever be put into a 
position of having to choose between the interests of Taiwan and the interest of the U.S.  
 
These facts reduce any potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
Applicant was sincere, open, and honest at the hearing. In the unlikely event that his 
relatives were subjected to coercion or duress, I find that with Applicant’s deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties to the U.S., including his uncompromising 
commitment to the U.S., his wife, and children, Applicant would resolve any attempt to 
exert pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the U.S. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
