  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-13545
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on February 29, 2008. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of
financial problems. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided for Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant’s response to the SOR was received on March 25, 2008, and she
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 6, 2008. The hearing took
place as scheduled on June 25, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 3, 2008.
The record was left open until July 18, 2008, to allow Applicant an opportunity to
submit additional documentary evidence. She did so, and those matters are admitted,
without objections, as follows: (1) Exhibit D–cover letter; (2) Exhibit E–divorce decree;
(3) Exhibit F–recent pay stub; (4) Exhibit G–401(k) account information; and (5) Exhibit
H–proof of payment for the gas bill in collection. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges four delinquent debts for a total of about
$41,000. The delinquent debts consist of a collection account for a gas bill and three
charged-off credit card accounts. In her Answer, she admitted the debts and provided a
one-page letter explaining the circumstances surrounding the debts. In addition, the
following facts are established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked as a
Unix system administrator for this company since March 2007. She is seeking to obtain
an industrial security clearance for the first time.   
She married in 1994 at age 18, and she divorced in 2005 (Exhibit E). She is
raising three children, ages 13, 6, and 3, without the benefit of child support as her ex-
husband stopped making $1,781 monthly payments in about July 2006. She attributes
the divorce to her husband’s infidelity and abuse of alcohol and drugs (Tr. 45). She
relocated to her current state of residence in 2006. In her Answer, she described the
circumstances of her relocation as follows:
In the summer of 2005, my marriage ended. In the summer of 2006 my
ex-husband became abusive and for safety reasons I quit my job and
moved to [State A]. Literally, woke up one morning, quit job, packed two
boxes, loaded my car and moved to [State A]. I have been rebuilding ever
since. It took 2 months to find another job and it wasn’t at the same pay
level. I had to start at the bottom again and work my way back up. Things
are finally starting to turn around. I’m back in school finishing up my
3
bachelor’s degree. The debt in question will be paid off. Granted, it’s not
something that will happen over night. It will take time to correct.
In her hearing testimony, she clarified her admissions in that she was disputing
responsibility for the collection account and one of the charged-off credit card accounts.
She took responsibility for the other two charged-off credit card accounts. Each debt is
discussed below.
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a $402 collection account for a gas bill. It stems from an
account that was in Applicant’s name when she occupied the marital home before and
after the divorce. Her ex-husband moved into the home after her relocation, and he
informed Applicant that the account had been taken care of (Tr. 30–31). Her post-
hearing exhibit shows the account is paid in full (Exhibit H). 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is a $13,582 charged-off credit card account. This is
Applicant’s account and she is making monthly payments on it through a collection
agency (Tr. 31, 36–38; Exhibit A). The account became delinquent when she relocated
and was unemployed for about two months in 2006. 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is a $12,297 charged-off credit card account. This account
is the responsibility of her ex-husband, and Applicant is not making payments on it (Tr.
31). The account was made the ex-husband’s responsibility in the divorce decree (Tr.
41–42). She has had no collection activity on this debt. She was unable to obtain
information about the account because it is in her ex-husband’s name, and so the
creditor would not speak to her about it (Tr. 42; Exhibit D). 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is a $14,994 charged-off credit card account. This is
Applicant’s account and she is making monthly payments on it through a collection
agency (Tr. 31, 38–39; Exhibit A). The account became delinquent when she relocated
and was unemployed for about two months in 2006. 
Applicant presented a written monthly budget and supplemented it with her
testimony (Exhibit B; Tr. 39). She has a monthly remainder of about $200 after paying
all expenses, including the payments for the two charged-off accounts. The budget is
fairly comprehensive and it shows she is not engaging in high living or frivolous
spending. For example, her monthly payment for an auto loan is a modest $220.
Her current annual salary is about $42,000 (Exhibit F). She plans to increase it
(perhaps double it) when she completes her bachelor’s degree in two years or so (Tr.
48–49). She recently returned to college to improve her job qualifications and earning
power, and she is earning high grades (Exhibit C). She is paying tuition and other
expenses with a Pell grant and reimbursement by her employer.  
Applicant’s overall financial condition is relatively stable, as shown by her
monthly budget and financial assets. She has about $3,000 in a savings account and
about $1,100 in a checking account (Tr. 39–40). In addition, she has about $7,100 in a
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
4
401(k) account (Exhibit G). She is in good standing with her federal and state tax
obligations, and she has had no collection activity for any accounts except for the two
charged-off debts she is paying off (Tr. 56–57). In addition, she is hopeful her income
will soon increase by the resumption of child-support payments (Exhibit D). When she
contacted the clerk of court to obtain a copy of the divorce decree, she was put in
contact with a person to activate child-support payments. Applicant was informed that
she should start receiving child support within two weeks of June 26, 2008.  
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any5
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order6
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at p. 13. 15
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 16
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 17
5
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. A decision to deny or revoke a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically14
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be15
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. Her history of financial problems is a security concern because it
indicates inability (not unwillingness) to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting16
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence is more17
than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions.
 Revised Guidelines at 14.18
 Revised Guidelines at 14. 19
 Revised Guidelines at 14. 20
6
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns. The most pertinent here is MC 2, which provides as follows:
The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.  18
 
Applicant receives the full benefit of MC 2. Her financial problems are directly
related to a combination of conditions largely beyond her control: (1) the divorce in
2005; (2) the sudden relocation in 2006, which was followed by two months of
unemployment; (3) new employment in 2006 at lower wages; and (4) nonpayment of
child support since July 2006. In addition to the conditions beyond her control, Applicant
acted responsibly under the circumstances when she relocated to remove herself from
an abusive and unsafe situation. Also, she demonstrated responsibility by obtaining
employment within a couple of months of relocating and by seeking further education to
improve her earning power and job qualifications.   
Another relevant condition is MC 4, which provides as follows:
The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.19
MC 4 applies in Applicant’s favor for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d. The
gas bill is paid in full, and she  initiated efforts to repay two of the charged-off credit card
accounts (Exhibit A). She is doing so with monthly payments.
And the third relevant condition is MC 5, which provides as follows:
The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions taken to resolve the issue.20
MC 5 applies in Applicant’s favor for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. She credibly
explained why she is disputing responsibility for the charged-off credit card account. It is
her ex-husband’s account, and she was unable to obtain information on it because she
is not an account holder (Tr. 42). Also, she provided documented proof (the divorce
decree) showing that her ex-husband is responsible for any credit card debt separately
incurred by him (Exhibit E). 
7
This case presents both unfavorable and favorable evidence, which requires
thoughtful balancing in light of the whole-person concept and the clearly-consistent
standard. I have considered the totality of facts and circumstances and conclude the
favorable evidence is more persuasive. The evidence shows that in all likelihood
Applicant would have never experienced the financial problems but for her divorce in
2005 followed by the sudden relocation in 2006. Her situation was made more difficult
by unemployment for two months in 2006 and nonpayment of child support since July
2006. Cumulatively, these circumstances had a profound effect on Applicant’s overall
financial condition. To her credit, she is rebuilding her life, to include her financial
record, and her circumstances are improving.   
In addition, despite the difficult circumstances, the evidence in no way suggests
Applicant engaged in illegal activities to generate funds, which is a concern under
Guideline F. Instead, the evidence shows that Applicant has demonstrated fortitude in
the face of challenging circumstances that were largely beyond her control. Indeed,
given the challenging circumstances, her overall financial condition is remarkably stable.
And with sufficient time, it appears likely that Applicant will favorably resolve the
remaining indebtedness.
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion to
obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with national interest  to
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
