1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------, -------- -------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-14530
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant first encountered financial problems, after a long and successful career
with a defense contractor, when she bought a house on risky terms at the peak of the
housing boom. Her two home-improvement loans and a credit card became delinquent
before she could sell the house. When the house sold, she applied the proceeds and
obtained a signature loan to repay the remaining debts. She resumed a financially
sound lifestyle renting a home. Based upon a thorough review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted. 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on April 27, 2007. On December 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security
concerns under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
2
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 9, 2008. She answered
the SOR in writing (Answer) on January 22, 2008, and on January 31, 2008, she
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared
to proceed on March 24, 2008, and DOHA assigned the case to me on April 1, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 4, 2008. Although Applicant did not
sign and return her written receipt for the notice of hearing until April 15, 2008, she
acknowledged on the record that she actually received the notice of hearing at least 15
days prior to the hearing. (Tr. at 9.) I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 21,
2008. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and submitted
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were admitted without objection. I granted
Applicant’s request to leave the record open until May 5, 2008, in order for her to submit
additional documents. Department Counsel forwarded Applicant’s submission of those
documents, without objection to their consideration, on May 5, 2008. These documents
were marked AE I, and the record was closed. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) on May 1, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom she has
worked, with a security clearance, for 24 years. She has never married and has no
children. She lives with her sister in a house they rent for $1,725 per month. (GE 1 at §§
2, 11, 13, 14, 26; Tr. at 6; GE 3 at 56.) 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted formerly owing each of the three debts alleged
in SOR ¶ 1, totaling $24,088. She denied that she deliberately falsified answers on her
e-QIP, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2, explaining that she did not realize any of the debts were
90 or 180 days delinquent since she had been making payments toward them as she
was able to do so, and planned to pay them in full when she sold her house. 
The facts of this case are not in dispute. Applicant had a good credit record and
no areas of security concern when she last updated her security clearance in 2001. Her
financial troubles arose when she purchased a house for the first time in July 2005, near
the peak of the housing boom and predatory mortgage lending era. Shortly after buying
the home, she hired Sears to remodel her kitchen, incurring the two loans listed in SOR
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c.  Her mortgage loan was an “80/20" loan, meaning that she was given an
80% first mortgage ($185,600) without mortgage insurance, and borrowed the 20%
down payment ($46,400) as a second mortgage. When equity in the home stopped
rising at the anticipated rate in 2006, the lender invoked some clause in the contract to
require substantially higher monthly payments to cover mortgage insurance. Applicant
and her sister could not afford to regularly pay these increased mortgage payments
3
while staying current on her Sears loans and her unsecured $3,423 credit card debt to
American Express as listed in SOR ¶ 1.a. She made payments as she could, and
decided to sell the house. 
Applicant was in contact with her creditors and attempted to negotiate periodic
payments pending the sale of her home when she planned to pay the debts in full. She
always intended to repay her creditors, and rejected the option of voiding the debts
through bankruptcy. When she completed her e-QIP she believed that the imminent
resolution of these debts meant she did not need to list or disclose them as
delinquencies responsive to questions 28.a or 28.b. The credit bureau reports do not
establish that any of those debts were indeed 90 or 180 days delinquent at the time she
signed her e-QIP. (GE 2; GE 4; AE A; AE B; AE C; AE F; Tr. at 26, 32, 40, 55-57, 64.) 
In October 2007, Applicant succeeded in selling her home and made about
$6,000 after paying off her mortgage balances and associated costs. She then qualified
for and was given a $22,000 signature loan from her credit union. In November 2007,
she used these funds to fully repay the three delinquent debts listed in the SOR. She
has made, and can afford to continue making, her regular $600 monthly loan payments
for this loan. Her reduced housing costs, now that she and her sister are renting again,
are low enough that she has regular surplus monthly income. (Tr. at 35-38, 51-55.)
In AE I, Applicant provided a letter from a long-time colleague attesting to her
reliability, dependability, trustworthiness, and good work performance. She also
included two recent performance appraisals and some informal notes describing these
same characteristics. Applicant’s demeanor during the hearing reflected her earnest
approach to her obligations and determination to avoid any debt problems in the future.
She testified credibly and demonstrated full awareness of how her problems arose and
how to avoid similar issues going forward. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Of these nine different disqualifying conditions, the Government asserted
5
that two were raised by Applicant’s financial circumstances (Tr. at 82.): “(a) inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
The evidence shows that Applicant, as recently as October 2007, was delinquent
in paying the three SOR-listed debts totaling about $24,000. These delinquencies arose
because her mortgage lender sharply increased her monthly mortgage payments when
housing prices stopped rapidly rising. Although she was temporarily unable to repay
these debts, she remained in contact with the lenders and made prompt efforts to sell
the house to permit repayment of her mortgage and other debt. The record establishes
a long history of financial responsibility with a temporary, 18 to 24 month period when
she was unable to repay some of her debts on time. She was never unwilling to repay
the debts. Of the three delinquent debts, two of them, comprising 86% of the total
amount, were home improvement loans taken out in connection with purchasing
Applicant’s former home. At the time these debts were incurred, they were widely
considered to be wise investments in what was, until then, a rapidly rising housing
market. When the boom ended, Applicant found herself unable to meet the cash flow
requirements because her lender increased her monthly payments. This relatively brief
period of inability to pay some debts, and short history of not meeting some financial
obligations raise only minor security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The four
potentially pertinent conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant did not dispute the debts in question (¶ 20(e)), nor is there any concern about
unexplained affluence (¶ 20(f)). 
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose solely because she, like many others at the
time, thought it would be a good investment to buy a home. She entered into a highly
risky mortgage arrangement, which went bad when housing prices peaked. This was
6
not an unreasonable judgment at the time and, having been burned once, she is most
unlikely to take such risk again (¶ 20(a)). The housing downturn was entirely beyond
Applicant’s control, was not foreseen by investors far more sophisticated in such
matters that she is, and her decision to sell the house and liquidate her debts was highly
responsible under the circumstances (¶ 20 (b)). Although Applicant did not need or seek
financial counseling, there are crystal-clear indications that she resolved the problem by
repaying all the debt and her current financial situation is under control (¶ 20(c)). Finally,
she did make a good-faith effort and repaid all overdue creditors. Her present loan
repayments on her new signature loan are current and fit easily within her monthly
budget (¶ 20(d)). Taken together, Applicant’s actions, all of which were undertaken
before issuance of the SOR, fully mitigate the minimal security concerns raised by her
temporary period of financial over-extension that ended when she sold her house.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The disqualifying condition alleged in the SOR and raised by the evidence
in this case is:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Given Applicant’s level of financial and legal sophistication, and the absence of
any security issues arising in her many prior clearance proceedings, she testified
credibly that she did not understand that she was incorrectly answering the two finance-
related questions listed in SOR ¶ 2. She now understands that she should have
checked the details more thoroughly and reported any responsive delinquencies. Based
on the evidence, including her demeanor and testimony, I conclude that she did not
deliberately omit responsive information in an attempt to conceal it and deceive the
Government about its existence. Accordingly, I find no substantial evidence that she
deliberately falsified or omitted information on her e-QIP security clearance application
with respect to the delinquencies noted in the SOR, even if they were, in fact, debts that
qualified for disclosure under the respective questions.
7
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern was a temporary period of financial over-extension brought about due to the
unforeseen housing downturn. Applicant is a mature, experienced adult who is
accountable for her decisions and conduct, and has performed her duties at work very
well for a long time.  She properly responded to her financial set-back by selling her
home and cutting her losses. She has repaid all delinquent debts and is again living in a
financially responsible manner. There is no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation
or duress since she acted responsibly under the circumstances, and is no longer
financially overextended. 
Applicant’s good reputation and performance at work is commendable, and
further mitigates any security concerns arising from her temporary financial hardship.
She has no delinquent debt, and has no intention of incurring additional debt in the
foreseeable future. She acted responsibly to keep her mortgage payments current at
the temporary expense of her other debts, thereby protecting her most important asset
and permitting her to favorably resolve the situation. She remained in communication
with her creditors, and her actions under the circumstances demonstrated honesty,
trustworthiness and good judgment.
On balance, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns
arising from her temporary inability to satisfy debts, and relatively brief history of not
meeting financial obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves no doubt as to
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has fully mitigated personal conduct and financial
considerations security concerns. 
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:           FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:                                 For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b:                                 For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
