1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11833
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On February 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F, financial considerations, and E, personal conduct. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 10, 2008, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on April 10, 2008. On April 30, 2008, a hearing was
scheduled for May 29, 2008. During the hearing, which was held as scheduled, I
received five government exhibits, 20 Applicant exhibits, marked A through T, and the
testimony of Applicant. At the close of the hearing, I left the record open at Applicant’s
request to allow him to submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted
As Applicant and his first wife grew estranged, they increasingly failed to communicate with one another.1
2
another exhibit, which I incorporated into the record. The transcript was received on
June 16, 2008. Based upon a review of the record, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old, married man with two children ages 23 and 17. His
first marriage ended in divorce in 2002 after a two-year separation. He married his
current wife later that year.
In 2000, Applicant retired from the U.S. Army after 24 years of service. He served
the first nine years in active duty, and retired as a sergeant first-class (E-7). He has an
associate’s degree in theology, and is currently working toward a bachelor’s degree in
theology and business (Tr. 20).
Applicant works for a defense contractor as a logistics specialist. His duties
involve testing, issuing, and distributing communications data to the armed services
(Id.).
Applicant works part-time as an assistant minister for a local church. Also, he
mentors troubled youth that are referred to him by the local court system, attempting to
“develop them from boyhood to manhood to try to assist them into just doing the right
things within the community” (Tr. 62). 
Since 1999, Applicant has accrued eight financial delinquencies, as listed in the
SOR, in the approximate amount of $26,000. Approximately $19,300, as alleged in SOR
subparagraph 1.g, represents a tax lien for tax years 1999 and 2001. Through the
1990s, Applicant and his first wife filed joint income taxes. In 1999, his first wife, without
his knowledge, withdrew $20,000 from her 401(k) account.  This triggered an1
unexpectedly high tax debt, which they were unable to satisfy when due (Tr. 43).
In approximately 2000, Applicant started a church (Tr. 35). He used much of his
personal income to finance its start-up costs and operation. The venture was ultimately
unsuccessful.
In 2001, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audited his tax returns for the
church. After the audit, the IRS concluded that he owed approximately $1,600. Before
the audit, Applicant anticipated receiving a refund (Tr. 35). He was unable to satisfy the
debt on time.
Since 2001, the IRS has been applying Applicant’s yearly tax refunds to the
delinquency. By December 2007, he owed approximately $15,600. Through
negotiations, Applicant obtained a $6,000 abatement of interest and penalties, and in
May 2006, the IRS applied his 2007 tax refund ($3,161) to the delinquency (Exhibit T).
Applicant satisfied a loan used to purchase furniture, a debt not alleged in the SOR. Also, his car loan payments2
have decreased by approximately $130 monthly.
3
Currently, Applicant owes approximately $1,300 for tax year 1999 and $2,900 for tax
year 2001 (Exhibit T). He has applied for a loan against his 401(k) plan with the
intention of using the loan money to satisfy the tax delinquency. As of the date of the
hearing, the loan application had been approved (Tr. 37).
The remainder of the SOR delinquencies include four medical bills stemming
from a 2005 rotator cuff surgery which disabled him from working for six months (SOR
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d ), two utilities (SOR subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f), and a
veterinary bill Applicant incurred when he adopted a sickly, stray cat (SOR
subparagraph 1.h). In January 2008, he successfully applied for a $10,000
consolidation loan, and used it to begin satisfying these delinquencies (Exhibit C, Tr.
44). He has satisfied all of the delinquencies except SOR subparagraphs 1.b and 1.d,
which total approximately $2,300 (Exhibits C, U). He intends to satisfy them within the
next six months.
Applicant has been paying approximately $115 per month on the consolidation
loan since January 2008 (Tr. 45). He does not anticipate any future problems paying it
because his income has increased slightly in the past year while his monthly credit
payments have recently decreased by approximately $330 monthly  (Compare Tr. 472
and Exhibit 4 at 5).
Applicant did not list the tax lien on his February 2007 security clearance
application, as required. He was aware of the delinquency since its accrual, and the
government had been applying his income tax refunds to its satisfaction since 2001.
Applicant did not know that the government had filed a lien against his property for this
delinquency until some time after completing the security application when the bank
which approved his January 2008 consolidation loan informed him it was on his credit
report (Tr. 40). He answered, “yes” to Section 28 of the security clearance application
regarding whether he had been more than 180 days delinquent on debt payments in the
past seven years, and whether he was currently more than 90 days delinquent on any
debts (Exhibit 1 at 37).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
4
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole
person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(AG ¶ 18). Here, Applicant’s delinquencies, accrued between 1999 and 2006, trigger the
application of AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.”
The majority of Applicant’s delinquencies constitute tax delinquencies accrued in
1999 and 2001, and medical expenses stemming from a surgery in 2005. The 1999 tax
delinquency occurred when his then-wife withdrew $20,000 from her 401k plan without
Applicant’s knowledge, triggering an unexpectedly high tax bill. The 2001 tax
delinquency related to unanticipated tax consequences from the failure of Applicant’s
church. Since 2007, Applicant has negotiated a $6,000 abatement of interest and
penalties, and obtained a loan that he intends to use to satisfy the remainder, which is
currently less than $5,000. 
In January 2008, Applicant obtained a loan that he used to begin satisfying the
medical delinquencies, and the other SOR delinquencies. Only two of these SOR
delinquencies, collectively less than $2,500, are outstanding. Applicant has been
steadily repaying the consolidation loan, and anticipates satisfying the two remaining
delinquencies within the next six months. Since he has consistently addressed his other
past due obligations, I am confident he will address these two debts in the near future.
5
AG ¶¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances,” 20(c), “ . . . there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved or is under control,” and 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” apply.
Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information (AG ¶ 15). Applicant’s security clearance application omission raises the
issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities, “ applies.
In light of Applicant’s disclosure of his other delinquencies in response to other
security clearance application questions regarding his delinquencies, I conclude his
explanation for omitting the tax lien from his security clearance application was credible.
The government has shown Applicant’s answer to Section 27 of the security clearance
application was incorrect, but this does not prove he deliberately failed to disclose
information about his tax lien. Every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. Rather, a
falsification must be deliberate and material. An omission of a tax lien is not deliberate if
the person did not know of its existence. Consequently, because Applicant did not know
of the tax lien when he completed the security clearance application, AG ¶ 16(a) does
not apply, and there are no personal conduct security concerns.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
6
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by circumstances beyond his control.
Since approximately January 2007, he has been resolving them. Because of the
organized, methodical manner in which he confronted his delinquencies, and his
improved financial circumstances, I am confident he will satisfy the minimal remaining
delinquencies. Clearance is granted.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
