 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18604 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Applicant’s Husband, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on May 20, 2008. On February 28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On April 8, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to be proceed on April 16, 
2008. The case was assigned to me on April 21, 2008. On May 5, 2008, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for May 28, 2008. The case was heard on 
that date. The Government offered four exhibits which were admitted as Government 
Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 4 without objection. The Applicant offered two exhibits which were 
admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – B without objection. Applicant and her husband, 
 
2 
 
 
who also served as her personal representative testified.  The record was held open 
until June 18, 2008, to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence.  Applicant timely 
submitted a 13-page document which was admitted as AE C without objection. The 
transcript was received on June 5, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations. 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  She has been employed as a security guard with the 
defense contractor since May 2007. She has an associates degree in applied science.  
She is married. She has three children from a prior marriage, a daughter, age nineteen, 
who has a son, age two; and two sons, ages 17 and 14. Her husband has a son, age 
17, and an 11-year-old daughter who lives with her mother. (Tr at 24-25, 47-48, 64; Gov 
1.)   
On May 20, 2008, Applicant filed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). (Gov 1.) A subsequent background investigation revealed that 
Applicant had the following  delinquent accounts:  a $101 account that was placed for 
collection in October 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a; Gov 3 at 1.); a $4,689 delinquent account placed 
for collection in May 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.b; Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 8.); a $144 satellite 
television account that was placed for collection in October 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.c; Gov 3 at 
1.); a $3,757 department store credit card account that was charged off in July 2006 
(SOR ¶ 1.d; Gov 3 at 1-2; Gov 4 at 10.); and a $3,263 delinquent account that was 
charged off in July 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.e; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 9-10.).  In September 2005, 
Applicant defaulted on her mortgage. Her house was foreclosed in October 2006. (SOR 
¶ 1.f; Gov 4 at 7.)  
 
On July 5, 2005, Applicant filed for divorce from her previous husband.  The 
divorce was final on November 23, 2005. (AE C at 5-11.)  At the time of the divorce, she 
was supporting three children and her grandson.  She had difficulty meeting her 
financial obligations which resulted in her home foreclosure and several delinquent 
accounts. (Tr at 24.) She and her ex-husband also struggled financially as a result of 
periods of unemployment.  Her ex-husband was laid off for three months in November 
2001.  She was laid off in 2002 for about a month. (Tr at 61-63.)      
 
When Applicant discovered that her job required a security clearance she began 
to pay off her debts.  Her current husband holds a clearance and holds a job involving 
security.  He advised her that she needed to resolve her delinquent accounts in order to 
maintain a security clearance. (Tr at 45, 52-53.) It took a few months for her to actually 
start resolving her delinquent accounts because they needed to assess the family 
finances after moving in together. She and her husband keep their finances separate 
because he has good credit.  Her husband has advised her on how to resolve her 
delinquent debt. (Tr at 53 -56.)  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant resolved several accounts that were not alleged in the SOR.  The debts 
include a $59 medical bill; a $24 account; a $683 account. Her student loan was past 
due $181.  Her student loans are now current. (Tr at 17-18; Gov 2.) They paid off 
several of the smaller accounts before dealing with the larger accounts. 
 
The current status of the accounts are:   
 
SOR ¶ 1.a, $101 collection account: Paid off in February 2008. (Tr at 19-20; Gov 
2 at 6, 18.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b, $4,689 collection account: Applicant paid $100 on February 8, 2008 
and on March 8, 2008. (Gov 2 at 10; AE C at 13.) Applicant and the company then 
entered into a settlement agreement. Applicant wrote checks that were provided to the 
collection agency to cash each month. The monthly payment is approximately $377.03 
and will be paid off in February 25, 2009. (Tr at 34-35; AE A at 10.) The first check in 
the amount of $380 was cashed on April 25, 2008. (Tr at 21, 34; AE A at 1, 9-10; AE C 
at 13.)    
 
SOR ¶ 1.c, $144 satellite television collection account: Paid on April 10, 2008.  
(Tr at 21-22, 40-41; AE A at 6.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d, $3,757 charged off department store credit card account: Agreed to 
pay $250 per month. Applicant began making monthly payments in March 2008. Timely  
payments were made in March, April, and May 2008 (Tr at 22-23, 41-43; AE A at 2, 4, 
7-8; AE C at 4.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e, $3,623 charged off account: Agreed to pay $250 per month. 
Payments have been made for March, April and May 2008. The account was a line of 
credit that Applicant and her ex-husband took out in order to satisfy their homeowner’s 
association demands to install a backyard fence and grass. Her ex-husband is not 
paying his half of the account. (Tr at 43-46; AE A at 4; AE C at 4; Gov 2 at 20.)    
 
Applicant’s foreclosed home was sold about six months after she moved out 
(approximately April 2007). She owed $182,000 on the mortgage. The home sold for 
approximately $194,000. She provided her contact information to the mortgage 
company. So far, she has received no notification of a deficiency judgment related to 
the mortgage. (Tr at 24, 63-65.)   
 
In March 2008, Applicant paid off a car loan. As a result, she has $400 in extra 
income each month to apply towards her debts.  Applicant uses her income to pay her 
debts. Her husband pays the household expenses. (Tr at 56-60.) After expenses, to 
include the delinquent accounts where she entered into payment agreements, she has 
approximately $410 left over each month. (AE C at 2.) Her husband has approximately 
$620 left over each month after expenses. He holds a part-time job which brings in an 
extra $650 per month, which is included in the above figure. (AE C at 3.)   
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant pays her daughter’s car insurance, cell phone and occasionally gives 
her money for food. She provides a total of $200 to $250 a month to her daughter. Her 
daughter attends college and is expecting her second child. (Tr at 47-48.) 
 
Applicant is well-regarded at work. The account program manager states that 
Applicant has been an exemplary performer who has volunteered for additional shifts. 
She easily grasps difficult tasks and demonstrates good judgment. She is a valued 
asset to the company and her peers. (AE B at 1.) Her site manager states that she 
demonstrates amazing initiative and dedication.  She displays a high degree of integrity, 
responsibility, and ambition. (AE B at 2.)  Several co-workers comment favorably on her 
integrity, work ethic, trustworthiness, and willingness to help others. (AE B at 3-5.)  In 
April 2008, she received special mention during an Air Force Inspector General 
inspection of the company. (AE B at 6.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
5 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case.  Applicant accumulated several 
delinquent debts. The SOR alleges five debts, an approximate total balance of $12,314. 
After her divorce, she fell behind in her house payments resulting in her home being 
foreclosed in October 2006.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Most of the 
delinquent debts resulted from Applicant’s divorce in 2005.  She has demonstrated her 
reliability and trustworthiness by taking steps to resolve the delinquent accounts. While 
not all the debts are paid, she entered into repayment plans with the accounts that 
remain delinquent and is making payments towards those accounts.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies.  Most of the financial problems 
were the result of Applicant’s 2005 divorce. During their marriage, she and her ex-
husband occasionally encountered financial difficulties due to periodic lay-offs. 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. She paid off the smaller accounts 
and has entered in to repayment plans for the debts that have larger balances. She is 
living within her means. 
  
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant did not attend financial counseling. However, it is 
noted that Applicant’s current husband has been proactive in helping Applicant resolve 
her financial problems. If she continues to follow the terms of her repayment plans, her 
larger debts will be paid off in February 2009. Based on the steps she has taken to 
resolve her delinquent accounts, it is likely her financial situation will be resolved within 
a year.    
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant resolved four debts prior to the 
SOR being issued. She paid two of the accounts and has entered into repayment plans 
with the three remaining debtors. It can take time after a divorce to get one’s financial 
affairs in order.  Once Applicant’s financial situation improved, she initiated a good-faith 
effort to resolve her delinquent accounts.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the favorable 
comments of Applicant’s superiors and co-workers. I considered the impact that her 
2005 divorce had on her financial situation, and her efforts to resolve her delinquent 
 
7 
 
 
accounts. She has mitigated the security concerns raised under financial 
considerations.  
  
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
