1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-13265
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 10,
2006. On March 17, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on May 20, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 30, 2008,
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 19, 2008. The government offered
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 which were received without objection. Applicant testified on
her own behalf. She also submitted Exhibits (AE) A through E. Department Counsel had
no objection to the exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on June
2
27, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, dated April 21, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a- 1.h of the SOR. Applicant provided additional information to
support her request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Applicant graduated
from high school in 1976 (Tr. 31). Applicant has been employed in her current position
since May 1981. She is technical support (assembler) for her employer (Tr. 16). She
also has a seasonal part-time job.
Applicant has been widowed since 2005 (GE 1). She has a grown daughter and
three grandchildren. Applicant married her husband when she was 17 years old. She
and her husband had a difficult marriage due to his drinking problems. Applicant’s
husband was verbally abusive to her. He also had health problems due to his drinking.
Applicant decided to leave her husband and move to another state in November 2001.
She was able to continue her employment with the same company.
Applicant’s financial problems began when she moved out of her husband’s
home to work in another state. They had not paid federal income taxes from 1995 until
1999. He used his money for his drinking habit. Applicant and her husband had
arranged to make payments with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). When Applicant
moved out of the house, her husband stopped making the payments. The IRS
garnished Applicant’s wages in September 2002. The levy was satisfied in May 2003.
All the money was taken from Applicant’s pay check leaving her with a minimal amount.
SOR ¶ 1.a is a garnishment for federal taxes not paid by Applicant and her
husband for the 1995-1999 years. This levy on her wages began in September 2002
and terminated in May 2003.
SOR ¶ 1.b is a medical account for $164. This debt originated with x-rays that
Applicant needed in conjunction with her gall bladder problems. This account is paid
(AE A).
SOR ¶ 1.c is another medical account for $1,090. This debt originated with
Applicant’s emergency surgery for gall bladder problems. The account is paid (AE A). 
SOR ¶ 1.d is an unnamed medical account for $41.25. This account is paid (AE
A). 
SOR ¶ 1.e is a medical account for $143. This account is paid (AE B).
3
SOR ¶ 1.f is for a credit card account that is charged off in the amount of $794.
This account is paid (AE C). 
SOR ¶ 1.g is for a credit card account that is charged off in the amount of $8,530.
Applicant charged hotel, rental car, and other daily expenses when she moved from her
home to another state. This account is not paid (GE 3). 
SOR 1.h is for a charged off account for $1,990. Applicant purchased furniture for
her apartment when she moved out of her home in 2001. This account is not paid.
Applicant completed a thirteen-week financial counseling course. However, she
continues to attend classes until she is debt free. She has a plan to pay off her bills. Not
only is she using the $400 that she has left after expenses, but she is taking any money
that she makes from her part-time job and using that to reduce her debts (Tr. 53). She is
saving money and she uses a budget (Tr. 29). Applicant may take another hardship
loan and pay the largest debt. She is looking for someone to share her apartment to
reduce her rent. She plans to pay the remaining debt in one year. Applicant lives
frugally. After 23 years she finally bought a new car. She is current on her monthly
payment of $166 for her new vehicle. Her credit report confirms that she is in good
standing with other accounts (GE 3).
Applicant’s current monthly net income is approximately $2,601. After monthly
deductions and expenses, she has a net remainder of approximately $400 a month to
help pay her debts (Tr. 53). She now pays her bills as soon as they are due.
Applicant took a hardship loan from her 401(k) retirement money. She used that
money to pay bills. She plans to do another hardship loan so that she can more quickly
pay off her largest remaining debt.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
5
security concerns. Applicant had delinquent debts that total about $13,000. She also
had her wages garnished in 2002 for failure to pay federal income taxes. The evidence
is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial problems were partially a result of her separation from her husband. Since that
time, she has paid the taxes due from her wages. She has also paid all but two of the
debts listed in the SOR. This potentially mitigating condition applies in part. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above,
Applicant’s husband contributed to the financial problems that evolved. Applicant was
steadily employed. She also had some medical problems that resulted in bills. I find that
this mitigating condition applies in part.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant completed a 13-week counseling program and
continues to receive counseling. She paid medical accounts and a charged off credit
account. She borrowed against her retirement funds to pay the credit account. She has
shown good faith with her creditors. I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions
apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c) the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
6
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a hardworking person.
She has been employed for the past 27 years with her employer. She has no incidents
or problems with them. She married quite young and her marriage was a difficult one.
Her husband’s drinking caused financial problems in the marriage. He did not pay
federal taxes for the years 1995-1999. Applicant made an arrangement with the IRS to
pay the taxes, but when she moved out of her husband’s house, he stopped paying the
amount. Applicant’s wages were garnished and the tax levy was completely paid in
2003. She is now widowed and living on her own. She paid several medical accounts
and a charged off credit account. She took a financial planning course and has a budget
and savings. She took a hardship loan to help pay the one credit account. She does not
live beyond her means. She plans to pay the remaining debt with her net monthly
remainder and if necessary, take another hardship loan against her retirement. She has
met her burden of proof in this case to overcome the government’s case. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
