                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12195 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on February 6, 2006. (Item 4)  On March 18, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) for Applicant 
detailing security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1)  The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 15, 2008, admitting all of the 
allegations.  She elected to have the matter decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on May 6, 
2008.  Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on May 15, 2008, 
and was provided the opportunity to file objections, and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions.  Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM or provide additional material.  The case was assigned to me on July 7, 2008.  
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 56 years old and has been a senior administrative secretary for a 
defense contractor for over three years.  She has been divorced for over 14 years after 
24 years of marriage.  She has three children, none living at home.  A personal financial 
statement of November 12, 2007, provided by Applicant in response to Interrogatories, 
shows a monthly income of $3,123, monthly expenses of $2,358, leaving a monthly 
remainder of $765.  Applicant's pay statement shows that she earned over $60,000 in 
2007.  (Item 6)   
 
The SOR lists 13 delinquent debts totaling approximately $22,325.  These debts 
include a medical collection account for $149 (SOR 1.a); a collection account for a 
credit card for $2,547 (SOR 1.b); a collection account for $1,103 (SOR 1.c); a telephone 
account in collection for $100 (SOR 1.d); a telephone collection account for $207 (SOR 
1.e); a credit card debt in collection for approximately $3,000 (SOR 1.f); another credit 
card account charged off for $1,733 (SOR 1.g); a charged off credit card account to the 
same creditor for $1,873 (SOR 1.h); a charged off credit card debt for $2,089 (SOR 1.i); 
a car repossession debt charged off for $7,801 (SOR 1.j); a charged off credit card 
account for $982 (SOR 1.k); a utility account charged off for $96 (SOR 1.l); and a state 
tax lien for $645 (SOR 1.m).  Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in May 1996 
(SOR 1.n), which was dismissed in April 1997 (SOR 1.o). (See, Item 7, Credit Report, 
dated February 27, 2008; Item 8, Credit Report, dated October 14, 2007; and Item 9, 
Credit Report, dated March 7, 2006)   
 
In response to interrogatories, Appellant noted that she was not actively engage 
in her bankruptcy action.  She just wanted to resolve her debts and followed the advice 
of her attorney.  Her state tax lien was to be included in the bankruptcy but was not 
included.  In any event, the debts were not discharged in bankruptcy because the 
petition was dismissed.  Applicant also noted when she moved in November 2001, she 
took a 15% pay cut.  There is no information on why Applicant moved or why she had to 
take a pay cut.  There is no information how the pay cut caused her financial problems.  
She also was unemployed for nine months in 2004.  Applicant did not make the required 
car payment and the car was repossessed.  She did not make payments on her credit 
cards accounts.  She stated she would try to make some payments on some of the 
smaller debts.   
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant noted that the SOR reflects problems with her 
past finances and she has a responsibility to satisfy her obligations.  She had no 
documentation or information to present that would be useful or show payment of debts. 
(Item 3)  However, there is information that the telephone debt listed at SOR 1.d was 
paid.  Some of her creditors also offered her settlement agreements but she did not 
indicate she took advantage of the offers. (Item 6)  Applicant provided no other 
information. 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Consideration: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18)  Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an Applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance.  An Applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  Applicant’s delinquent debts are a security concern raising Financial 
Consideration Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts); FC DC ¶ 19(b) (indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible 
spending and the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt); FC DC ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); and FC DC ¶19(e) (consistent spending beyond one’s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis).  Applicant accumulated delinquent 
debts because of an unwillingness to pay her financial obligations.  The debt total has 
risen over the years with no indication of any attempt to pay the debts.  The debts 
appear to be for normal consumer items which indicate she may be spending beyond 
her means. 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and it does not apply.  Almost all 
of the delinquent debts have not been addressed by Applicant, and they have not been 
paid so they are current debts.  There are a number of delinquent debts from various 
sources so they are not infrequent.  The debts seem to be ordinary credit card debts, 
telephone bills, department store accounts, or loans.  There is no evidence they were 
incurred under unusual circumstances.  Since the debts are current and not paid, they 
cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems 
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation) and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances).  Applicant claims a nine month 
period of unemployment as well as a pay cut when she moved.  However, she 
presented no information on how or why these events impacted her ability to pay her 
debts.  In fact, since she has been gainfully employed by her present contractor for 
almost four years, there has been no attempt to pay past due obligations indicating that 
she is not trying to resolve her indebtedness.  She did not establish she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances, so the mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(a) (the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control).  Applicant presented no information of financial counseling, so this 
mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).  For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay.  A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed.  
Applicant presented no information to show she has a plan to pay the debts or any 
action that she has taken to pay her debts.  Applicant has sufficient income to pay her 
delinquent debts but has not attempted to do so.  Her salary for 2007 was over $60,000, 
and she has a net remainder each month of over $756 that could be used for debt 
reduction.  The only indication of any debt being paid is the one telephone debt which 
seems to be resolved.  Bankruptcy is a legal and permissible means of resolving 
indebtedness.  However, the circumstances of the bankruptcy action can be examined 
to determine any security significance.  The filing of the bankruptcy action in itself does 
not create a security concern.  However, the fact Applicant did not participate in the 
process, and did not complete the action and it was dismissed is another indication of 
her irresponsible and indifferent attitude towards her finances.  There is no indication 
Applicant acted responsibly towards her debts or that the situation is under control.  In 
fact, the opposite seems to be true, her finances are not under control and she has not 
acted responsibly.  The indication is that she just did not pay her debts, and the debts 
continued to accumulate.  There is no indication of a good faith effort to pay creditors or 
resolve debts.  Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for financial considerations. 
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
 
6 
 
 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall 
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole person concept.  
 
 Applicant has not taken action to resolve her past due debts.  Her indifferent 
attitude and lack of actions shows she is not trustworthy, responsible, or exercises good 
judgment.  Applicant has been irresponsible towards her delinquent debts and financial 
obligations.  This is an indication that she might be irresponsible towards the protection 
and handling of classified information.  I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from her finances and personal conduct.  Clearance is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
