1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------,-------- -------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-18010
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has substantial delinquent debt that he cannot afford to repay. He
claimed he would file bankruptcy, but did not provide promised proof that he has done
so. Based upon a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on August 31, 2006. On February 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after
September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 12, 2008. He responded to
the SOR in writing (Answer) on March 28, 2008, and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on April1, 2008. Department Counsel
was prepared to proceed on April 18, 2008, and DOHA assigned the case to me on
April 24, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 24, 2008. Although Applicant did not
sign and return his written receipt for the copy of the notice of hearing that was
forwarded via his employer until May 1, 2008, he acknowledged on the record that he
actually received the copy that was mailed directly to him at least 15 days prior to the
hearing. (Tr. at 11.) I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 13, 2008. Department
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called two other witnesses, and
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection.
I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until June 13, 2008, in order for
him to submit additional documentation. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing
(Tr.) on May 22, 2008.  On June 12, 2008, Applicant submitted a letter from his
bankruptcy attorney to Department Counsel, who forwarded it without objection to its
consideration. These documents were marked AE D, and Applicant did not submit any
further evidence.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor, applying for a
security clearance for the first time. In the Answer, Applicant admitted owing each of the
eight delinquent debts set forth in SOR ¶ 1, totaling $299,046, that first became
delinquent between May 2003 and April 2006. (GE 2 through GE 8.) Applicant’s
admissions are, with one exception, incorporated herein. The exception is that the
$18,195 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.h is the same debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, as $25,562
owing to the collection agency to whom the original credit card issuer transferred the
debt. Accordingly, including both debts improperly inflates the number and total amount
of debt, which should be seven debts totaling $280,851. 
Applicant has worked as a truck driver, and in associated jobs, for many years. In
1987, he and his wife also opened a printing business that was fairly successful. In July
2000, they sold that business to her sister on a loan contract that was meant to provide
them with a retirement income stream. She ran the business into the ground and, by
2003, had sold all the equipment and obtained a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. Some
of the balances on some of the delinquent credit card debt resulted from Applicant and
his wife letting her sister charge expenses to their accounts before the business failed,
but they do not know how much or which cards were involved. (Answer, Tr. at 35, 39-
41, 92-94.) 
Applicant inherited his grandparents’ farm in a rural area of the Midwest. In 2001,
an acquaintance who worked in real estate convinced him and a neighbor that they
should dam the creek between their properties to form a small lake, and subdivide their
3
adjacent properties into ready-to-build lots for sale. He encountered significant
regulatory problems and other unanticipated expenses, combined with disappointing
sales performance of the lots. Finally, in 2004, he turned all of his ownership interests
and associated debt over to another real estate manager, who he had hired to assist
him, in return for one dollar. (Answer; Tr. at 38-39, 60-61, 65-72.) 
In January 2003, Applicant and his wife traded in a fifth-wheel trailer rig in which
they had been living for a motor home they purchased for about $200,000. They
intended to retire and travel while living in the motor home, and wanting ultimately to
move to another state. In August, 2004, after the failures of both the printing business
and land development scheme, they drove the motor home to the other state and
sought work. He finally obtained his present employment in April 2006. They found living
in the motor home  to be extremely expensive and often inconvenient, particularly in the
winter months. They missed a monthly payment on the motor home loan in April 2006,
and the lender refused to enter into a modified payment plan. Instead, they were
threatened with eviction and repossession. In early 2007, they emptied the motor home,
put it in a rented storage facility, and moved into an apartment. Since then, they have
been able to meet their present debt obligations, but unable to save any money or
address their delinquent debt. Although Applicant now earns about $60,000 per year
and his wife has worked as much as she could, they have barely been able to keep up
with living costs. Applicant’s father-in-law became ill and ultimately passed away in early
2008, necessitating several expensive trips back to the Midwest. Applicant also suffered
a two-month period of reduced employment during early 2008 due to a medical
problem, most of the cost of which was covered by his medical insurance. (Answer; GE
2 at 15; Tr. at 54-58, 75-76, 83-91, 103-105.)
Although not listed in the SOR, Applicant now has a recently charged-off
additional credit card delinquency on a Discover card in the amount of $16,512. This
account was reported 30 days past due on his August 16, 2007 credit report, and had
previously been 30 days past due in November 2006. (GE 3 at 10; GE 4 at 9.) The
account was reported as closed by credit grantor in January and April 2008, and as a
charged-off debt in May 2008. (GE 5 at 2; GE 6 at 2; GE 8 at 2.)
Applicant and his wife obtained the required bankruptcy credit counseling in late
March 2008, and met with a bankruptcy attorney on April 1, 2008. The attorney testified
during the hearing that she had advised them concerning their options, and that they
would probably qualify only for Chapter 13 relief, requiring a five-year partial repayment
program. She did not know when she would be ready to file the action, as they had yet
to provide her with complete information. Applicant’s wife testified that the reason they
had not yet filed for bankruptcy was that they could not afford the attorney fees required
to be paid before the action could be filed. After some discussion, Applicant and his wife
decided to seek additional time before the record closed so they could move forward
with the bankruptcy and provide proof thereof. They were granted a month to do so. At
the end of that period, they submitted AE D, a letter from the attorney saying she would
be filing some type of  bankruptcy petition on their behalf within ten days, and would
provide a copy of the court generated transaction report verifying that she had done so.
4
Neither she, nor Applicant, provided any further proof of progress in connection with
bankruptcy proceedings. (Answer; Tr. at 74-82, 86-87, 109-111; AE D.)
Applicant submitted two character-reference letters from former supervisors
attesting to his reliability, dependability, trustworthiness, and good work performance.
(AE A at 4, 5.) He also offered numerous certificates and publications documenting his
successful performance in several demanding and responsible positions. (AE A, first
section; AE B; AE C.) He testified credibly that he would resolve his delinquent debts if
he had the resources to do so, but saw no way to do so given his present financial
situation. (Tr. at 41-42.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
5
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Of these nine different disqualifying conditions, the Government asserted
that three were raised by Applicant’s financial circumstances (Tr. at 97.): 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
The evidence shows that Applicant, during the three years preceding his security
clearance application, incurred at least seven SOR-listed delinquent debts totaling in
excess of $280,000. His monthly net income is barely sufficient to pay his reported
regular living expenses and other debts, which did not include any delinquent debt
repayments. Substantial security concerns are raised under both AG ¶¶ 19(a) and
19(c). There is no evidence that these debts were incurred for frivolous or irresponsible
purchases, so no security concerns under AG ¶ 19(b) are supported by this record. 
6
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from
financial considerations. The four potentially pertinent mitigating conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose over the last five years, and more than
$280,000 in SOR-listed debts remain delinquent at present. His family budget is such
that he does not have the means to repay them, and is likely to incur additional
delinquent debt, as has already been demonstrated by another credit card delinquency
exceeding $16,000 on which he defaulted more than a year after obtaining his present
employment. 
None of Applicant’s delinquent debt could be directly tied to his failed land
development project or the failure of his former printing business, although both issues
resulted in drastically reduced income for the family from what they had hoped to earn.
Each of these ventures was voluntarily undertaken by Applicant and his wife, and none
of his delinquent debt involves medical bills. These are not circumstances that can be
considered beyond his control. 
Applicant offered no evidence that he followed the minimal financial counseling
he recently sought.  Nor, despite being granted another month in which to do so, did he
show that he has followed through on using bankruptcy relief to address his debts. He
has not contacted any of his creditors to arrange repayments. There is no indication in
this record that his financial issues are either under control or likely to improve in the
foreseeable future.
This evidence establishes minimal mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through (d).
Applicant remains financially over-extended to a significant extent. He is well regarded
at work, but that is insufficient to overcome other record evidence concerning his
financial history and present circumstances, as they bear on his trustworthiness,
reliability and good judgment. 
7
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern includes substantial delinquent debts that he cannot afford to repay. Applicant
is a mature, experienced adult who is accountable for his decisions and conduct even
though he was apparently taken advantage of in several failed business ventures. His
debts arose over the past five years, and persist to date. There is ongoing potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress since he remains financially overextended. 
Applicant’s good reputation and performance at work is commendable, but
insufficient in itself to mitigate security concerns arising from his financial irresponsibility
and excessive debt load. His indebtedness is quite likely to continue in the foreseeable
future. His recent efforts to seek resolution of these debts through bankruptcy are steps
in the right direction, but he has not followed through on that program. He needs
additional time to establish a pattern of responsibility, in light of his substantial
indebtedness and apparently continuing financial over-extension.
On balance, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to mitigate reliability and
trustworthiness security concerns arising from his inability to satisfy debts, and history of
not meeting financial obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves substantial doubts
as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his
financial considerations. 
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
