1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-13621
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on July 9, 2007.
On March 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines J and E
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 18, 2008. He answered the
SOR in writing and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on May 20, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 3, 2008,
and I convened the hearing on June 20, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1-
5, which were received without objection. Applicant testified in his own behalf and
presented the testimony of one witness. He did not submit any exhibits. DOHA received
2
the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on June 30, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated April 21, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.b of the SOR. He also admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 2.a
2.b of the SOR. Applicant provided additional information to support his request for
eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 22-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 2004. After high school, he was accepted into an apprenticeship program
with a defense contractor in 2004. He has been employed with his current employer
since October 2004 (Tr. 16). 
Applicant is single. He has an infant daughter. He plans to wed the mother of his
baby daughter. He expects to receive a raise very soon based on the high grades he
received during his apprenticeship. He wants to succeed in the company and needs a
security clearance to reach his goal.
On March 29, 2005, Applicant was arrested and charged with felony Possession
of Burglary Tools, Tampering with Vehicle, and Trespassing. He pleaded guilty and was
sentenced to 12 months incarceration with 11 months suspended. He served 15 days of
weekend community service. The court fined him $500 and sentenced him to six
months of supervised probation.
Applicant acknowledged that he was hanging out with the wrong crowd at the
time of the 2005 incident. He was spending time with some people from his
neighborhood. He and another fellow were driving around looking for rims to take from
cars. On this particular date, Applicant saw a police car and started to run away.
Applicant had several car jacks in his automobile and the police charged him with
possession of burglary tools. Applicant spent a night in jail. His mother had a bond
posted and retrieved him the next day (GE 5).
In April 2005, Applicant was working in the shipyard. It was his last day and his
supervisor was giving him a party. The supervisor ordered pizza for the party early that
morning. The pizza was to be delivered around noon (Tr. 19).  However, the pizza driver
did not arrive until almost 12:25. By that time Applicant only had a few minutes to return
to his duty station. Applicant took three pizzas from the delivery man. He was in a hurry
to return to work and walked back to the gate and did not pay for the pizzas.  He
received a message from a detective after work about the stolen pizzas. Applicant
called the store owner and told him that he was in a hurry and did not pay at the time of
delivery. However, he explained that he would pay for them and asked the owner not to
press charges. Applicant paid for the pizzas and he believed that everything was
resolved (Tr. 21). Nonetheless, Applicant was found guilty of the charge, sentenced to a
3
six-month suspended sentence, fined, and required to complete 24 hours of community
service (GE 4).
In April 2007, Applicant attended a party at a friend’s house. He gave someone a
ride home because the person had been drinking. Applicant noticed after he dropped
him off that the fellow left a bottle in the car. Applicant did not notice the bottle. Applicant
was shortly thereafter stopped for speeding. He was going 12 miles over the speed
limit. He was given a ticket for speeding, open container, and obstructed view. Applicant
had custom lettering on the back rear-view mirror of his car. Applicant explained that he
asked the officer to give him a Breathalyzer test because he knew he had not been
drinking. Applicant was found guilty of the open container charge and speeding. He was
fined. He was also on probation for speeding tickets until February 2008. Applicant
successfully completed his probation period (Tr. 24).
Applicant admitted that he was immature and acted in a stupid manner in the
past. He has a good job and he understands that there was no reason for him to be
involved in any activity that would jeopardize the job that he loves. He does not maintain
any friendships with the fellows from the neighborhood. Applicant believes that now that
he is a father and has the responsibility for his family that he would never engage in any
behavior that would cause concern. He also acknowledged that he has little free time
now that he is working and caring for his infant daughter (Tr. 32).
Applicant’s teacher and mentor from the apprenticeship program at work highly
recommends Applicant. He has known him since the beginning of the apprenticeship.
Applicant has maintained high grades. His teacher rates Applicant as one of the top
three in the program. Applicant’s teacher has weekly contact with him. He trusts him
and took time off from his schedule to testify for Applicant at the hearing. He also knows
the security concerns that the Government has with respect to the incidents in
Applicant’s past and still highly recommends him. The witness has been with the
company for 17 years and works with all the apprentices in this particular program (Tr.
40). 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
4
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in
AG & 30, “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 31(a), an Asingle serious crime or multiple lesser offenses@ may be potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 31(c), Aallegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged or convicted@ may raise security
concerns. As noted above, Applicant was arrested and charged with a number of
5
incidents in 2005. He was convicted of possession of burglary tools, tampering with a
vehicle, trespassing and larceny. These facts are sufficient to raise these potentially
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Aso much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.@ Applicant=s criminal conduct occurred in 2005. His citation for speeding and
open container was in 2007. However, Applicant was very young and has not had any
more incidents. The repeated incidents do create some doubt about Applicant’s
judgment. This potentially mitigating condition partially applies in this case. 
Under AG & 30(d), it may be mitigating where Athere is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including, but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement.” As noted above, Applicant
has been employed in the apprenticeship program for more than three years. He has
high grades and will complete the program this year. His teacher/mentor recommends
Applicant for the clearance due to his work skill and attitude. He has no recorded
disciplinary actions. He completed his community service and his probation. He is now a
father and has a family to provide for. He does not maintain friendships with the people
from his old neighborhood. He works and has little free time. I find this potentially
mitigating condition applies in this case. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.
AG 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications,
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or untrust
worthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
6
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulation, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information;
In March 2005, Applicant was charged with Petit Larceny for stealing the pizzas
from the delivery man at the shipyard. He did not wait to pay for the pizzas because he
wanted to return to work. He was found guilty, was fined, sentenced to six-months
suspended sentence and 24 hours of community service.
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and many not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information.
Applicant’s speeding ticket in 2007 and driving with an open container relates to
poor judgment and falls under 16(d). 
The AG ¶ 16 continues:
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct that
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress, such as (1)
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal,
professional, or community standing. 
This disqualifying condition is a factor for consideration because Applicant was
embarrassed about the incidents.
Paragraph 17 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Specifically,
AG ¶ 17 states:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not case doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgement. 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors,
circumstances or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur” does apply. 
7
AG 17(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress is a factor for consideration. 
Applicant acknowledged that his behavior was stupid in the past. He was young
and was hanging with the wrong crowd. He no longer associates with that group. He is
careful not to speed and is aware of the risks associated with speeding. He completed
his probation successfully. He works hard and is supporting his family. His employer
recommends him. He related his convictions to the investigator and completed his
security questionnaire truthfully listing the above referenced convictions and charges.
He has mitigated any personal conduct concerns through his recent actions and
behavior. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a hard working young
man. He has been apprenticed to his employer for more than three years. He has
consistently received high  grades. He is highly recommended for a clearance. He is a
father and is providing for his family. He is a loyal employee. He is enthusiastic about
his job. He is stable and concerned about his future. The incidents in 2005 and 2007
occurred when Applicant was immature and younger. He has no other incidents on his
record.
Overall, the record evidence and whole person analysis leaves me without questions
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his
personal conduct and criminal conduct. 
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a-c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
