                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17920 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
On March 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 7, 2008, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) on May 1, 2008. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
May 7, 2008, and it was received on May 19, 200. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not submit additional information. The 
case was assigned to me on July 7, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. They are incorporated 
herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 59 years old and served as a police officer for 20 years attaining the 
rank of Detective. He retired in 1993 and has held various jobs since then. He 
experienced periods of unemployment from May 1999 to September 1999 and May 
2006 to December 2006. He has been employed as a contract investigator with a 
Department of Defense contractor since December 2006. Applicant was married from 
1970 to 2003. He has three adult children.  
 
 Applicant has a judgment against him in favor of his ex-wife in the approximate 
amount of $23,348. He admitted he owes this debt and it has been delinquent since 
2004. It is a debt for alimony pursuant to a divorce decree. Applicant’s response 
regarding the debt is as follows:  
 
The monies in question were the result of a default judgment found 
against me while I lived in [Place A]. She was and has been receiving 47 
percent of my law enforcement pension and I was to receive 47 percent of 
her teaching pension when she retired which to date has not happened. I 
had been under the assumption that any monies owed would be resolved 
at that time. These money equations were to be worked out by our 
corresponding attorneys.1 
 
No explanation was provided for why Applicant has not resolved this debt when 
he is aware he owes it.  
 
 Applicant admits the debt owed in SOR ¶ 1.b and claimed it was in the process 
of being paid off by monthly payments when they were halted due to the default 
judgment that froze his funds and payments. Applicant offered no other explanation for 
why he has not resolved this debt. No documentation was provided to support his 
assertion. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is for telephone services. Applicant claimed this debt was 
the result of an ongoing dispute he had with the telephone company because of 
“improper services I received from them, improper equipment I received and a lack of 
1 Item 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
concern on their part over the quality of service I was receiving from them.”2 Applicant 
offered no explanation for why he has not resolved this debt or any action he has taken 
to formally dispute the debt.  
 
 Applicant stated he had no knowledge about the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d. He 
claimed his account records indicate his prompt payment to this creditor until he moved 
and closed the account. He failed to provide any documentation to support his assertion 
or any action he has taken to resolve or dispute the debt.  
 
 Applicant did not offer any documents to support any of his assertions nor any 
corroborating evidence.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
2 Id. 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them, especially AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Applicant has a default 
judgment against him that despite being aware of it and its effect on his other debts he 
has not resolved. The default judgment is four years old. He also has other debts that 
he apparently disputes, but has done nothing to resolve them. I find both disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions. I especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”); (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
 
5 
 
 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”); (c) (“the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”); (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”); and (e) (“the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue”). 
  
 Applicant is aware that he has a legally binding default judgment entered against 
him for approximately $23,348. He is aware of his responsibility toward paying this 
judgment. He apparently believes that somehow this dispute will be resolved at a later 
date by the attorneys who were involved in his divorce proceedings. He has offered no 
evidence to show he has made an attempt to discuss the issue with his attorney, pay 
the judgment or resolve it. He claimed that because of the judgment somehow his 
payments on another debt were frozen. Again he offered nothing to show he was paying 
this debt and why he is not paying this delinquent debt. He admitted the debts in his 
Answer to the SOR, but does not offer any evidence to show he is resolving them. He 
has not provided any documents to support he paid his debts or is formally disputing 
them. He merely discounts his obligations toward his creditors. Applicant is unwilling to 
resolve his delinquent debts. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant acknowledged and 
admitted his delinquent debts, but offered no evidence of efforts he has made to resolve 
or pay the debts. Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
financial considerations.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
