 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-10399 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Adrienne E. Trent, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign preference and 
foreign influence.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 1, 2005, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
EPSQ version of a Security Clearance Application (hereinafter SF 86). On November 
19, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive). 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On December 29, 2005, the President promulgated revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information, and on 
August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a 
memorandum directing implementation of those revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
(hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive 
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation), in which the SOR was issued 
on or after September 1, 2006.  The AG are applicable to Applicant’s case because his 
SOR was issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR on December 3, 2007. In a sworn, written statement, 
dated December 19, 2007, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested 
a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on February 1, 2008, and the case was assigned 
to Administrative Judge Henry Lazzaro on February 4, 2008. It was reassigned to me on 
February 14, 2008, due to caseload considerations. A Notice of Hearing was issued on 
February 19, 2008, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on March 20, 2008. 
 
During the hearing, three Government exhibits and two Applicant exhibits were 
received without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was 
received on March 28, 2008. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take 
Administrative Notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to Taiwan, also referred to 
as the Republic of China (hereinafter Taiwan), appearing in a written submission of the 
request.  Facts are proper for Administrative Notice when they are easily verifiable by 
an authorized source and relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the source 
information relied upon by the Government was publications of the Department of 
State;1 the Congressional Research Service;2 the Center for Counterintelligence and 
Security Studies;3 the National Counterintelligence Center, now known as the Office of 
the National Counterintelligence Executive;4 a press release from the U.S. Department 
1 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Background Note: Taiwan, dated 
October 2007. 
 
2 Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Taiwan: Recent Developments and U.S. Policy 
Choices, dated October 9, 2006. 
 
3 Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Center for Counterintelligence and Security Studies, Intelligence Threat 
Handbook, excerpts, dated June 2004. 
 
4 National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage, dated 2000. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
of Justice, U.S. Attorney, Western District of New York;5 a press release from the U.S. 
Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of Virginia;6 and records of the 
U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia.7 
 
With regard to the National Counterintelligence Center Report, I note that it is 
eight years old, and the cited facts are based upon a “private survey” of “nearly a dozen 
selected Fortune 500 companies.” The report does not indicate how the companies 
were selected, what companies were selected, or how they decided upon their input to 
the survey. The survey results do not indicate whether the collection of economic 
information was accomplished through “open” methods, such as reading a newspaper, 
that raise no security issues under the relevant criteria, or more covert methods that 
might raise security concerns. Furthermore, as the selected companies are unidentified, 
it is impossible to assess possible bias or determine if there is an existing anti-Taiwan 
economic or political agenda. For these reasons, I conclude the factual matters 
asserted by Department Counsel, as demonstrated by the proffered report, should be 
given less weight than information from a more authoritative source.  
 
The two press releases were presented apparently to substantiate that Taiwan 
actively pursues collection of U.S. economic and propriety information, and therefore, 
Applicant’s relationship with family members in Taiwan raises suspicion of him. Neither 
case involves Applicant personally or involved espionage through any familial 
relationship. The Western District of New York press release concerns the sentencing of 
a U.S. citizen for conspiring to commit trade secret theft during 1999-2001 to the benefit 
of a corporation based in Taiwan. There is no indication of any government 
sponsorship, approval, or involvement encouraging the Taiwanese company‘s attempt 
to acquire sensitive commercial information for competitive advantage.  Likewise, there 
is no evidence that Taiwan’s government was involved in, or sanctioned, the criminal 
activity. 
 
The Eastern District of Virginia press release and the court record set forth the 
facts and sentencing of a former U.S. State Department official for unauthorized 
possession of classified information, making false statements to the government 
concerning his relationship with a female Taiwanese intelligence officer, and by not 
reporting that he had traveled to Taiwan where he met with the foreign intelligence 
officer. The criminal wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens is of decreased relevance to an 
assessment of Applicant’s security suitability, especially where there is no evidence that 
Applicant, nor any member of his family, was ever involved in any aspect of the case or 
ever targeted by any Taiwanese intelligence official. 
 
5 U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney, Western District of New York, Press Release: Defendant 
Sentenced to 48 months in Trade Secret Theft Case Re: United States v. Jonathan C. Sanders, dated Apr. 18, 2006. 
 
6 U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of Virginia, Press Release: Former State 
Department Official Sentenced for Mishandling Classified Material, dated Jan. 22, 2007. 
 
7 U.S. District Court Eastern District of Virginia, Criminal Case No. 1:05CR43, U.S. v. Donald W. Keyser, 
Statement of Facts, dated Dec. 12, 2005. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, I take administrative 
notice that the events described in the press releases or related court record occurred,8 
as well as that information set forth in the National Counterintelligence Center Report.  
However, the inference that somehow Applicant and/or his family participated in criminal 
activity was not argued and is not accepted.  Pursuant to Rule 201, Federal Rules of 
Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts, as set forth below under the 
Taiwan subsection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.d., and 2.a. and 2.b., of the SOR. 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
obtain a SECRET security clearance.  He has been employed as a modem hardware 
engineer by the same government contractor since April 2004.9  
 
Applicant was born in Taiwan in 1958,10 and resided there with his parents.  In 
January 1982, he came to the U.S. and enrolled in a graduate program at a U.S. 
university.11 He received his Masters Degree in Electrical Engineering in September 
1989.12 In January 1990, after searching for employment, Applicant joined a subsidiary 
of a major U.S. corporation, as an electrical engineer.13 He remained there for over 
eight years, and subsequently left for other opportunities in the U.S. He eventually 
joined his current employer. In 1993, Applicant married a naturalized U.S. citizen,14 and 
he and his wife had two children, both of whom are native-born Americans.15 Applicant 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April 2004.16  
 
8 Tr. at 18, 26-28. 
 
9 Government Exhibit 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated Jun. 1, 2005), at 2. 
 
10 Id. at 1; Applicant Exhibit A (Taiwan Passport, issued Dec. 16, 2005), at 1.  During the hearing, Applicant 
testified erroneously that he was born in 1957.  See, Tr. at 30.  Since the issuance of the passport requires official 
documentation, I find the date 1958 is the more accurate date. 
 
11 Tr. at 30. 
 
12 Id. 
 
13 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 9, at 3. 
 
14 Id. at 4-5. 
 
15 Id. at 5. 
 
16 Id. at 1. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
Applicant’s father was born in mainland China in 1929, and subsequently 
immigrated to Taiwan.17 He visited the U.S. frequently, commencing in 1962-63, and in 
about 1970, served a medical residency in the U.S.18  After serving as a medical officer 
with the Taiwan military, he retired and went into private medical practice.19  He retired 
from that practice approximately 20 years ago.20 Applicant’s father passed away in 
December 2007.21  
 
His mother was born in 1932.22 She passed away in 1991.23 
 
Applicant’s wife was born in Taiwan in 1967.24 It is unclear where she was raised 
or when she immigrated to the U.S. with her parents and sister. She became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in September 1990.25 Her parents are naturalized U.S. citizens, 
residing in the U.S.26  
 
Applicant has two brothers, both of whom were born and raised in Taiwan.27 
They are Taiwanese citizens and residents.28 They attended U.S. universities and 
graduated as mechanical engineers about 15 years ago.29 Both brothers are employed 
by the same non-Taiwanese multinational corporation,30 and neither brother has had 
any affiliation or association with any Taiwanese governmental service or intelligence-
related entity.31 Applicant has had very little communication with his brothers since his 
mother passed away. He generally spoke to his father or, if his father was not home, to 
17 Id. at 4. 
 
18 Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated Nov. 30, 2005, attached to Answers to 
Interrogatories, dated Sep. 20, 2007), at 1. 
 
19 Tr. at 62. 
 
20 Id. 
 
21 Applicant Exhibit B (Death Certificate, dated Dec. 4, 2007). 
 
22 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 9, at 4. 
 
23 Tr. at 45. 
 
24 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 9, at 4. 
 
25 Id. at 5. 
 
26 Id. 
 
27 Id. at 4-5. 
 
28 Id. 
 
29 Tr. at 46. 
 
30 Id. at 46-47, 56. 
 
31 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 18, at 2; Tr. at 61-62. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
his younger brother who resided with their father.32 During the few months since their 
father passed away, he has had monthly contact with them.33  
 
When he passed away, Applicant’s father owned two pieces of real estate.  He 
resided in one and rented the other and then left them to his three sons.34 Aside from 
that joint inheritance, Applicant does not own any property in Taiwan and has no other 
financial interests there.35 Applicant is prepared to renounce any interest he may have 
in the inheritance because his future in the U.S. is much more important to him than two 
very old structures in Taiwan.36 He owns the family residence in the U.S.37 
 
Applicant was issued a Taiwan passport in April 2000.  It was to expire in April 
2006.38 He was issued his U.S. passport in July 2004. It expires in June 2014.39 In 
November 2005, during an interview with an investigator pertaining to his application for 
a security clearance, Applicant stated his Taiwan passport was due to expire in about 
May 2006, and it would not be renewed since he now had a U.S. passport.40  However, 
due to circumstances described below, in December 2005, Applicant renewed his 
Taiwan passport.41 He attempted to surrender it to Taiwan authorities, but they insisted 
there was no such process, so he destroyed it by cutting it, and submitted the entire 
destroyed passport to me at the hearing.42  
 
From the time he first arrived in the U.S. in January 1982, until September 2002, 
a period of nearly 21 years, Applicant remained in the U.S. and did not return to 
Taiwan.43 In 2002, because of his father’s deteriorating health, Applicant returned briefly 
to Taiwan as a Taiwan citizen, using his Taiwan passport.44  In December 2005, his 
32 Id. at 45, 56. 
 
33 Id. at 46. 
 
34 Id. at 53. 
 
35 Id. 
 
36 Id. at 53-54. 
 
37 Id. at 29. 
 
38 Government Exhibit 3 (Taiwan passport, issued Apr. 2000, attached to Answers to Interrogatories, dated 
Sep. 20, 2007). 
 
39 Id. (U.S. passport, issued Jul. 2000, attached to Government Exhibit 3). 
 
40 Answer to SOR, dated Dec. 10, 2007, at 1. 
 
41 Id. (Taiwan passport, issued Dec. 2005, attached to Government Exhibit 3). 
 
42 Applicant Exhibit A, supra note 10; Tr. at 42. 
 
43 Tr. at 31, 40-41. 
 
44 Id. at 35-36. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
father’s health deteriorated further.  Believing he needed a visa to enter Taiwan on his 
new U.S. passport, a process that could have been lengthy,45 Applicant opted to take 
the quickest route to Taiwan and that meant using his Taiwan passport rather than his 
U.S. passport.46 However, after being advised by Taiwanese authorities that his old 
Taiwan passport could not be used if it was expected to expire within six months, he 
reluctantly renewed it.47  He used the renewed Taiwan passport to travel to Taiwan.48  
Applicant returned to Taiwan in December 2006 to attend his father’s funeral.49  This 
time he used his U.S. passport after learning that he didn’t need a visa to enter 
Taiwan.50 
 
Applicant inquired as to the process for renouncing his Taiwanese citizenship, 
but was advised by Taiwan authorities that it was a lengthy process which required 
extensive documentation which had to be filed in Taiwan.51  He intends to do so.52 
 
Taiwan 
 
In 1949, a large number of Chinese refugees fled from the civil war in mainland 
China and immigrated to the off-shore Island of Formosa.  The Communists in mainland 
China established the PRC, and Chiang Kai-shek, the leader of the Kuomintang on 
mainland China, established a provisional government and capital in Taipei, Taiwan.  
The PRC refuses to recognize Taiwan’s independence, and insists that there is only 
“one China.”  After recognizing Taiwan for nearly 30 years, on January 1, 1979, the U.S. 
formally recognized the government of the PRC as the sole legitimate government of 
China.  The U.S. does not support independence for Taiwan and, under the Taiwan 
Relations Act, signed into law on April 10, 1979, is committed to a “one-China policy.” 
Nevertheless, the U.S. has been also been committed to maintaining cultural, 
commercial and other nonofficial relations with Taiwan, and continues to provide arms 
in support of Taiwan’s security and regional stability. 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy with a strong economy, with significant 
economic contacts with both the PRC and the U.S.  Taiwan’s own national security 
remains under constant threat from the PRC since PRC has not renounced the use of 
force against Taiwan, and this has led to Taiwan’s large military establishment. 
45 Id. at 36-37. 
 
46 Answer to SOR, supra note 40, at 1; Id. at 38-39.  
 
47 Id. Applicant had no intention of renewing his old Taiwan passport until he was advised he had to do so if 
he hoped to enter Taiwan. Government Exhibit 3 (Answers to Interrogatories, dated Sep. 20, 2007), at 3. 
 
48 Tr. at 39. 
 
49 Id. 
 
50 Id. at 39-40, 49-52. 
 
51 Id. at 40, 48, 52-53. 
 
52 Id. at 48; Answer to SOR, supra note 40, at 1. 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
Taiwan’s armed forces are equipped with weapons obtained primarily from the U.S., but 
Taiwan has stressed military self-reliance in recent years that has resulted in the growth 
of indigenous military production. 
 
Taiwan is believed to be an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence and 
proprietary information. There is no evidence that Taiwan uses coercive measures to 
gain access to such information. While there have been a number of incidents involving 
individuals, companies, and Taiwanese intelligence officers improperly acquiring or 
attempting to acquire U.S. economic intelligence and proprietary information, there is no 
direct or indirect connection to, or involvement with, Applicant.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An Administrative Judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”53 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the Government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the Applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, 
explanation, extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the 
Government’s case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
53 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). 
 
9 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” Accordingly, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:       
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member” is 
potentially disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 10(a)(1), this includes but is not limited to:  
“possession of a current foreign passport.”  Similarly, under AG ¶ 10(d) “any statement 
or action that shows allegiance to a country other than the United States: for example, 
declaration of intent to renounce United States citizenship; renunciation of United States 
citizenship” may raise security concerns. After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
April 2004, Applicant retained the Taiwan passport that had been previously issued to 
him. Not only did he retain it, but in December 2005, due to a combination of 
circumstances, he renewed it and used it as well, even though he had previously stated 
to an investigator that he would not do so.  By his actions, he exercised the rights and 
privilege of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen. I find AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and 
10(d) apply. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign preference.  Under AG ¶ 11(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the “dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
birth in a foreign country.”  Similarly, AG ¶ 11(b), may apply where “the individual has 
expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.”  Also, AG ¶ 11(e) may apply 
where “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated.” 
 Applicant explained that his only motivation for using his Taiwan passport in 
December 2005 was not an indication of a preference for Taiwan over the United 
States, but rather solely for his convenience in entering Taiwan quickly to visit with his 
sick father.  Such actions, since 2000, have security significance.  However, prior to 
2000, that was not the case. Applicant’s actions would not have been considered 
foreign preference-driven, or of security significance, but rather in pursuit of personal 
interest of the type identified in a memorandum by the Director, Security Plans and 
Programs, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, to the Director, Defense 
Investigative Service, in March 1983, wherein he stated:54 
 
. . . If an individual retains his/her foreign citizenship as a result of 
affirmative action on his/her part, an investigation should be initiated to 
determine the reasons for his/her action.  If these reasons adversely 
implicate his/her loyalty or trustworthiness, there may be basis to deny, 
suspend, or revoke a personnel security clearance.  If, however, an 
individual asserts his/her rights to foreign citizenship in pursuit of 
personal interest (e.g., wills, trusts, estates, taxes, family, etc.) there 
are no grounds to deny, suspend, or revoke a personnel security 
clearance. 
 
 Thus, the issue is, distilled to its basic components: whether Applicant's actions 
in renewing, possessing, and using his Taiwan passport in December 2005, were 
merely for personal convenience, or indicative of a preference for Taiwan over the 
United States. Considering Applicant’s explanations, and his subsequent action in 
destroying his Taiwan passport and surrendering all the pieces to me, I find ¶¶ 11(a), 
11(b), and 11(e) apply. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
54 See Memorandum from Director, Security Plans and Programs, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, 
to Director, Defense Investigative Service, subject: "Personnel security clearances for U.S. citizens actively 
maintaining dual citizenship with another country, dated March 15, 1983, at 1. (emphasis supplied) 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.55 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion@ is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), Aconnections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information@ may raise security concerns. Also, AG ¶ 7(e) may apply if there is “a 
substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any 
foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.”  I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) 
apply in this case.  However, the security significance of these identified conditions 
requires further examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with his family 
members who are Taiwanese citizen-residents to determine the degree of “heightened 
risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.@ Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows Athere is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.@ In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  And AG ¶ 8(e) 
may apply where “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
55 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
12 
                                      
 
                                                          
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.” 
Applicant’s relationship with his two brothers, his travel to Taiwan, and his 
inheritance of property in Taiwan are current concerns for the Government. Both of 
Applicant’s parents are now deceased. He had little contact with either brother from the 
time he arrived in the U.S. in 1982 until their mother passed away in 1991.  Thereafter, 
he had no contact with his older brother and very infrequent contact with his younger 
brother until their father died in December 2007. In the few months since that time, he 
has had monthly contact with them. 
 
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, including the 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government, within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.56  In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”57 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the U.S. may 
be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it controls is likely 
to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the U.S. through the 
Applicant.  It is reasonable to presume that a friendly relationship, or the existence of a 
democratic government, is not determinative, but it may make it less likely that a foreign 
government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or associates in 
that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, the U.S. and Taiwan have a history of friendly relations making 
it less likely that the Taiwanese Government would attempt coercive means to obtain 
sensitive information.  However, it does not eliminate the possibility that a foreign power 
would employ some non-coercive measures in an attempt to exploit his relatives.  While 
Applicant has two brothers still residing in Taiwan, there may be speculation as to 
“some risk,” but that speculation, in the abstract, does not, without more, establish 
sufficient evidence of a “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a security 
clearance. 
 
As to Applicant’s relationship with his two brothers, there is a very low potential of 
forcing him to choose between the interests of U.S. and those of either Taiwan or his 
brothers. He has met his burden of showing there is little likelihood that those 
56 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
57 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
13 
                                      
 
relationships could create a risk for foreign influence of exploitation. I find AG ¶¶ 8(a) 
and 8(c) partially apply in this case.  
 
Applicant has been a resident of the U.S. since 1982.  He and his wife became 
naturalized U.S. citizens and their two children are native-born U.S. citizens. He 
surrendered his Taiwanese passport and he is willing to renounce his dual citizenship. 
They have no foreign financial interests other than the small inheritance from his father, 
described as two very old structures, which he is willing to renounce. He is fully involved 
in his children’s lives and activities. Applicant and his wife have “such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [they] can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”   
 
It is true that, since 1982, Applicant took three trips back to Taiwan to visit his 
father who was in deteriorating health.  At the time of his first visit, in 2002, about 20 
years after he had been in the U.S., he was still a Taiwanese citizen. And that trip 
should have no current security interest. However, when his father’s condition worsened 
in 2005, and he eventually died in 2006, Applicant did so as a U.S. citizen.  I find AG ¶¶ 
8(b) and 8(e) apply to his travel to Taiwan, his relationship with his brothers, and his 
foreign financial interests. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s parents are deceased. 
Applicant has resided in the U.S. since 1982, and became a U.S. citizen in 2004.  He 
married in the U.S., and his closest family members are his wife and two children-all 
U.S. citizens-and they reside with him in the U.S.  As such, they are not vulnerable to 
direct coercion or exploitation, and the realistic possibility of pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress with regard to them is low. 
 
14 
                                      
 
 
Applicant’s relationships with his two brothers are not close and his contact with 
them is sporadic. He had no relationship whatsoever with one brother from 1982 until 
December 2007, and has spoken to him only since their father passed away in 
December 2007. His relationship with his other brother was only slightly closer by virtue 
of having spoken to him infrequently when their father was not at home.  They have 
spoken several times since their father’s death. While Taiwan is believed to be an active 
collector of U.S. economic intelligence and proprietary information, there is no evidence 
that Taiwan uses coercive measures to gain access to such information. It is in 
Taiwan’s interests to maintain friendship with the U.S. to counterbalance the PRC. It is 
very unlikely Taiwan would forcefully attempt to coerce Applicant through his two 
brothers still residing in Taiwan. (See AG & 2(a)(8).) The presence of those family 
members in Taiwan without any affiliation or relationship to the Government of Taiwan, 
does not generate a realistic potential for exploitation. 
 
As to Applicant’s actions in renewing and using his Taiwan passport on one 
occasion after he became a naturalized U.S. citizen, and after telling an investigator that 
he had no intention of ever renewing that passport, they raise several different issues.  
Applicant renewed the Taiwan passport only because he was under the erroneous 
impression he needed to obtain a visa to see his ailing father and was advised by the 
Taiwanese authorities that a passport renewal was required.  He now knows better and 
has destroyed the Taiwan passport.  (See AG && 2(a)(1), 2(a)(2), 2(a)(3), 2(a)(5), 
2(a)(7), and 2(a)(9).) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence 
and foreign preference concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
   
 
 
15 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Chief Administrative Judge 
