1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------, ------ -------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-12178
SSN: ----- ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Angela Correa, Personal Representative
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has substantial delinquent debt that he cannot afford to repay. He did
not deliberately falsify information about his debts on his security clearance application
because he cannot read and did not understand the questions. Based upon a thorough
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on September 1, 2006. On January 15, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after
September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 23, 2008. He answered
the SOR in writing (Answer) on January 28 and 31, 2008, and requested a decision be
made without a hearing before an administrative judge. These answers, and some
character reference letters, were forwarded to DOHA by his personal representative on
February 5, 2008, in her capacity as his employer’s Assistant Facility Security Officer.
When Department Counsel learned that Applicant cannot read, he requested a hearing
pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.7, in order to ensure a fair process, conducted orally, in
which all parties could be assured that Applicant understood and participated in
developing a comprehensive record. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on
March 24, 2008, and DOHA assigned the case to me on March 25, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 2, 2008. Although Applicant did not
sign and return his written receipt for the notice of hearing until April 11, 2008, both
Applicant and his personal representative acknowledged on the record that they actually
received it at least 15 days prior to the hearing, when I forwarded them a copy via email
on April 2, 2008. (Tr. at 14.) I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 22, 2008.
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called two other
witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without
objection. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until May 6, 2008, in
order for him to submit additional documentation. On April 28, 2008, Applicant’s
personal representative submitted copies of his W-2 forms for the past two years to
Department Counsel. Department Counsel forwarded Applicant’s submission without
objection to its consideration on May 1, 2008. These documents were marked AE B,
and Applicant did not submit any further evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) on May 7, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has
worked, with a security clearance, for more than 10 years. This contractor receives set-
aside contracts and hires a majority of employees with handicaps and barriers to
employment. Applicant is illiterate. He and his wife of nine years are now living in
separate households, to avoid fighting with each other. His wife receives about $600 per
month in Social Security payments. Their daughter, age 9, and his step-daughter, age
14, live with their mother. (GE 1 at §§ 2, 11, 13, 14, 26; Tr. at 8-9, 66, 83-85, 89;
Answer, dated Jan. 31, 2008.) 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted each of the 15 debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1,
totaling $27,464, that first became delinquent between April 2000 and July 2006. (GE 2;
GE 4.) He denied that he deliberately falsified answers on his e-QIP, explaining that he
either did not know about debts or misunderstood questions due to his illiteracy. No
evidence was introduced that would support a finding of deliberate falsification, as
opposed to ignorance or mistake, concerning the four incorrect “No” answers pertaining
to repossessions, judgments, and delinquencies alleged in SOR ¶ 2. 
3
During the hearing, Applicant testified concerning his present understanding of
the status of each SOR-alleged delinquent debt. (Tr. at 48-61.) He stated that the
charged-off debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.l resulted from the repossession of
Applicant’s and his wife’s former automobiles. He did not remember the details of the
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m, which his October 9, 2006 credit bureau report (CBR)
reflected as another auto loan repossession charge-off. He did not dispute owing these
three debts, which total $14,550, and he has no funds available to repay them. He was
unclear about the details of the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.j, 1.k,
and 1.o, but neither disputed owing them nor offered any evidence that he had made
any effort to resolve them. These six debts total $4,434. He remembered that he still
owes the two debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.n, totaling $748. He remembered
having paid the $1,361 delinquent credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h in order to
obtain his Countrywide mortgage in September 2005. Although this debt still appeared
as unpaid on his October 2006 CBR (GE 2 at 7), it did not appear on subsequent CBRs.
On balance, I find that this debt was repaid before the SOR was issued. 
Applicant said the $181 cable service debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a arose because
the company claimed he had not returned the cable box and he thinks he did. He
testified that he had not done anything to formally dispute the debt. (Tr. at 48-49.) He
further testified that the $664 attorney’s fee debt in SOR ¶ 1.b related to his wife’s legal
effort to regain custody of her daughter from her own mother. He did acknowledge that
he now understands it is also his joint debt. (Tr. at 50.) Finally, he acknowledged that
his September 2005 Countrywide mortgage was 180 days in arrears in September
2006, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. However, he testified, and subsequent CBRs confirm,
that he has since brought his mortgage payments current. His three auto repossession
loans became delinquent in June 2005, October 2005, and July 2006. 
Applicant provided AE A to document his entrance, on April 19, 2008, into a
financial counseling program rather than filing for bankruptcy. (Tr. at 108-112.) This
service’s initial budget assessment showed a net monthly budget deficit of $3,439.
Among their initial recommendations was that he seek a second job to increase his
income, and lower monthly living expenses to pay down credit card debt. Applicant had
not implemented either of these recommendations by the time of the hearing. (Tr. at 42-
47, 78.) He testified and offered AE B to show that his income fluctuates from year to
year based on duties assigned. His supervisors testified that they have implemented a
new payment plan to ensure his pay does not fall below $15 per hour to assist him with
his financial difficulties. (Tr. at 67-76, 89-90, 99.)
Applicant submitted three character-reference letters from present and former
supervisors attesting to his reliability, dependability, trustworthiness, and good work
performance with his Answer. He also offered testimony from his direct and upper level
supervisors describing these same characteristics, as well as his history of compliance
with all security regulations. He primarily does manual indoor and outdoor maintenance
work, depending on the needs of the government facility and the season, and also
works some hazardous material/waste projects. His work does not involve use of
classified information, but access to many of his work areas requires a clearance.  
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Of these nine different disqualifying conditions, the Government asserted
that two were raised by Applicant’s financial circumstances (Tr. at 82.): “(a) inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
The evidence shows that Applicant, as recently as October 2006, incurred at
least 14 SOR-listed delinquent debts totaling in excess of $27,000. His monthly net
income falls several thousand dollars short of being sufficient to pay his reported regular
living expenses and other debts, which did not include any delinquent debt repayments.
These debts all became delinquent during his current period of regular employment, as
he assumed more debt than he could afford to repay. Although he has brought his
mortgage payments current, and repaid one credit card debt to obtain that mortgage,
the evidence establishes the continuing existence of 13 SOR-listed delinquent debts,
totaling more than $20,000, that Applicant incurred over the past eight years.
Substantial security concerns are raised under both AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The five
potentially pertinent conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented roof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose over the last eight years, and a substantial
number and amount remain delinquent at present. His family budget is such that he
does not have the means to repay them, and is likely to incur additional delinquent debt.
Applicant incurred all of this debt while working in his present job. His company has
arranged to pay him no less than $15 per hour during periods he is performing lower
paying jobs, but there is no way to calculate to what extent that will change his available
income. He and his wife, who receives only $600 per month in social security payments,
are voluntarily maintaining two separate households, while supporting two children,
because they fight when living together. None of his delinquent debt involves medical
bills. These are not circumstances that can be considered beyond his control. Applicant
offered no evidence that he followed the minimal financial counseling he recently
sought, or that he has any comprehensive plan to address his debt. He has not
contacted any of his creditors to arrange repayments. He said that he disputes the
amount claimed for the cable box, but showed no evidence that he followed through
with the creditor about that liability. There is no indication in this record that his financial
issues are either under control or likely to improve in the foreseeable future.
This evidence establishes minimal mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through (e).
Applicant remains financially over-extended to a significant extent. He is well regarded
at work, but that is insufficient to overcome other record evidence concerning his
trustworthiness, reliability and good judgment. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
7
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The disqualifying condition alleged in the SOR and raised by the evidence
in this case is:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Given his level of financial and legal sophistication, and his inability to read,
Applicant testified credibly that he did not understand that he was incorrectly answering
the four finance-related questions listed in SOR ¶ 2. Based on the evidence, including
his demeanor and testimony, I conclude that he did not deliberately omit the correct
information in an attempt to conceal it and deceive the Government about its existence.
Accordingly, I find no substantial evidence that he deliberately falsified or omitted
information on his e-QIP security clearance application. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern includes substantial delinquent debts that he cannot afford to repay. Applicant
is a mature, experienced adult who is accountable for his decisions and conduct even
though he is illiterate. His debts arose over a lengthy period, and persist to date. There
is ongoing potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress since he remains
financially overextended. 
8
Applicant’s good reputation and performance at work is commendable, but
insufficient in itself to mitigate security concerns arising from his financial irresponsibility
and excessive debt load. His indebtedness is quite likely to continue in the foreseeable
future. His recent efforts to bring his mortgage payments current, seek financial
counseling and embark on a debt resolution program are steps in the right direction, but
he needs additional time to establish a pattern of responsibility in light of his lengthy
indebtedness and apparently continuing financial over-extension.
On balance, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to mitigate reliability and
trustworthiness security concerns arising from his inability to satisfy debts, and history of
not meeting financial obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves substantial doubts
as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated any personal conduct security concerns, but did
not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:           FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:                                 For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b:                                 For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c:                                   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d:                                 For Applicant 
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
