KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings as to Applicant’s debts are supported by substantial
record evidence and are sustainable.   Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-13491.a1
DATE: 07/18/2008
DATE: July 18, 2008
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-13491
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
John J. Hopkins, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 27, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
Transcript at 45.1
Applicant’s Brief at 3.2
See, e.g., Transcript at 73-77.3
The Judge found in favor of Applicant as to the debts alleged in SOR paragraphs 1(a), 1(c) and 1(h).  Those4
favorable findings are not at issue on appeal.
2
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 14, 2008, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding
Applicant’s falsification of her security clearance application was deliberate; whether the Judge’s
unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline F is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
(1) Applicant argues that she did not deliberately falsify her response to two questions on her
security clearance application by failing to disclose multiple debts that had been delinquent for more
than 90 or 180 days.  At the hearing she stated that she failed to disclose the information because she
was under stress and misunderstood the “full impact” of the questions.   In her appeal brief, she1
states only: “In the present case there were no intentional misstatements on the application.”2
Applicant has not demonstrated that the Judge erred.
The Judge had the opportunity to consider Applicant’s explanation for why she failed to
disclose the information in question.   The Judge was not bound, as a matter of law, to accept or3
reject Applicant’s explanation.  The Judge considered Applicant’s explanation in light of the record
evidence as a whole, and concluded there was a sufficient basis to find that Applicant’s omissions
were deliberate and intentional.  On this record, the Judge’s finding of deliberate falsification is
sustainable.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  His ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under
Guidelines E is also sustainable.
 
(2) Applicant also argues that the Judge’s adverse decision should be reversed because the
debts alleged in the SOR were her husband’s debts, not hers.   In the alternative, she argues that the4
Judge should have concluded that the security concerns raised by her history of financial difficulties
had been mitigated because the indebtedness had resulted from circumstances beyond her control,
she had received counseling and there were clear indications that her financial problems were being
resolved, and that she had made a good-faith effort to repay the creditors.  Given the totality of the
record evidence, Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
A Judge’s findings must be supported by substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as
a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary
Applicant admitted to the debts in SOR paragraphs 1(b), 1(d), 1(g) and 1(i) in her Answer.  At the hearing she5
acknowledged: “Yes, I have debts.”  Transcript at 42.  Credit reports admitted without objection established that
Applicant was individually responsible for the debts in SOR paragraphs 1(b), 1(d), 1(e) and 1(f).  See Government
Exhibit 4 (which lists accounts as “INDIV ACC” or “JOINT ACC”).  Similarly, the two judgments reflected on the credit
reports as pertaining to SOR paragraphs 1(g) and 1(i) name Applicant as a defendant.  See Government Exhibits 3 and
4.  In his decision, the Judge noted that: “Some of the delinquencies are in the name of Applicant’s spouse, but they affect
the entire family, making Applicant vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress.”  Decision at 10.
3
evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. “This is something less than the weight of the
evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not
prevent an administrative agency’s finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo
v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  Considering the record as a whole, the
Judge’s material findings as to Applicant’s debts are supported by substantial evidence and are
sustainable.5
Once a concern has been articulated regarding an applicant’s security eligibility, there is a
strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply
on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application
requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See ISCR Case
No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 15, 2003).  “Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does
not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.”  See ISCR Case No.
05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar.19, 2007).  “As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence
as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice
versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue
for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.”  See
ISCR Case No. 05-03143 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
Applicant has not met her burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding that
the Guideline F allegations had not been mitigated.  Although Applicant strongly disagrees with the
Judge’s conclusions, she has not established that those conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.  
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations
that extended over many years.  At the time the case was submitted for decision she still had
significant outstanding debts and was still in the process of trying to resolve her financial problems.
In light of the foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems
were recent and still ongoing.  The favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2005).  The Board does not review a case de novo.  After
reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
4
a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156,
168 (1962).  Therefore, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision under Guideline
F is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple       
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
