 
1 
                                      
 
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16944 
 SSN: --------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines H.  Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 6, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires For 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) also known as Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On March 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and 
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, 
modified and revised. The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines H. 
 
 The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
 
2 
                                      
 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations in a sworn statement signed on 
March 30, 2008, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. Documents were attached to the answer with explanatory information. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated May 1, 2008, was provided 
to him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant provided an additional statement dated 
June 1, 2008. The case was assigned to me on June 16, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all three of the allegations in his answer to the SOR, and 
offered explanations. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He has been an employee of a defense contractor 
since May 2007 working as a senior software engineer. He was unemployed for six 
months before obtaining his present job. He holds a B.S. degree in electrical 
engineering from a prominent engineering school on the east coast. He has never been 
married.    
  
 Applicant admitted use of marijuana with varying frequency for 30 years from 
1977 when he was a sophomore in college until March 2007 when he was employed in 
his present position. He stopped using marijuana when he was preparing to file an 
application for a security clearance. He also has purchased marijuana at various times 
during his use. His use of marijuana declined after 1987 to once a month on weekends 
or when attending concerts (Exh. 6). All of the evidence proving the allegations was 
provided by Applicant in his interrogatory in an effort to be forthcoming in connection 
with his SF 86.  
 
 Applicant is pleased that he no longer uses marijuana and has had no difficulty in 
ceasing its use. He has no intention of using the drug in the future and it has had no 
impact on his work or health. He still associates with the friends with whom he used 
marijuana, but only one of them continues to use it. His family and co-workers are 
aware of his past use. 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered For access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,” 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
      Analysis 
 
 Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that the following Adjudicative Guidelines provide the standard for 
resolution of the allegations set forth in the SOR.  
 
4 
                                      
 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens). 
 
 (b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes several conditions that could be applicable to this matter, raise 
a security concern, and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and, 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.  
 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of   
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
While Applicant provided candid responses in his answer and to the 
interrogatories, his admission of regular drug use over such an extended period of time 
raises serious questions as to his judgment. The period of time of abstention is 
insufficient to justify application of the abstinence criteria.  While he continues contacts 
with his friends with whom he used marijuana, only one continues to use it. This is 
problematic as to whether this condition provides mitigation. Other MCs are 
inapplicable. He continued to use marijuana for thirty years into adulthood and well after 
completing college. There is insufficient evidence of rehabilitation to apply the mitigating 
conditions. It is premature to grant a security clearance  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
 
6 
                                      
 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions previously discussed through application of the whole person concept. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to drug allegations. He has made some progress in 
changing his conduct, but the conduct alleged occurred well into adulthood so it cannot 
be attributed to youthful indiscretions.  He has been totally abstinent for only 16 months.  
 
 I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), a careful consideration of the whole person factors and supporting 
evidence, application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative process, and 
interpretation of my responsibilities under the guidelines. Applicant has not mitigated or 
overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or For Applicant on the allegations set Forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:  Against Applicant  
 
           Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
    ___________________ 
Charles D. Ablard 
Administrative Judge 
