 
 
 
 
1
                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE   
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-17808 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
      Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
On September 11, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 12, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 21, 2008, and waived her 
right to a hearing before an administrative judge. On April 16, 2008, she withdrew her 
waiver and requested a hearing.  On April 21, 2008, DOHA assigned the case to me 
and issued a Notice of Hearing on May 7, 2008. The case was heard on May 29, 2008, 
as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through F into evidence 
without objection.  At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until June 13, 
2008, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. On June 12, 
2008, she submitted four additional exhibits that I marked as AE G through J and 
admitted into the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 11, 2008.  On June 26, 2008, Department Counsel notified me that Applicant 
informed him that she recently remarried and that the bankruptcy court entered a 
discharge order on June 24, 2008.  On July 8, 2008, I received the four additional 
documents that I marked as AE K through N and entered into the record without 
objection from Department Counsel.                                                    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.r of the SOR and provided additional information in support of her 
request for a security clearance. Her admissions are incorporated into the following 
findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. She has two children, ages 20 and 23, from her first 
marriage that ended in 1989 after six years. She married her second husband in June 
1993 and legally separated from him in September 2004, at which time she left the state 
she where she was living.  She was divorced in January 2005. (GE 1).  Within the past 
couple of weeks, she remarried to a man who owns his own construction business. At 
the time of the hearing, they were making arrangements to move to a new home. 
 
 While married to her second husband, Applicant worked for a state agency for 
eleven years, until she resigned her position in 2001. She then began a computer 
business and worked from home, while her husband maintained his job as a manager of 
a food market. Around that time, her husband, who managed the family finances and 
played in a band, began using drugs illegally and diverting household funds from family 
expenses.  As a result, her bills began becoming delinquent. (Tr. 23; 34). Prior to this 
time, she did not experience financial difficulties, other than for a brief time after her first 
divorce in 1989. 
 
 After leaving her home state in October 2004, Applicant moved to another state 
with her two children and began working for an employment agency. For the next 
couple years, she experienced periods of unemployment and under-employment, while 
accumulating a significant amount of debt that she could not manage. (Tr. 22). In 
August 2006, she began a position as a computer expert with a federal contractor. She 
worked there until last month when she was laid off, pending this hearing. (Tr. 42). She 
 
 
 
 
3
earned about $10,000 in 2004; $14,934 in 2005; $27,932 in 2006; and $34,625 in 2007. 
(AE G). 
 
 In April 2007, Applicant consulted a bankruptcy lawyer. (Tr. 36). He advised her 
not to pay any of her debts, including those for small amounts. (Tr. 64). On February 29, 
2008, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 Petition for Bankruptcy.  On June 24, 2008, the 
bankruptcy court entered an order discharging approximately $31,581 of debt, including 
some that were attributable to her former husband’s unpaid accounts. (AE L). As part of 
the bankruptcy proceeding, she completed a five-hour credit counseling session over 
the internet. (AE D at 4; Tr. 37). 
 
 The SOR alleges 18 debts, totaling $21,070, and includes medical bills not 
covered by insurance, credit card debt, utility bills, unpaid rent, and department stores 
bills. All of the debts alleged in the SOR are included in the discharge order.1 (Tr. 28) . 
 
 Applicant submitted a copy of her budget. Her net monthly income is $1,292     
that she receives as an unemployment benefit. Her expenses total $1,290.2 Both of her 
children are working and no longer live with her. She does not have any credit cards or 
other outstanding debts. (Tr. 61). She asserted a commitment to her job that she finds 
very satisfying and managing her finances. (Tr. 77). She admitted that in the past she 
did not take adequate responsibility for her finances, resulting in debt and financial 
difficulties. At 42, she wants to begin saving money for her retirement. (Tr. 67). She 
acknowledged her mistakes and stated, “I’ve learned some tough lessons, very tough 
lessons. The counseling that I took has helped a lot. I’m not a person who is prone to 
going out and just spending wildly. I do have self-restraint. I think I just had to learn how 
to budget.” (Tr. 59). 
 
  Applicant submitted six letters from her colleagues in support of her 
request for a security clearance. Her direct supervisor for the past year and 8 months 
knows of Applicant’s personal life. He does not believe she is a security risk. (AE F at 
3). A naval Captain, who has worked with Applicant, wrote, “From my perspective, 
[Applicant’s] dependability as a worker, her strong patriotism, her long term goals, and 
her personal character would prevent her from taking any questionable short cut to 
improve her situation.” (AE at 2). A retired senior chief electronics technician with the 
Navy, who has known her since 1983, believes Applicant is a “honest, hard-working, all-
American. I understand the circumstances she’s been through that would cast doubt on 
her ability to hold a clearance, but her integrity and patriotism are unsurpassed.” (AE at  
6).  On July 8, 2008, the security director for her employer submitted a request that 
DOHA expedite the security determination process because he would like her to 
resume her position as soon as possible. (AE N). 
 
                                            
1According to Applicant’s bankruptcy lawyer, “Pursuant to 6th Circuit precedent In re Madaj, F.3d 
467, if a debtor inadvertently omits a creditor from her bankruptcy schedules in a no asset Chapter 7 
case, the debt is nonetheless discharged. Because [Applicant’s] Chapter 7 case was a no asset case 
[SOR ¶¶ 1.a and1.e are the same debt] is discharged.” (AE I).  
2Applicant recently remarried and her husband’s income is not included in this income number. 
 
 
 
 
4
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise security 
concerns. Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt, which began 
accruing in 2001 while married to her husband that she was unable to pay. The 
delinquencies have been ongoing until they were recently discharged in a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. The guideline includes six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated when Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant=s 
financial worries arose in 2001 and continued into 2008. Because the problems were 
unresolved for about seven years, this condition cannot apply.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant’s debts began 
accumulating as a result of her husband’s illegal drug use, and her subsequent decision 
to move out of the house and get divorced. They were exacerbated by extended periods 
of unemployment and under-employment. Those circumstances were outside of her 
control. However, she did not present any evidence indicating that she attempted to 
manage her debts over those years, as further required under this condition. Thus, I find 
this potentially mitigating condition has partial application.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
 
 
 
 
6
is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where “the 
evidence shows the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.” Applicant presented evidence that she obtained formal credit 
counseling and she submitted a copy of her budget.  In February 2008, she filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy that discharged approximately $31,000 of debt, including those 
delinquencies listed on the SOR. A recent bankruptcy, absent a track record of financial 
responsibility subsequent to the bankruptcy, may be insufficient evidence to trigger the 
application of these two mitigating conditions in many cases.3 However, based on her 
current budget and change in family circumstances, along with her new knowledge of 
financial management, I conclude these mitigating conditions should be given some 
consideration, as she took steps to resolve her delinquencies and her other expenses 
are under control.   
 
No other mitigating conditions apply.  
 
“Whole Person” Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a 42-year-old woman, 
who began experiencing financial difficulties in 2001 after she left her husband, who 
was abusing drugs. Applicant had over a ten-year history of full employment during 
which time she did not incur financial difficulties. At this point in her life, she no longer is 
supporting her children, recently remarried a man who is fully employed, and is 
committed to achieving financial stability and security. Given her awareness of the effect 
                                            
3 See e.g., ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (Dec. 31, 1997) at p.4 (“While a discharge in bankruptcy is 
intended to provide a person with a fresh start financially, it does not immunize an applicant’s history of 
financial problems from being considered for its security significance.”) 
 
 
 
 
7
that future delinquencies could have on her employment, coupled with her organized 
presentation that demonstrated her understanding of her situation and her employer’s 
strong support, I do not believe similar financial problems will recur in the future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant is an intelligent, 
hardworking individual, who experienced unanticipated family problems that seriously 
affected her financial life. There is no other evidence in her background to indicate that 
her financial problems may create a security risk. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.r:        For Applicant 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
