1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11430
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Mark F. Riley, Esquire
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant completed Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QI), on August 11, 2006. On October 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns
regarding personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended,
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SOR issued after September 1, 2006. 
On November 19, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR allegations by
constructively denying all substantive allegations raised. The case was assigned to an
administrative judge on January 7, 2008. Department Counsel and Applicant agreed to
a February 28, 2008, hearing date and a Notice of Hearing was issued on January 22,
2008. Due to caseload considerations, the case was reassigned to me on February 26,
2008. 
 Tr. 30.    1
 Tr. 68; 75 (W hen asked whether she was unhappy about her imminent promotion, Applicant stated: “No    2
I was not. I was just looking for better opportunities. . . . I was always looking.”).
 Case File, Military Investigative Records Repository File (Ex. 6, Statement of Dec. 8, 2003);see also    3
Military Investigative Records Repository File (Ex 2, Statement of Dec. 12, 2003)..
 Case File, Military Investigative Records Repository File (Ex. 1, Memorandum of Nov. 24, 2003).    4
2
The hearing took place as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted three
exhibits (Ex.), accepted into the record as Exs. 1-3 without objection. Applicant testified
and submitted 10 exhibits, which were accepted as Exs. A-J without objection. One
witness testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 7, 2008. Based upon a
review of the case file, exhibits, and testimony, security clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old information coordinator who has worked for the same
defense contractor since January 2004. Retiring from the U.S. military after 20 years of
service in 1999, Applicant soon found civilian employment with the military, working in
the area of intelligence. She remained with the military until the end of 2003. Currently
single, she has two grown daughters and an infant grandchild.
When Applicant first started civilian government work at the end of 1999, she
was hired as a computer specialist. She was then moved to the Freedom of Information
Act/Privacy Act (FOIA/PA) Office, where she served as an intelligence specialist
processing status up-dates on security clearances and working with non-complex
FOIA/PA cases.  She did not check on current security clearance statuses, but passed1
on requests of that nature to her superior. In July 2002, she was promoted to
intelligence assistant, processing completed intelligence products. Before leaving for
her new job, Applicant checked the progress on her security clearance with a contact in
a military central clearance facility (CCF) so she would know of its status when she
started pursuing private sector employment.  A more lucrative job offer from the private2
sector would be orally extended to Applicant sometime in the latter part of November
2003, at which time Applicant would orally apprise her superiors that she would be
taking another position once the paperwork had been finished.
In the interim, during the autumn of 2003, the husband of a division chief from
Applicant’s workplace called the sister of a manager at Applicant’s workplace. She
called her brother to tell him that the man’s wife “was mad that someone has spread a
rumor that she had a daughter.”  Rumors apparently also arose concerning the child’s3
parentage. Unbeknownst to Applicant, an informal investigation was initiated on
November 24, 2003.  The appointed investigative officer was charged with investigating4
an allegation that personal information had been improperly disclosed from military
records. The alleged disclosure concerned the division chief. There is no mention of
Applicant in the memorandum appointing the investigating officer. 
 Case File, Military Investigative Records Repository File (Ex. 7, Statement of Dec. 4, 2003).    5
 Case File, Military Investigative Records Repository File (Ex. 8, Statement of Dec. 16, 2003).    6
 Id.    7
 Case File, Military Investigative Records Repository File (Ex. 7, Statement of Dec. 4, 2003); Case File,    8
Military Investigative Records Repository File (Ex. 8, Statement of Dec. 16, 2003).
 Ex. H. (Employment Offer, dated Dec. 12, 2003).    9
 Ex. I (Resignation letter, dated Dec. 23, 2003); Ex. J (Notification of Personnel Action, effective January    10
5, 2004, citing reason for departures as “personal reasons.”).
 Some testimony stated the date as Dec. 16, 2003, but Ex. 1, supra, note 6, shows that Applicant signed    11
her sworn statement on Dec. 12, 2003. Unbeknownst to Applicant, a leak of personal information regarding
the former division chief was the subject of the interview.
3
A December 4, 2003, interview of the division chief indicated that, based on what
she had been told by another co-worker, she suspected Applicant may have been the
source of the rumor.  That other co-worker later gave a statement directly citing5
Applicant as the source of the rumor.  In that statement, the woman also detailed her6
personal observations of what she described as improper behavior by Applicant
concerning Applicant’s contacting former colleagues to find out security clearance
statuses of current co-workers. She stated she observed such incidents dating back as
far as nine months, most of it never previously reported. Her depiction included
instances of her own gossiping with Applicant, including chat about the woman at issue
in the investigation. She admitted that she had asked Applicant to help her find out the
status of her own security clearance in August 2003.  She explained that she did so as7
part of her covert efforts to discover who was giving Applicant information on employee
security clearance statuses, although she never explained why she failed to report her
findings until she was sought out for interview in December 2003.  Of all the8
investigative interviews conducted, only the statement of the woman whose privacy was
the subject of the investigation and the statement of the woman who told her Applicant
was the source of the rumor suggest Applicant gossiped about the investigation
subject’s marriage. 
While the informal investigation proceeded, Applicant received her job offer in
written form by letter dated December 12, 2003. It confirmed the offer of a salary of
approximately $79,000 and a competitive benefits package.  This was a large economic9
jump from her then-current salary of $47,000 per year. She was excited that, with her
higher salary, she could help her daughter finish school and, perhaps, return to school
herself. She informed her superiors that the job offer had been received in writing and
that she planned to submit her written resignation on December 23, 2003, with a
projected date of departure on January 5, 2004.  She would start her new job the10
following week.
Also on December 12, 2003, Applicant was interviewed by the investigator
concerning several colleagues, including her former division chief.  Applicant’s own11
 Tr. 72.    12
 Tr. 73.    13
 Ex. C (W ritten Statement of Dec. 2003).    14
 Tr. 40-41.    15
 Tr. 48.    16
 Id.    17
 Tr. 52.    18
 Tr. 53.    19
4
conduct was questioned, as well. Applicant was not told who the subject of the
investigation was.  She was told the subject of the investigation could not be disclosed12
at that time.  She made a written statement summarizing the interview.  With regard to13 14
the division chief, Applicant stated she had a working relationship with her and had, in
the past, discussed such topics as being stationed abroad, the divorce rate of military
people stationed in Europe, and other topics in common to two former military females.
Of the division chief’s personal life, Applicant knew very little besides “water cooler talk”
about the woman’s marriage.  Neither woman likes the other, although the reasons15
why are unclear.
With regard to a former first line supervisor in the FOIA/PA office, Applicant
stated during the interview that she knew him professionally as a former boss. She
stated that after leaving the FOIA/PA office, Applicant asked this former boss to check
on the security clearance status of the woman with whom she was currently in training
and was meant to replace. Such information was available through the security
clearances index database. She did so at the request of the woman, whose promotion
seemed stalled.  Applicant was personally concerned because the woman continued to16
have login and password access which Applicant had yet not been extended, making
her observational training under the woman of little effective value.  Applicant’s former17
boss confirmed that the woman’s security clearance was pending and suggested there
may be financial issues. Applicant relayed the information to the woman, who
eventually moved to her new position.
During the interview, Applicant was also asked about a peer for whom she was
serving as his production assistant/manager. Applicant stated she knew nothing about
the man’s personal life and had never asked for any information about him in the
workplace. Applicant was specifically asked whether she knew why a particular woman
from the FOIA/PA office had her security clearance withdrawn or whether she had
heard any gossip about the woman.  Applicant told the investigator she had never18
checked on the woman’s security clearance status nor asked anyone to check it for her.
She did state, however, that she had heard someone in the office say the woman
“owed them money” and that the woman had been charged with some form of drug
offense.  19
 Tr. 57.    20
 Tr. 58.    21
 Id.    22
 Tr. 62-63; 101-102.    23
 Tr. 66.    24
 Tr. 71-72; 137-138.    25
 Tr. 99.    26
 Tr. 121-123.    27
 Tr. 62.    28
 Tr. 130.    29
5
The investigator further asked Applicant about a new hire who was serving as
Applicant’s team lead. She and the team lead shared a small cubicle, sometimes using
each other’s work areas. After he arrived, it took a long time for his security clearance to
be approved. Applicant became concerned that her work, which was with strictly
classified material, was within his view and access.  The man told Applicant he shared20
her concern and the matter was raised with Applicant’s immediate supervisor and
senior leadership. Applicant was told to “mind your own business,”  but she remained21
concerned. After two months, Applicant and the man “were so concerned about him not
being cleared properly that I said well let me just check the status of his clearance. So I
called [my female CCF contact].”  In October 2003, she called the contact in the22
presence of a senior research analyst who was also a good friend.  The man was not23
at work at the time and Applicant did not have his social security number, so the contact
narrowed down people until the man’s entry was ultimately discerned. The contact
confirmed that the man’s clearance status was still pending. Applicant informed the
man the following day. Subsequent to that time, Applicant introduced the senior analyst
friend to her contact at the CCF so the friend could check on her own security
clearance.24
At no time was it suggested to her that her checking was improper, illegal, or a
violation of the Privacy Act.  Applicant maintains she never intended to access, request25
to access, and/or request information be provided to her for which she did not have a
need to know.  There was nothing to preclude any of the people Applicant checked on26
from personally checking on whether their clearances were pending.  Applicant27
assumed it was not inappropriate, citing to her genuine concerns regarding the handling
of classified materials by those without a clearance and stating that she relied on her
former boss and her contact to inform her if such requests were inappropriate.28
Applicant saw no reason to follow formal channels of inquiry with regard to verifying
these individuals’ security clearance status because she did not think there was
anything wrong with doing it orally.  Those she called seemed to help her as a way to29
 Tr. 141.    30
 Tr. 131.    31
 Case File, Military Investigative Records Repository File  (Ex. 8, Statement of Dec. 16, 2003).    32
 U.S. Military Investigative Records Repository, Summary of Dec. 12, 2003, at 2.    33
 Id.    34
 Id.    35
 Id.    36
 Id.    37
 Tr. 150-151.    38
6
expedite satisfying the request for information regarding employee security clearance,
in lieu of going through a multi-step, formal written request and answer process.  “I30
didn’t think anything was wrong with it. And I’m quite sure if it had been then [my
superior] would have told me.”  31
The informal investigation was to be issued no later than 14 calendar days of the
November 24, 2003, letter appointing the investigating officer. The investigator’s report
was late. It was dated December 12, 2003, the day of Applicant’s interview. At least one
of its referenced subject interviews, however, was dated December 16, 2003.  32
The investigator made three recommendations based on his conclusions.
Among those recommendations was administrative action against Applicant for
perpetuating rumors about employees.  Applicant was described as a woman who33
violated the privacy rights of others by looking up personal clearance information “and is
an overall busy body in everyone’s business.”  It was recommended Applicant’s34
security clearance be temporarily revoked and that she be put on unpaid leave.35
Administrative action was also urged to stop Applicant from her “well established
pattern of looking through individual’s clearance records without permission or need to
know.”  The investigator also concluded that Applicant violated individuals’ rights to36
privacy, and had used her position and friendship to improperly collect information on
fellow employees. The investigator did not note a rule or regulation prohibiting or
otherwise addressing such activity. Those helping Applicant in her acquisition of
information were named and lesser sanctions recommended; of the man giving
Applicant security clearance information, it was merely recommended that he “should
also receive appropriate administrative actions for aiding and abiding (sic) [Applicant].”37
Of all the interviews, only the statement of the woman whose privacy was the subject of
the investigation and the statement of the woman who told her Applicant gossiped
about the woman’s marriage depict Applicant in a gossipy manner. In contrast to the
investigator’s assessment, Applicant’s former supervisor and friend testified that
Applicant is not a gossip, but a discreet employee.  She stated Applicant is not the38
 Tr. 82.    39
 Tr. 89.    40
 Tr. 82-83.    41
7
type to seek personnel information for her own personal benefit. At work, her former
supervisor felt Applicant demonstrated good judgment.
Applicant did not leave government service because she thought she was under
investigation.  Indeed, although she had some suspicions she might be involved in39
some of the scenarios discussed,  she never knew she was under investigation until40
she received an interrogatory from DOHA in September 2007 and a response to a
FOIA request in December 2007.  Consequently, when she completed her August41
2006 e-QIP she answered “no” to Section 22. That section inquired whether any of the
following have happened to the Applicant in the past seven years: 1) Fired from a job;
2) quit a job after being told you would be fired; 3) left a job by mutual agreement
following allegation of misconduct; 4) left a job by mutual agreement following allegation
of unsatisfactory performance; 5) left a job for other reasons under unfavorable
circumstances. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior,
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative
process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial
and common sense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny
of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative
Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the
SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).    42
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).    43
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).    44
 Id.    45
 Id.    46
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.    47
8
Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance of42
evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  43 44
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access45
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily46
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the47
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline E (Personal Conduct) to be
the most pertinent to the case. Personal conduct concerns under AG ¶ 15 arise from
questions regarding one’s ability to protect classified information. Conditions pertaining
to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are set forth and
discussed below.
Analysis
The SOR posed four allegations, all of which Applicant denied. Two of those
allegations are predicated on the assertion that Applicant knew she was the subject of
 Indeed, Applicant is not named in one interview statement and only referenced in passing in two of the    48
seven interview statements (not including Applicant’s own). See Case File, Military Investigative Records
Repository File (Ex. 6, Statement of Dec. 8, 2003); Case File, Military Investigative Records Repository File
(Ex. 5, Statement of Dec. 11, 2003); Case File, Military Investigative Records Repository File (Ex. 2,
Statement of Dec. 12, 2003), respectively.
 At most, Applicant “suspected” she might have something to do with some of the things discussed, but    49
she had no idea she was the subject of any investigation.
 Additionally, refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions in connection with a    50
personnel security or trustworthiness determination will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or
administrative determination of further processing for clearance eligibility.
9
an investigation when she resigned from her position in December 2003 and when she
completed the August 2006 e-QIP. Predicating those allegations on that assumption is
fatal inasmuch as there is no evidence to suggest Applicant knew she, or specifically
her conduct, was the subject of an investigation either before or after she left for her
new position. Indeed, the memorandum appointing an investigator and the resultant
investigative report make it clear the investigation was an effort to reveal facts
surrounding an allegation that personal information about a particular individual had
been improperly disclosed. Applicant’s name and activities did not emerge until after
the interviews were commenced and, even then, her activities were seldom the focus of
discussion.  Moreover, the facts make it clear that Applicant’s motivation for departing48
from her position when she did was not to avoid an investigation, but to accept a
previously negotiated and far more lucrative private sector job. Furthermore, there is
simply no evidence to counter Applicant’s testimony she had no knowledge the
investigation concerned her directly.  Lacking proof Applicant was under investigation49
and that she knew she was under investigation, she is technically correct in denying she
was “the subject of an investigation conducted by [the government]” as a result of her
actions from July 2002 through December 2003 (SOR 1.b), “resigned from her position.
. . during the investigation regarding your misconduct” (SOR 1.c), and “failed to disclose
that [she] left [federal employment] during an investigation regarding your misconduct.”
(SOR 1.d).
Allegation 1.a: “During the period from July 2002 through December 2003,
[Applicant] accessed information regarding fellow employees which [she] did not have a
need to know” remains. Security concerns arising from matters of personal conduct are
controlled by Guideline E of the AG. Such security concerns arise in the presence of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations which could indicate that the person
may not properly safeguard classified information.50
Through a former associate, Applicant requested information on the status of
various colleagues’ security clearances. Those entrusted with such information
imparted it freely in response. There is no evidence indicating how “need to know” was
defined in their workplace. The evidence does not support a finding that Applicant was
subject to, and aware of, any specific prohibition to what she was doing. The evidence
does support, however, a finding that she was specifically told to mind her own
10
business with regard to her cubicle mate’s pending security clearance status. Having
informed her superiors of her concerns, that matter should have been dropped after
their decision had been made. Such facts give rise to Personal Conduct Disqualifying
Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16((c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative
issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information) and AG ¶16(d)
(credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline
and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when
combined with all available information supports a whole person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard protected information).
The conduct at issue occurred in 2003 – five years ago. At the time, Applicant
still maintained contact with former colleagues in the FOIA/PA office which could
access status information on security clearances. Whether information on newer
colleagues’ security clearances was granted to Applicant as a courtesy extended to an
old friend or whether that office was unusually free with its freedom of information is
unclear. What is clear is that the incidents occurred several years ago, Applicant has
long since moved into the private sector, and there is no indication that any other
questionable incidents have since occurred or might occur in her present position. 
The evidence as a whole, however, indicates that it was the culture, not
Applicant, that was at fault here. The office in possession of the information sought
gave it to Applicant freely, yet those who actively retrieved and disclosed information
from the database were recommended a lesser sanction than Applicant despite the fact
they were the ones entrusted with access to the database. The main informant, upon
whose own gossip and hearsay the subject of the investigation relied, conceded she
availed herself of Applicant’s contacts and that she waited nearly a year before openly
waging her accusations against Applicant. In light of the passage of five years,
Applicant’s new employment, and the accepted practices within her former employment
culture, Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition (PC MC) ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. Moreover,
Applicant aggressively expressed some of her concerns regarding colleagues’ working
on or around classified information despite pending security clearances with her
superiors, albeit without results. Later, during her December 2003 interview, Applicant’s
solicited statement as to many of the facts now at issue was direct and forthcoming.
Such facts give rise to PC MC AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress).
11
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a public trust position must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
factors noted above. Applicant is a mature individual with a unique blend of military,
civilian government, and private sector experience During most of her service, she
worked in the area of intelligence. Consequently, she has experience working within
stated parameters. Moreover, in her penultimate position as a government civilian, she
worked in a FOIA/PA office which had access to the database for security clearance
indices. In her next job, she felt unfettered in making inquiries regarding colleagues’
security clearance statuses. The majority, if not all, of these requests were made with
the acquiescence, if not the urging, of the colleague at issue. Applicant’s contacts
possessing access to the database felt equally unfettered in confirming an individual’s
security clearance was still under investigation or pending. 
To the extent such requests were made with the approval of the individual whose
security clearance processing was stalled, there can be no issue of a privacy violation
inasmuch as any such right would have been waived upon request or acquiescence.
What the agency defined “need to know” is never clearly stated and no guidance is
given in the investigative report as to what, if any, established rule or disseminated
regulation Applicant violated in requesting such information. Without some standard for
guidance, there is no evidence security concerns remain or that Applicant mishandled
or failed to protect classified information. 
The protection of classified information is the central concern in issues regarding
personal conduct. Viewing Applicant’s record as a whole, there is no clear evidence that
in nearly 30 years of military, civilian government, and private sector service she ever
mishandled or failed to protect classified information. In light of the totality of the
circumstances, and given the depiction of procedures used within her former work
environment, Applicant has mitigated personal conduct security concerns. Moreover,
her actions here do not violate the level of trust expected under Guideline E. With
security concerns thus mitigated, it is clearly consistent with the national security to
continue Applicant’s security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
12
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance is granted.
__________________________
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
