 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-16070 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence.  Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2006, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
e-QIP version of a Security Clearance Application (hereinafter SF 86). On January 17, 
2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive). 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
It should be noted that on December 29, 2005, the President promulgated 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified 
Information, and on August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) 
published a memorandum directing implementation of those revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation), in which the 
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  The AG are applicable to Applicant’s 
case because his SOR was issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR. In a sworn, written statement, 
dated January 24, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government 
was prepared to proceed on February 5, 2008, and the case was assigned to 
Administrative Judge Henry Lazzaro on February 6, 2008. It was reassigned to me on 
February 14, 2008, due to caseload considerations. A Notice of Hearing was issued on 
February 19, 2008, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on March 19, 2008. 
 
During the hearing, two Government exhibits and two Applicant exhibits were 
received without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was 
received on March 28, 2008. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take 
Administrative Notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to Taiwan, also referred to 
as the Republic of China (hereinafter Taiwan), appearing in a written submission of the 
request.  Facts are proper for Administrative Notice when they are easily verifiable by 
an authorized source and relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the source 
information relied upon by the Government was publications of the Department of 
State;1 the Congressional Research Service;2 the Centre for Counterintelligence and 
Security Studies;3 the National Counterintelligence Center, now known as the Office of 
the National Counterintelligence Executive;4 a press release from the U.S. Department 
of Justice, U.S. Attorney, Western District of New York;5 a press release from the U.S. 
1 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Background Note: Taiwan, dated 
October 2007. 
 
2 Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Taiwan: Recent Developments and U.S. Policy 
Choices, dated October 9, 2006. 
 
3 Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Center for Counterintelligence and Security Studies, Intelligence Threat 
Handbook, excerpts, dated June 2004. 
 
4 National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage, dated 2000. 
 
5 U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney, Western District of New York, Press Release: Defendant 
Sentenced to 48 months in Trade Secret Theft Case Re: United States v. Jonathan C. Sanders, dated Apr. 18, 2006. 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of Virginia;6 and records of the 
U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia.7 
 
With regard to the National Counterintelligence Center Report, I note that it is 
eight years old, and the cited facts are based upon a “private survey” of “nearly a dozen 
selected Fortune 500 companies.” The report does not indicate how the companies 
were selected, what companies were selected, or how they decided upon their input to 
the survey. The survey results do not indicate whether the collection of economic 
information was accomplished through “open” methods, such as reading a newspaper, 
that raise no security issues under the relevant criteria, or more covert methods that 
might raise security concerns. Furthermore, as the selected companies are unidentified, 
it is impossible to assess possible bias or determine if there is an existing anti-Taiwan 
economic or political agenda. For these reasons, I conclude the factual matters 
asserted by Department Counsel, as demonstrated by the proffered report, should be 
given less weight than information from a more authoritative source.  
 
The two press releases were presented apparently to substantiate that Taiwan 
actively pursues collection of U.S. economic and propriety information, and therefore, 
Applicant’s relationship with family members in Taiwan raises suspicion of him. Neither 
case involves Applicant personally or involved espionage through any familial 
relationship. The Western District of New York press release concerns the sentencing of 
a U.S. citizen for conspiring to commit trade secret theft during 1999-2001 to the benefit 
of a corporation based in Taiwan. There is no indication of any government 
sponsorship, approval, or involvement encouraging the Taiwanese company‘s attempt 
to acquire sensitive commercial information for competitive advantage.  Likewise, there 
is no evidence that Taiwan’s government was involved in, or sanctioned, the criminal 
activity. 
 
The Eastern District of Virginia press release and the court record set forth the 
facts and sentencing of a former U.S. State Department official for unauthorized 
possession of classified information, making false statements to the government 
concerning his relationship with a female Taiwanese intelligence officer, and by not 
reporting that he had traveled to Taiwan where he met with the foreign intelligence 
officer. The criminal wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens is of decreased relevance to an 
assessment of Applicant’s security suitability, especially where there is no evidence that 
Applicant, nor any member of his family, was ever involved in any aspect of the case or 
ever targeted by any Taiwanese intelligence official. 
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, I take administrative 
notice that the events described in the press releases or related court record occurred,8 
6 U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of Virginia, Press Release: Former State 
Department Official Sentenced for Mishandling Classified Material, dated Jan. 22, 2007. 
 
7 U.S. District Court Eastern District of Virginia, Criminal Case No. 1:05CR43, U.S. v. Donald W. Keyser, 
Statement of Facts, dated Dec. 12, 2005. 
 
8 Tr. at 28-30. 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
as well as that information set forth in the National Counterintelligence Center Report.  
However, the inference that somehow Applicant and/or his family participated in criminal 
activity was not argued and is not accepted.  Pursuant to Rule 201, Federal Rules of 
Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts, as set forth below under the 
Taiwan subsection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.f. of the SOR.  Those admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance, the level of which has not been divulged.  He has been 
employed as a senior electrical engineer by the same government contractor since 
August 2005.9 Applicant’s colleagues, working group leaders, both current and past, 
and a director of operations, all support his application and characterize him in a very 
positive light, using terms such as: integrity, sound judgment, highest ethical standards, 
diligent, and knowledgeable.10 According to his immediate supervisor, his judgment and 
reliability are both rated “excellent,” the highest of the five possible ratings on his 
employee performance evaluation.11 
 
Applicant was born in Taiwan in 1972,12 and resided there with one or both of his 
parents.  When his parents divorced, he moved in with his father.13  In 1982, at the age 
of 10, Applicant immigrated to the U.S. with his father, stepmother, and brother.14 He 
subsequently left his father’s residence when he was in high school. He attended a U.S. 
university from 1990 until 1996, and earned BSEE and MS degrees in engineering 
management.15 Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 1991.16 In 
1994, Applicant married,17 and he and his wife have had three children, all of whom are 
native-born Americans.18  
 
 
9 Government Exhibit 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated Feb. 6, 2006), at 11. 
 
10 See Applicant Exhibits B-1 through B-5 (Character References, various dates). 
 
11 Applicant Exhibit A (Employee Performance Evaluation, dated Oct. 18, 2007), at 3. 
 
12 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
13 Tr. at 44. 
 
14 Id. at 45. 
 
15 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 9, at 10. 
 
16 Id. at 7. 
 
17 Id. at 17. 
 
18 Id. at 21-23. 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
Applicant’s father was born in 1947 and raised in Taiwan.19 When Applicant and 
his father relocated to the U.S., the father owned and operated a restaurant.20 
Applicant’s father has no known affiliations with the Taiwanese Government.21 After he 
left his father’s residence, Applicant and his father were estranged, and did not 
communicate for about 20 years.22 The first and only time they have spoken since the 
mid-1980s was in March 2007, after his father had a stroke and his uncle encouraged 
him to call his father.23 As it happens, his father was in a hospital located in the Peoples 
Republic of China (PRC).24 Their conversation lasted less than five minutes because 
his father had a hard time speaking.25 Applicant has no idea where his father is now.26  
Applicant has not had any communication with his father since that one brief telephone 
call. 
 
His mother was born in 1947 and raised in Taiwan, and has remained a resident 
and citizen of Taiwan.27 Since her divorce, she has been a single homemaker, and for 
the past 10 years, has not held a job.28 In May 2006, Applicant saw his mother for the 
second time since he left Taiwan (1995 was the first time). He speaks with her by 
telephone or computer, generally once a month.29 While she has an inheritance, on 
occasion, depending on his financial condition, Applicant may send her small amounts 
of money.30 He did not send her any money in 2007, but did bring her $7,000-$8,000 
when they visited in 2006.31 His mother has never had any type of job or affiliation with 
the Government of Taiwan.32 
 
 
19 Id. at 21. 
 
20 Tr. at 45. 
 
21 Id. at 65. 
 
22 Id. at 44. 
 
23 Id. at 44-46. 
 
24 Id.  
 
25 Id. at 55-56. 
 
26 Id. at 46. 
 
27 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 9, at 20. 
 
28 Tr. at 43. 
 
29 Id. at 54. 
 
30 Id. at 53. 
 
31 Id. at 53-54. 
 
32 Id. at 54. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
ree 
children.  
t furnish 
her support, but does send some money generally on the Chinese New Year.47 
Taiwan, and continue to reside there as Taiwanese citizens.48 Her brother is a laborer, 
              
 
Applicant’s wife was born in Taiwan in 1970.33 It is unclear where she was raised 
or when she immigrated to the U.S.  They were married in the U.S.34 She became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in September 1999.35 While she retains her dual citizenship, 
she is willing to renounce her Taiwanese citizenship, but has not been furnished 
guidance on how to do so.36 Likewise, she is willing to surrender her Taiwanese 
passport, which expires in 2016.37 She does not hold a job outside the family home, but 
is a fulltime homemaker raising their three children.38 In 1995, after their marriage in the 
U.S., Applicant and his wife returned to Taiwan so their families could bless them and 
have a traditional wedding dinner.39 They returned briefly in 2006 with their th
40
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law was born and raised in Taiwan where she continues to 
reside as a Taiwanese citizen.41 She owns a restaurant in Taiwan.42  She has never 
been affiliated with the Taiwanese Government or Intelligence Service.43 She came to 
the U.S. on one occasion in the 1990s,44 and Applicant and his wife have visited Taiwan 
to see her in 1995 and 2006.45  Applicant’s wife speaks with her at least once a month, 
but Applicant’s contacts are about once every six months.46 Applicant does no
 
Applicant’s wife has two sisters and one brother who were born and raised in 
                                            
33 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 9, at 17. 
 Id. 
 Id. at 18. 
 Tr. at 52. 
 Id. at 41-42. 
 Id. at 52. 
 Government Exhibit 2 (Answers to Interrogatories, dated Dec. 17, 2007), at 26. 
 Id. 
 Tr. at 47. 
 Id. at 46, 48, 56. 
 Id. at 56. 
 Id. at 47. 
 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 39, at 26. 
 Tr. at 56-57. 
47 Id. at 64. 
 
 
34
 
35
 
36
 
37
 
38
 
39
 
40
 
41
 
42
 
43
 
44
 
45
 
46
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
one sister is a flight attendant, and the other sister is a homemaker.49 Applicant last saw 
them in 2006, and he has little, if any, contact with his in-laws, but his wife does have 
periodic contacts with her sisters.50 They do not speak to the brother.51 
 
Applicant’s father has four brothers-Applicant’s uncles-whom he has not seen nor 
had any contact with, since he immigrated to the U.S. in 1982.52 They were all born and 
raised in Taiwan.  One uncle was employed by the Taiwanese Customs Service, but 
retired and eventually moved to the U.S.53 Another uncle was a painter of movie boards 
who retired at least 20 years ago, and still resides in Taiwan.54 A third uncle was 
educated in the U.S. and was a professor before retiring in the U.S.55 The fourth uncle 
was also a professor, at a public university in Taiwan, before retiring in Taiwan.56 Other 
than the uncle who worked for the Customs Service, none of his other uncles was ever 
affiliated with the Taiwanese Government. 
 
Applicant has an estimated net worth in the U.S. of about $400,000,57 and does 
not own any property in Taiwan.58  He has no intentions on visiting Taiwan within the 
next three years.59  In December 2007, Applicant surrendered his Taiwanese passport 
to his Facility Security Officer.60 
 
Taiwan 
 
In 1949, a large number of Chinese refugees fled from the civil war in mainland 
China and immigrated to the off-shore Island of Formosa.  The Communists in mainland 
China established the PRC, and Chiang Kai-shek, the leader of the Kuomintang on 
mainland China, established a provisional government and capital in Taipei, Taiwan.  
 
48 Id. at 48. 
 
49 Id. at 49. 
 
50 Id. at 58. 
 
51 Id. 
 
52 Id. at  49-50, 64. 
 
53 Id. at 60-61. 
 
54 Id. at 50, 61-62. 
 
55 Id. at 62. 
 
56 Id. at 63. 
 
57 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 39, at 14. 
 
58 Tr. at 65. 
 
59 Id. at 64. 
 
60 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 39, at 4 (Letter from FSO, dated Dec. 17, 2007). 
 
8 
                                      
 
wan, and continues to provide arms 
in support of Taiwan’s security and region stability. 
eliance in recent years that has resulted in the growth 
of indigenous military production. 
ation, there is no direct or indirect 
connection to, or involvement with, Applicant.  
Policies 
h are useful in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
erson, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
ise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
The PRC refuses to recognize Taiwan’s independence, and insists that there is only 
“one China.”  After recognizing Taiwan for nearly 30 years, on January 1, 1979, the U.S. 
formally recognized the government of the PRC as the sole legitimate government of 
China.  The U.S. does not support independence for Taiwan and, under the Taiwan 
Relations Act, signed into law on April 10, 1979, is committed to a “one-China policy.” 
Nevertheless, the U.S. has been also been committed to maintaining cultural, 
commercial and other nonofficial relations with Tai
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy with a strong economy, with significant 
economic contacts with both the PRC and the U.S.  Taiwan’s own national security 
remains under constant threat from the PRC since PRC has not renounced the use of 
force against Taiwan, and this has led to Taiwan’s large military establishment. 
Taiwan’s armed forces are equipped with weapons obtained primarily from the U.S., but 
Taiwan has stressed military self-r
 
Taiwan is believed to be an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence and 
proprietary information. There is no evidence that Taiwan uses coercive measures to 
gain access to such information. While there have been a number of incidents involving 
individuals, companies, and Taiwanese intelligence officers improperly acquiring U.S. 
economic intelligence and proprietary inform
 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, whic
 
An Administrative Judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the p
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likew
 
9 
                                      
 
 case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
 as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
Anal sis 
 
uideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
ecurity concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
 obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
                                                          
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”61 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the Government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the Applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, 
explanation, extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the 
Government’s
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” Accordingly, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
 
y
G
The s
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to
61 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.62 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion@ is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), Aconnections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information@ may raise security concerns. Also, AG ¶ 7(d), “sharing living quarters with a 
person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” may raise 
security concerns as well. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply in this case.  However, 
the security significance of these identified conditions requires further examination of 
Applicant’s respective relationships with his various extended family members who are 
either Taiwanese citizen-residents or dual citizen-U.S. residents to determine the 
degree of “heightened risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.@ Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows Athere is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.@ Also, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
Applicant’s relationship with his various extended family members is diverse. 
Those who are Taiwanese citizen-residents, his mother, father, mother-in-law, brother-
in-law, two sisters-in-law, and two uncles, require the most scrutiny.  His relationship 
with his father was strained and, for the most part, non-existent for over 20 years. The 
five-minute telephone call between them while his father was in the hospital with a 
stroke did not drastically alter this minimal relationship.  Likewise, he has had no 
62 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
relationship with his two uncles since he departed Taiwan in 1982. He has no 
relationship with his brother-in-law, and a rare, indirect relationship with his two sisters-
in-law. As far as they are concerned, the contacts and relationships are casual and 
infrequent.  
 
The relationship he has with his mother is now somewhat closer and more 
frequent.  He resided with his father upon his parents’ divorce, as well as after he 
arrived in the U.S., and did not see his mother for 13 years after he arrived in the U.S.  It 
was another 11 years before he saw her again.  While they do have periodic contact by 
telephone and computer, and he sends her some money every so often, even those 
activities have not demonstrated a really warm close relationship. His relationship with 
his mother-in-law is somewhat similar.  He has seen her on only three occasions in 13 
years, and has direct contact with her about once every six months. 
 
His relationship with his spouse, a dual citizen-U.S. resident, is obviously much 
closer.  Nevertheless, while she retains her dual citizenship, she is willing to renounce 
her Taiwanese citizenship. She does not hold a job outside the family home, but is a 
fulltime homemaker raising their three children. 
 
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, including the 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government, within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.63  In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”64 Nevertheless, the 
relationship between a foreign government and the U.S. may be relevant in determining 
whether a foreign government or an entity it controls is likely to attempt to exploit a 
resident or citizen to take action against the U.S. through the Applicant.  It is reasonable 
to presume that a friendly relationship, or the existence of a democratic government, is 
not determinative, but it may make it less likely that a foreign government would attempt 
to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or associates in that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, the U.S. and Taiwan have a history of friendly relations making 
it less likely that the Taiwanese Government would attempt coercive means to obtain 
sensitive information.  However, it does not eliminate the possibility that a foreign power 
would employ some non-coercive measures in an attempt to exploit his relatives.  While 
Applicant has some extended family members still residing in Taiwan, there may be 
speculation as to “some risk,” but that speculation, in the abstract, does not, without 
63 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
64 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
12 
                                      
 
substantially more, establish evidence of a “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
As to Applicant’s very causal relationship with his father, brother-in-law, two 
sisters-in-law, and two uncles, there is a very low potential of forcing him to choose 
between the interests of U.S. and those of either Taiwan or those extended family 
members. He has met his burden of showing there is little likelihood that those 
relationships could create a risk for foreign influence of exploitation. I find AG ¶¶ 8(a) 
and 8(c) fully apply in this case.  As to his slightly closer relationship with his mother and 
mother-in-law, AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) partially apply to a more limited extent. 
 
As to his relationship with his wife, AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) fully apply.  Applicant has 
been a resident of the U.S. since 1982, when he was 10 years old.  He attended U.S. 
schools for his education.  He and his wife became naturalized U.S. citizens and their 
three children are native-born U.S. citizens.  He surrendered his Taiwanese passport 
and they are willing to renounce their dual citizenship. They have no foreign financial 
interests.  Applicant’s performance evaluation and letters of support laud his hard work 
and excellent performance, and refer to him using terms such as: integrity, sound 
judgment, highest ethical standards, diligent, and knowledgeable. Applicant and his wife 
have “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [they] can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has an estimated net 
worth in the U.S. of about $400,000, and does not own any property in Taiwan. He has 
resided in the U.S. since 1982, and became a U.S. citizen in 1991.  He married in the 
U.S., and his closest family members are his wife and three children, and they reside 
 
13 
                                      
 
with him in the U.S.  As such, they are not vulnerable to direct coercion or exploitation, 
and the realistic possibility of pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress with regard to 
them is low. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with his various extended family members who are 
Taiwanese citizen-residents is varied. Some are historically non-existent relationships, 
some are limited to extremely rare visits with periodic telephone contacts, and some are 
generally limited to infrequent telephone contacts.  While Taiwan is believed to be an 
active collector of U.S. economic intelligence and proprietary information, there is no 
evidence that Taiwan uses coercive measures to gain access to such information.  It is 
in Taiwan’s interests to maintain that friendship to counterbalance the PRC.  It is very 
unlikely Taiwan would forcefully attempt to coerce Applicant through his relatives still 
residing in Taiwan. (See AG & 2(a)(8).) The presence of extended-family members in 
Taiwan without any affiliation or relationship to the Government of Taiwan, does not 
generate a realistic potential for exploitation. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Chief Administrative Judge 
