 
 
 
 
1
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-14970 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.  
 
On June 28, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (SF 86). On April 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 22, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on June 2, 
 
 
 
 
2
2008, and issued a Notice of Hearing on June 5, 2008. The case was heard on June 25, 
2008, as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through C 
into evidence without objection.  At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open 
until July 11, 2008, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. On 
that day, Applicant submitted two exhibits that I marked as AE D and E and admitted 
into the record without objection by the Government. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 3, 2008.                                                          
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.b, I.f, 1.h, 1.l, and 1.m of the SOR. She denied all of the other allegations. Those 
admissions are incorporated into the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. She has two and a half years of college in the area of 
administration and accounting. She has two adult children, ages 34 and 32. She has 
been married several times. She married her last husband in 2000. He died in 
November 2003, leaving her with $16,000 of financial obligations and insufficient funds 
to pay the debt. (Tr. 36; 71).  
 
 Applicant began her current position with a federal contractor in January 2007. 
She is an administrative assistant to a vice-president of the company. About three 
weeks ago, she started a part-time job to supplement her income. (Tr. 61). Prior to her 
position with the federal contractor, she worked for various companies. She did not work 
from September 2001 to August 2004, while she was married to her last husband and 
subsequent to his death. Other than that time period, she worked most of her life. (Tr. 
21-23). 
 
 Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties in 1986 that continued until she 
married her last husband in 2000.  During those fourteen years, she accrued significant 
financial obligations because she exercised poor judgment while in various 
relationships. (Tr. 71-72). In March 2002, she filed a Petition for a Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy. In June 2002, the court entered an order, discharging approximately 
$24,824 in debt. After the discharge, she was in “a good financial place.” (Tr. 37).  
However, subsequent to that discharge, she again began accumulating delinquent 
debts. (Tr. 37).  
 
 In June 2007, Applicant completed a SF-86. In response to questions about her 
finances, she acknowledged that she had filed a petition for bankruptcy within the past 
seven years and had an automobile repossessed. She noted that she was not sure of 
the status of her financial delinquencies. Under the heading, “Additional Comments,” 
she wrote, “My credit is not good.  I’m in the process of cleaning up my credit.” (GE 1 at 
35).  
 
 
 
 
 
3
 In January 2008, the Government sent Applicant a set of Interrogatories inquiring 
about thirteen delinquent debts and one judgment in follow-up to the SF-86. When she 
returned the document, she included a copy of her budget, which is current, with some 
modifications because of her new part-time position. Her net monthly income is about 
$1,600. Her expenses are about $857, leaving a net remainder of about $750 a month 
for other expenditures.  (GE 2 at 5; Tr. 61).  Last year, she started becoming more 
financially solvent. (Tr. 73). 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CRB) from March 27, 2008, November 2007 and 
July 2007, the SOR alleged eleven delinquent debts, totaling $16,607. (GE 3, 4 & 5). All 
of those debts were the subject of the Government’s January 2008 Interrogatories. The 
status of those debts is as follows: 
 
 1. Applicant asserted that she has no knowledge of five delinquent debts 
because she never had accounts with those creditors: SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j.  
She has not done anything to investigate the debts in order to have them removed from 
her credit history.  
 
 2. One debt was resolved in the 2002 bankruptcy: ¶ 1.h. 
 
 3. Applicant admitted having knowledge of five debts in the SOR:  ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.e, 1.f, and 1.k. She had accounts for her husband’s estate with the creditors listed in 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  She called the creditors a few times after her husband’s death in 
November 2003 to inquire about the debts. Other than those phone calls, she said, “I’ve 
not taken time, which I know that’s really a problem. I haven’t taken time to do a letter, 
and like you said, maybe called – go set up an appointment to go in and talk to talk to 
them.” (Tr. 58). She thinks that the debt alleged in ¶ 1.e may be the balance owed on an 
automobile loan that she “could have” co-signed for her roommate. (Tr. 45-48). It 
remains unpaid or unresolved. She disputes the $9,287 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, 
relating to an automobile repossession, and believes the amount is $4,000. She has not 
taken any steps to resolve it.  “Truthfully, I’ve not done anything.” (Tr. 58).  SOR ¶ 1.k 
alleges an unpaid 2002 judgment for $1,650, which arose after she was evicted from an 
apartment.  She disagrees with the amount, but has not taken steps to resolve the 
matter. 
 
 Applicant submitted her 2007/2008 Annual Performance Evaluation. According to 
her supervisor, Applicant’s over-all performance summary is “Meets Expectations Plus.”  
(AE A).  Applicant reviewed the evaluation and noted that she felt “very fortunate to 
have the opportunity to work in the [division]. (Id.). 
 
 On July 9, 2008, Applicant hired a law firm to “help me clear my credit report and 
negotiate settlements with the verified creditors.” (AE D and E).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
5
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns, two of 
which may be applicable in this case. Under AG ¶ 19(a) “an inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. Applicant began 
accumulating delinquent debt in 1986, some of which was not resolved until 2002 when 
she filed bankruptcy. Subsequent to the discharge of about $24,000, she accrued 
additional delinquent debts that she did not pay or resolve.  The evidence is sufficient to 
raise those two potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 20 includes six conditions that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
 
 
 
6
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
   Applicant=s financial problems started in 1986, and have essentially continued 
into the present, except for a brief period in 2002 when she discharged many debts 
through a bankruptcy. Because the problems have been ongoing for many years, they 
reflect on her reliability and judgment. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
Applicant attributed her financial issues to previous relationship problems and 
exercising poor judgment while in the relationships. Those were situations under her 
control, and consequently, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
On April 3, 2008, DOHA issued a SOR to Applicant, notifying her of the 
delinquent debts that were a concern to the Government. As of the hearing on June 25, 
2008, she had not taken any steps to resolve ten of the eleven delinquent debts alleged 
in the SOR. (One debt was previously resolved in a 2002 bankruptcy.) She submitted a 
copy of her budget that indicates she has some money at the end of the month that she 
could use to pay or resolve those outstanding financial obligations. On July 9, 2008, she 
entered into an agreement with a law firm to begin investigation of those issues. While 
the execution of that agreement is an affirmative step in managing her finances, it is not 
sufficient evidence that her problems are under control, as required under AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
Throughout the security clearance process, Applicant admitted that she had 
credit problems that she wanted to resolve. Despite her consistent acknowledgement of 
those issues, she just recently executed an agreement to begin the process of resolving 
her credit problems. Because Applicant waited over a year to initiate action to resolve 
her debts, and as of today not one of the ten outstanding debts has been resolved or 
paid, her recent action cannot be construed as a “good faith” effort to pay or resolve her 
over-due debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Although Applicant disputes several debts, she did not present any evidence to 
support the application of AG ¶ 20(e). AG ¶ 20(f) does not apply.   
 
 “Whole Person” Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
 
 
7
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a 51-year-old woman, 
who candidly acknowledged that her financial difficulties for many years were the result 
of poor relationship choices and money management issues. In 2002, she filed 
bankruptcy to discharge about $24,000 of debt. Since that discharge, she again began 
accumulating debts that she chose not to manage or resolve. 
 
In June 2007, Applicant completed a SF-86. In it she acknowledged that she had 
financial issues and that she “was in the process of cleaning up” her credit. In January 
2008, the Government inquired about thirteen debts that were delinquent. In April 2008, 
the Government alleged eleven of those debts in a SOR and placed her on notice that 
her finances could effect her employment. In May 2008, Applicant answered the SOR 
and requested a hearing. On June 25, 2008, the hearing was held. At the time of the 
hearing, only one of the eleven debts was resolved or paid, despite her previous 
statement that she was working on the credit problems. On July 9, 2008, she decided to 
seek professional help.  
 
Applicant’s decision to employ the assistance of a law firm to resolve her issues 
is a positive step in achieving financial stability. However, failing to initiate that step until 
very recently indicates an on-going lack of commitment to manage her financial 
obligations and demonstrates unreliability. Until she resolves her delinquent debts and 
establishes a solid budget and track record of fiscal responsibility, similar problems may 
recur in the future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves substantial questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under financial 
considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i through 1.m:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
   
________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
