 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-15153 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), based on four delinquent debts totaling $23,381, including a delinquent 
student loan for $20,237. Applicant paid off all the debts except the student loan, and he 
has been making regular payments on the student loan for six months. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on December 18, 2006. 
On March 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
 
2 
 
 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 19, 2008; answered it on 
March 31, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on April 4, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
April 25, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on April 29, 2008. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on May 9, 2008, scheduling the hearing for May 28, 2008. Applicant 
requested additional time to prepare, and I granted his request. On May 29, 2008, 
DOHA issued a second notice of hearing, rescheduling the hearing for June 17, 2008. I 
convened the hearing as rescheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through G, which were admitted without objection. 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until July 2, 2008, to enable him to 
submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AX H through L, and they were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s response to AX H through L is 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on June 26, 2008. The record closed on July 2, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d. His admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old digital test technician employed by a federal contractor. 
He has worked for his current employer since December 2006. He previously worked as 
a temporary contract employee, supporting the same employer from January to 
December 2006. He has also been self-employed since December 2004, servicing and 
repairing electronic scanning equipment (Tr. 48). He received an associate’s degree in 
electronic engineering and technology in 1991, and has been taking college classes to 
obtain his bachelor’s degree since January 2000 (Tr. 6, 39-40). He is unmarried and 
has three children, ages 20, 15, and 8, who live with him and his girlfriend (Tr. 41). He 
had an interim clearance until the SOR was issued, but he has never held a final 
security clearance.  
 
 Applicant’s security clearance application reflects he was laid off from work and 
unemployed from July 2003 to September 2003. He was injured on the job in January 
2004 and unemployed until April 2004. He was laid off again in May 2005 and 
unemployed until September 2005. 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor describes him as dedicated, extremely conscious 
of security procedures, hard-working, respectful, and a team player (AX L). A co-worker 
regards him as a dedicated employee and a “great asset” to his company (AX K). 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts: a medical debt (¶ 1.a), a utility bill (¶ 
1.b), a credit card account (¶ 1.c), and a delinquent student loan (¶ 1.d). The medical 
debt was for treatment of Applicant’s injuries in an automobile accident in 2004. He 
thought all medical bills had been paid by insurance, but his credit report reflected a 
delinquent debt for $851. He contacted the collection agency and paid $756, the 
amount the agency claimed due on the account. He has been unable to identify the 
creditor, if any, for the remaining $95 listed on his credit report, but is willing to pay it if 
the creditor can be identified (Tr. 33-34). Applicant’s credit report dated June 30, 2008 
reflects a zero balance on this account (AX I at 1). 
 
 The utility bill in SOR ¶ 1.b arose after Applicant sold his house in 2005. The 
utility company had been estimating his bills, but they read the meter after Applicant 
moved and determined he owed $2,994. This bill appears to include the cost of 
installing a water heater (Tr. 35). The debt has been paid in full (AX B; Tr. 34-35). 
 
 The $55 delinquent credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was on an account 
opened in 2006. In January 2008, Applicant received an offer to settle the account for 
$600, paid it, and received a letter from the collection attorneys stating the account had 
been settled (AX E; Tr. 35-36). Applicant’s credit report dated June 30, 2008, reflects a 
zero balance on this account (AX I at 1). 
 
 Applicant is in a loan rehabilitation program for the delinquent student loan 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant’s mother co-signed his student loans around 1988, and 
applicant sent his mother $150 per month to pay the loans starting in 2000. He was 
unaware that there were two separate loans and his mother was not making the 
payments on one of them. He discovered the account was delinquent when he was 
interviewed by a security investigator (GX 7 at 2-3). His credit reports reflected that the 
last activity on this account, with a balance of $20,237, was in February 2004 (GX 4 at 
3; GX 5 at 2; GX 6 at 9). He has been making monthly payments of $220 by automatic 
debit from his checking account since January 2008. If he adheres to the monthly 
payment plan, his account will be rehabilitated and considered current after he makes 
the October 2008 payment (AX G; AX J). 
 
 Applicant testified that the security investigator “did [him] a favor” by confronting 
him with his delinquent debts, because he had taken his good credit for granted and did 
not pay enough attention to his financial situation (Tr. 45). He now pays close attention 
to his finances and subscribes to a credit monitoring service (Tr. 46). 
 
 Applicant works about 20 hours a week and earns about $3,000 per month as a 
government contractor. He earns between $500 and $1,500 per month from his private 
business (Tr. 48). He submitted a personal financial statement in January 2008, 
reporting total net monthly income of about $3,936 per month and monthly expenses 
between $2,885 and $3,235, leaving a remainder between $1,051 and $701. He went 
through a period of accumulating debts, but now his only outstanding debt is the student 
loan (Tr. 51). His car is paid for, and he has no credit cards (Tr. 51). He has about 
 
4 
 
 
$30,000 in checking accounts, and he intends to use these funds to purchase a house 
(Tr. 66). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
5 
 
 
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@  
 
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e). AG ¶ 19(b) is not 
raised because there is no evidence of “frivolous or irresponsible spending.” Since the 
government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 
19(a), (c) and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
 
6 
 
 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
The first two prongs (“so long ago” and “so infrequent”) are not established, 
because Applicant had multiple delinquent debts and the student loans are still in the 
process of being rehabilitated. The medical bills attributable to his automobile accident 
arose from circumstances that are “unlikely to recur,” but the utility bills, delinquent 
credit card account, and delinquent student loan did not arise from unusual 
circumstances. The final prong (“does not cast doubt”) is established by Applicant’s 
aggressive responses to his delinquent debts after he learned about them and his 
proactive measures to prevent recurrence. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is established for the 
medical bills, but not for the others. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. The automobile 
accident giving rise to the delinquent medical bills was beyond Applicant’s control, and 
he has resolved this debt. Applicant’s periods of unemployment also were beyond his 
control, but his unemployment ended before the delinquent credit card account was 
opened, and his unemployment appears to have been unrelated to the medical bills. He 
did not attribute his delinquent student loans to unemployment, but rather to being 
unaware that there were two loans and his mother was paying only one. I conclude AG 
¶ 20(b) is established for the medical bills, but not for the others. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition also has two prongs that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive. If 
the person has received counseling, it must also be shown that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or under control. However, if the person has 
not received counseling, this mitigating condition may still apply if there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or under control. Applicant has not 
received counseling, but it appears his financial problems are under control. I conclude 
AG ¶ 20(c) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
 
7 
 
 
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. Applicant was unaware of some 
delinquent debts until he applied for a security clearance. Upon learning of his 
delinquent debts, he took prompt and aggressive action. His only outstanding debt is his 
student loan, and it appears to be under control. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
produced evidence that he paid the balances in full for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.c, and he produced a recent credit report showing zero balances on both 
accounts. He is willing to pay these two small amounts if the creditors can be identified. 
I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, intelligent, educated adult. He was sincere, candid, well 
prepared, and credible at the hearing. Like many applicants, he did not pay attention to 
his credit history until he applied for a clearance and discovered that his financial record 
raised security concerns. Confronted with the facts, he responded promptly and 
aggressively.  
 
 Applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off 
each and every debt alleged in the SOR. All that is required is that he demonstrate that 
he has “established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant 
actions to implement that plan.” ADP Case No. 18900 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008), 
 
8 
 
 
citing ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006) and ISCR Case No. 02-
25499 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2005). Applicant has resolved all the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR except for the student loan on which he has been making regular 
payments for six months. Based on his recent track record and his credible testimony at 
the hearing, I am confident that he will continue making payments on his student loans 
until the account is rehabilitated.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
