 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15076 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-
QIP), on February 28, 2007. On February 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 11, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on April 21, 2008.  The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on April 23, 2008.  
Applicant received the FORM on May 4, 2008. He had 30 days from receipt of the 
FORM to submit any additional material.  He did not respond. The FORM was 
forwarded to the hearing office on July 7, 2008 and assigned to me that same date.   
 
2 
 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated November 28, 2007, Applicant admitted SOR  
¶¶ 1.b – 1.f, 1.h, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.n – 1.r. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, 1.m, 2.a, and 
2.b. (Item 3.)  
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed with the defense contractor since 
September 2006. (Item 4; Item 5.)   
 
On September 19, 2006, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for Public Trust 
Position, SF 85P.  He answered “No” in response to question 22.b, “Are you now over 
180 days delinquent on any loan or financial obligation? Include loans or obligations 
funded or guaranteed by the Federal Government.” On February 28, 2007, Applicant 
completed an electronic questionnaire for investigation processing (E-QIP) in order to 
apply for a security clearance. He answered “No” in response to Section 28.a “In the 
last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and in response 
to Section 28.b “Are you currently 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” 
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts: 
a $4 debt placed for collection in August 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.a; Item 7 at 1); a $313 medical 
account placed for collection in August 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.b; Item 7 at 1); a $239 medical 
account placed for collection in May 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.c; Item 7 at 1); a $75 medical 
account placed for collection in May 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.d; Item 7 at 1); a $392 medical 
account placed for collection in November 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.e; Item 7 at 2, Item 8 at 4, 7); 
a $265 medical account placed for collection in July 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.f; Item 7 at 2; Item 8 
at 4, 6, 8); a $414 credit card account charged off in March 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.g; Item 7 at 
2); a $845 medical account placed for collection in July 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.h; Item 7 at 2); a 
$346 account placed for collection in January 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.i; Item 7 at 2); a $206  
account placed for collection in August 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.j; Item 7 at 2); a $157 delinquent 
telephone account placed for collection in July 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.k; Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 
6); a $130 account placed for collection in November 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.l; Item 7 at 2; Item 
8 at 4); a $6,755 deficiency owed after an automobile repossession in November 2006 
(SOR ¶ 1.m; Item 8 at 3); a $69 account placed for collection in November 2002 (SOR ¶ 
1.n; Item 8 at 3); a $129 medical account placed for collection in December 2006 (SOR 
¶ 1.o; Item 8 at 6); a $37 returned check debt (SOR ¶ 1.p; Item 3); a $55 returned check 
debt placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.q; Item 3); and a $96 medical debt placed for 
collection in May 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.r; Item 8 at 6, 7).  
 
In a response to interrogatories, Applicant indicated that he planned to resolve all 
of the debts by May 2008. (Item 6 at 3.) In his answer to the SOR, he states the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.a is resolved but provided nothing to verify the debt is paid. He is looking into 
the other accounts. He states that in six months 98% of the debts listed will be resolved.  
 
3 
 
 
He states he is not a deadbeat. He has been making car payments for two years and he 
has paid several old debts not alleged in the SOR. (Item 3.)   
 
Applicant did not indicate that he had delinquent debts on his application for a 
position of public trust or on his e-QIP application because he was not aware of the 
delinquent debt because his ex-wife handled all of the bills. Applicant married in August 
2003 and divorced in April 2006. (Item 3; Item 4, Section 13/15.) Applicant encountered 
two periods of unemployment, from March 2001 to November 2001, and from March 
2006 to June 2006. (Item 4, Section 11.) He provided no information about his work 
performance.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); and FC DC ¶ 19(e) (consistent spending beyond one’s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis) apply to Applicant’s case. Since 
2001, Applicant has a history of not meeting financial obligations. He incurred numerous 
delinquent accounts that remain unresolved. The SOR alleged 18 delinquent accounts 
that were either charged off or placed for collection with a total approximate balance of 
$10,527.   
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant’s history of financial irresponsibility goes back to at least 2001. His history of 
financial irresponsibility casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  Applicants financial issues remain. He has not provided proof that any of the 
debts are resolved.  
 
5 
 
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) is considered because Applicant endured 
two periods of unemployment. He was unemployed for seven months in 2001 and for 
three months in 2006. He underwent a divorce a few years ago and several of the 
delinquent accounts appear to be medical debts. However, Applicant provided no 
explanation as to how he encountered his financial problems. He did not explain 
whether the medical bills were incurred as a result of an unexpected medical 
emergency or were for routine medical appointments. He took no steps to resolve any 
of the delinquent accounts so it cannot be concluded that he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. FC MC ¶20(b) does not apply.   
 
     FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling.  It is unlikely 
that his financial problems will be resolved in the near future.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply.  Applicant indicates that he intends 
to resolve these accounts but has provided no verification that any of the delinquent 
accounts were resolved. I cannot conclude that Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to 
resolve his overdue accounts.    
 
Applicant’s failure to honor his financial obligation to his creditors remains a 
security concern. He has not mitigated the security concerns raised under financial 
considerations.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list his 
delinquent debts that were over 180 days old in response to section 28(a) and his 
delinquent debts that were currently 90 days old in response to section 28(b) on his e-
QIP application, dated February 28, 2007. He also did not list his delinquent debts that 
were over 180 days old in response to question 22.b on his application for a position of 
public trust, dated September 19, 2006. Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition ¶ 
 
6 
 
 
17(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities) potentially applies to this allegation. Applicant claims he was unaware 
of his delinquent debts because his ex-wife handled all the bills during his marriage. The 
deliberate falsification allegation is based on circumstantial evidence. I find Applicant did 
not deliberately withhold this information when filling out his e-QIP application and on 
his application for a position of public trust. I find for Applicant with respect to the 
personal conduct concern.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant provided no information 
about his work performance. At the close of the record, Applicant provided little 
evidence that he has taken steps to resolve his delinquent accounts. There was 
insufficient evidence to conclude any of the accounts were resolved. Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant    
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    Against Applicant    
Subparagraph 1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    Against Applicant    
Subparagraph 1.r:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
