                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17062 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 9, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On February 25, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR),2 
alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR 
1  Item 4. There is no allegation of falsification of her SF 86.   
 
2  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On February 25, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected 
to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 2). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated April 2, 2008, was provided to her, 
and she was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.3 Applicant responded to the FORM on June 9, 2008. The 
case was assigned to me on June 16, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f and 1.h. She denied or disputed 
the remaining SOR allegations. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old process analyst. She has worked for a government 
contractor since February 2007.4 She married in 1978, and her spouse is deceased. 
Her children were born in 1977, 1982 and 1983. One of her sons is handicapped and 
lives with her. She served in the Army reserves from 1989 to the present, and is 
currently a staff sergeant (E-6).5 She did not list her education level on her SF 86. She 
has no police record. She has not used illegal drugs in the last seven years, and has 
never used illegal drugs while in a sensitive position.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR lists eight debts totaling approximately $8,000. The following table 
shows the status of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR: 
 
SOR ¶ and Type Debt   Amount Status 
¶ 1.a Credit Card Account  $2,099 Judgment filed on May 22, 2006 
(Items 5, 7) 
¶ 1.b Medical Account $3,629 Judgment filed on June 22, 2000 
(Items 5, 8) 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.d and 1.e  
Telephone or  
$1,126, $739 
and $218 
Collection Account was Paid in 
April 2008 (Item 5; FORM 
                                                          
3  Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated Apr. 10, 2008; and 
Applicant’s receipt is signed and dated Apr. 15, 2008.  
 
4  Item 4 (2007 security clearance application) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless 
stated otherwise. 
 
5  The file does not contain her military or enlistment records.  
 
3 
 
 
Cable Services  response at 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6) 
¶ 1.f Medical Account $100 Collection account reported in 
December 2006 was Paid (Item 3 
at 2, 3 and Item 5)  
¶ 1.g Insurance Account $389 Disputed debt 
¶ 1.h Medical Account $400 Collection account reported in 
December 2006 (Item 3 at 2 and 
Item 5) 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.a ($2,099 judgment filed in May 2006), after receipt of the 
SOR, Applicant contacted the creditor attempting to settle the debt without success. 
She was going to include the debt in a debt consolidation program (answer to SOR at 8-
12), and then changed her mind and decided to file for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy protection 
to resolve her delinquent debts (Response to the Form at 14).  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – Applicant disputed the amount of the debt, but admitted having 
several delinquent medical bills. She had included some of her debts in the 
unsuccessful debt consolidation program (answer to the SOR). 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d and 1.e ($1,126, $739, and $218) were reported delinquent in 
August 2005, December 2001, and November 2002. The account numbers for the 
$1,126 and $739 debts correspond. The evidence suggests the two accounts are a 
duplication of each other. On March 24, 2008, Applicant provided a statement from the 
creditor in SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.e, dated March 1, 2008, indicating she owed $836 (Item 3 at 
5).6 Her evidence established that these accounts were transferred from collector A to 
collector B for collection (FORM response at 8). She included a letter from collector B, 
dated February 20, 2008, showing a settlement amount of $440 on a $734 medical debt 
(FORM response at 7). Her FORM response indicated collector B agreed to a 
settlement amount of $1,590 for other debts to be paid in three equal payments (FORM 
response at 1). She made the three payments on March 17, 31, and on April 14, 2008 
(FORM response at 1, 3 - 6).   
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.h ($100 and $400) are medical debts placed for collection, and 
reported to a credit reporting agency in December 2006 (Item 5). She paid SOR ¶ 1.f; 
and SOR ¶ 1.h is still outstanding. She disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($389). This debt 
was placed for collect on an insurance account. She said that when she ended her 
policy she received a refund check, and did not believe she owed any money. However, 
she did not provide any correspondence with the creditor showing she disputed the 
debt.  
 
When she completed her e-QIP, she denied she had any: (1) unpaid judgments 
in the last seven years; (2) any debts delinquent over 180 days in the last seven years; 
                                                          
6  She provided one page from a three-page statement from the creditor showing she paid $73.85 
on December 3, 2007, and at that time owed $361 (Item 3 at 6). On March 1, 2008, she owed the same 
creditor $836 (Item 3 at 5). 
 
4 
 
 
and (3) any debts currently delinquent over 90 days. (See Item 4, Sections 27d, 28a 
and 28b.) Applicant did not receive notice in the SOR that a failure to disclose her 
financial problems raised a security concern. As such, these omissions cannot be used 
to deny her clearance. However, I may consider these omissions as part of the totality 
of the circumstances in Applicant’s case. 
 
On February 7, 2008, Applicant responded to interrogatories and promised to 
use a debt consolidation company to pay the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.e and 1.h (Item 9 
at 2). She provided a budget indicating a $140 monthly payment to the debt 
consolidation company, and $99 monthly to the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a (Item 9 at 3). 
Applicant provided pages 1, 4, 5, 9 and 10 of her debt consolidation agreement (Item 3 
at 7-12). The service fee was $904, with an initial payment of $276 (Item 3 at 12). A 
letter from the debt consolidation company, dated May 28, 2008, indicated Applicant 
had enrolled in their 36-month program. The program’s goal was to resolve three debts, 
and she paid $92.05 on March 22, 2008, and April 22, 2008 (FORM response at 12, 
13).  
 
On May 12, 2008, she retained a law firm to file to discharge her debts under 
Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code (FORM response at 14). There is no explanation as 
to why she terminated her debt consolidation program. Applicant also failed to present 
information regarding when she acquired the debts, why they became delinquent, what 
efforts she took to pay, settle, or otherwise resolve her delinquent debts, and how she 
plans to avoid future financial problems. 
 
Applicant’s budget showed a gross monthly salary of $5,004, deductions of 
$1,133, expenses of $1,222 and a net remainder of $1,801 (Item 9 at 3). She listed 
monthly payments of $471 for a vehicle loan, $138 for a financial company, $140 for the 
debt consolidation company, and $99 for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b (Item 9 at 3).    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”7 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).8 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
7  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
8  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
6 
 
 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, her SOR 
response, and her FORM response. She admitted responsibility for all the alleged 
delinquent debts, except SOR ¶ 1.g. She hired an attorney to file for Chapter 7 
Bankruptcy protection to resolve her delinquent debts; however, as of the day she 
responded to the FORM her debts were still outstanding. The government established 
the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) 
because available information fails to establish she acted diligently and responsibly to 
resolve her delinquent debts.9 She did not disclose how she acquired the debts; why 
they became delinquent; what efforts she took prior to receipt of the SOR to resolve her 
debts; or, any conditions beyond her control that resulted in her financial problems 
(such as loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or 
a death, divorce or separation). She is responsible for three delinquent debts totaling 
about $6,000. It appears she began her attempts to resolve her delinquent debts only 
after receipt of the SOR. It is unclear when her last payments were made on any of 
these three delinquent debts.  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not fully apply. Applicant probably received some 
financial counseling in connection with creation of her budget, working with the debt 
consolidation company, and meeting with her bankruptcy attorney. However, there are 
not “clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” There is 
insufficient information to establish that Applicant applied the knowledge obtained from 
financial counseling or that she showed good faith10 in the resolution of her debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g because Applicant disputed the 
$389 debt. She denied responsibility for this debt from the outset, and the only basis for 
the debt was a credit report. She did not provide “documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or [provide] evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
Notwithstanding, it is a relatively small debt and, under the circumstance of her case, I 
do not consider the dispute documentation necessary.  
 
Applicant did not provide proof of her most recent correspondence with the 
creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.h, nor did she present evidence of her current 
9  “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). 
 
10  The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).  
 
 
8 
 
 
financial situation. Considering the record as a whole, I conclude these three debts, 
totaling about $6,000 are still valid, delinquent debts, and that Applicant is responsible 
for them. Applicant failed to explain why she did not established payment plans for her 
debts even though according to her budget she has available income (about $1,800 
monthly) to take this reasonable and prudent action.  
 
Applicant has the legal right to file for bankruptcy protection to resolve her 
delinquent debts. However, considering her available income, her unexplained filing for 
bankruptcy protection raises questions about her current and future financial situation. 
Her overall conduct with her creditors casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. She should have been more diligent and made 
greater efforts to resolve her delinquent debts, especially after receipt of the SOR on 
March 24, 2008. She has not carried her burden of proving her financial responsibility. 
Based on my evaluation of the record evidence as a whole, I conclude no mitigating 
conditions fully apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG  ¶ 2(c).   
Applicant’s record of good employment weighs in her favor. There is no evidence 
of any security violation. Aside from her delinquent debts (which is a civil, non-criminal 
issue), she is a law-abiding citizen. She served in the Army reserves for almost 20 
years. These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. The overall 
amount of her delinquent debt at about $6,000 is relatively low.  
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. 
Applicant has been carrying delinquent debts since around 2001. She was well aware of 
her financial responsibilities, and apparently had sufficient resources to establish 
payment plans with her creditors. Because of her age and position in the Army reserve, 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
she knew or should have known of the security significance of these delinquent debts. 
In March 2008, she received the SOR and was placed on further notice of the 
Government’s security concerns. Her efforts to resolve her delinquent debts were 
insufficient when compared to available income that she could have used to address 
her delinquent debts. Her actions were not adequate to fully resolve security concerns. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude the sparse favorable 
information available in the record is not sufficient to mitigate the security concerns 
pertaining to financial considerations.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”11 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude she is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c to 1.g:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Juan J. Rivera 
Administrative Judge 
11  See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
