  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-12543
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on December 21, 2007. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of
financial problems. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided against
Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant’s response to the SOR was received on February 12, 2008, and she
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on April 10, 2008. The hearing took
place as scheduled on June 5, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 16,
2008.
Procedural Rulings 
On the government’s motion, the SOR was amended to delete the allegation in ¶
1.j because it erroneously duplicated the allegation in ¶ 1.i. Applicant had no objections,
and the motion was granted.   
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the amended SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts ranging from
$137 to $9,070 for about $50,000 in total. The delinquent debts include collection
accounts, charged-off accounts, and two unpaid judgments. Her Answer was mixed.
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She worked for a
federal contractor from 1986 to 2002. She started working in production, but changed to
a security officer position in 1991 or 1992. In 2002, the security function was sold off to
a security company, and Applicant became an employee of that company with the same
duties at the same location. In short, she has been continuously employed in the
defense industry since 1986. 
She is now seeking to retain a security clearance previously granted to her. To
that end, she completed a security-clearance application in February 2007 (Exhibit 1). In
response to questions about her financial record, she disclosed wage garnishments in
2004 and 2005 as well as delinquent credit card accounts. 
Applicant has married twice. Her first marriage ended in divorce in 1999. That
marriage produced two sons who are now young adults living on their own. She
remarried in 2002, and she now has four adult stepsons. A 19-year-old stepson is living
with Applicant and her husband.
 It is assumed the three debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d are one debt because it involves the same3
creditor and Applicant recalls having only one credit card account with this company. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a4
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 7
3
Applicant’s change of employers in 2002 resulted in a loss of pay and benefits.
For example, she went from earning $11.75 per hour to $9.50 per hour. Her wage is
now $11.00 per hour. In March 2007, her husband was laid off from his job with a state
highway department (Tr. 38–40). He was unemployed until about September 2007
when he accepted a part-time position. He now has a full-time position and benefits
working for a maintenance department of a local college.
  
Applicant traces her financial problems to 1999 when she divorced and accepted
several credit card offers (Tr. 21–22, 43–44). Her history of financial problems is well
documented (Exhibits 1–3). For example, a February 2007 credit report contains two
unpaid judgments for $4,000 and $3,663, multiple accounts with derogatory information
(e.g., past due, bad debt, assigned for collection), and six accounts in the collections
section of the report (Exhibit 2). The delinquent debts in the SOR are established by
Applicant’s admissions, her testimony, and the credit reports.  Although she claimed to3
have paid some of the debts, she did not present any documentary evidence showing
that she has paid in full, settled, or resolved any of the debts in the SOR.  
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.4
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an5
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any6
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order7
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.11
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 12
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).13
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.14
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating15
conditions under Guideline F). 
4
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting8
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An9
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate10
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme11
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.12
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.13
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination14
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically15
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
 Revised Guidelines at p. 13. 16
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 17
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 18
5
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be16
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. Her history of financial problems is a security concern because it
indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting17
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence is more18
than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions. It appears Applicant was
financially irresponsible when she used credit cards to make purchases she could not
afford and otherwise lived beyond her means. Her delinquent debts are both
longstanding and ongoing. 
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns:
MC 1–the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
MC 2–the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
MC 3–the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
MC 4–the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
MC 5–the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and,
MC 6–the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
 
6
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered and none apply in
Applicant’s favor. In particular, MC 2—conditions largely beyond a person's
control—has some potential application. Applicant’s divorce in 1999, the change of
employers in 2002, and her husband’s brief unemployment no doubt affected her overall
financial condition and these matters were largely beyond her control. But she did not
act responsibly under the circumstances when she used credit cards in an irresponsible
manner.  
Another potential mitigating condition is MC 4, which requires a person to initiate
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. She has done
little to demonstrate an intent to clean up her financial house. Although she claims to
made payments or paid some of the debts, she has not presented any reliable
documentary information to establish her claims. Based on this record, her efforts are
not enough to qualify as a good-faith effort. Indeed, what is missing here is: (1) a
realistic and workable plan; (2) documented actions taken in furtherance of the plan;
and (3) a measurable improvement to the situation. In simple terms, she did not present
sufficient evidence to establish her case. 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the
whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis does not support
a favorable decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Deleted 
Subparagraphs 1.k–1.n: Against Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
