1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-13766
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                            
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information must be granted.
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on July 26,
2006. On March 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Item 2 (Applicant’s Response to the SOR, dated April 14, 2008).1
Item 3 (Applicant’s security clearance application) at 1, 3.2
Item 7 (Copy of 2000 Bankruptcy court docket sheet); Item 8 (Copy of 1991 Bankruptcy court docket sheet).3
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 28, 2008. She answered
the SOR in writing on April 14, 2008, and requested a decision on the written record in
lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on May 7, 2008. Applicant received the FORM on May 12,
2008. She had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit material
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She did not respond or submit additional
evidence. DOHA assigned this case to me on July 7, 2008. The government submitted
eight exhibits, which have been marked as Item 1-8 and admitted into the record.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, dated March 25, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.h, and 1.j-1p of the SOR, some with explanations. She denied
the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.i and 1.q of the SOR. She also provided additional
information to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance.1
Applicant, who is 39 years old, works as a composition specialist for a
Department of Defense contractor. She began her employment in May 2006 and
completed her security clearance application (SF-86) shortly thereafter.2
In November 1991, Applicant and her husband filed a petition for bankruptcy
under Chapter 7, and the court discharged their debts on March 25, 1992. Applicant and
her husband again filed a petition for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 on May 25, 2000, and
the court discharged their debts on September 14, 2000. The record contains no
evidence as to why Applicant and her husband filed for bankruptcy on these two
occasions.3
Within one year of her 2000 bankruptcy discharge, Applicant and her husband
began to experience financial problems. Her husband sustained serious injuries in a
motorcycle accident in September 2001 and was unable to work for at least six months.
Although she took a second job, Applicant was unable to meet their monthly expenses,
which included medical bills, a car payment and the mortgage. As a result, the
mortgage company foreclosed on their house and the bank repossessed their car. The
mortgage company received sufficient money from the foreclosure sale to satisfy the
loan on Applicant’s house. The bank sold the repossessed car in 2001, but did not
receive sufficient funds to satisfy the loan. Applicant has not paid anything on this seven
year old debt with a remaining balance of $11,296. (SOR ¶ 1.m) In 2001, Applicant
wrote a check and asked the payee to hold the check for a week. Instead the payee
Item 3, supra note 2, at 10; Item 5 (Credit report, dated September 20, 2006) at 9; Item 6 (Financial4
interrogatories and answers) at 3.
Item 3, supra note 2, at 2-5; Item 6, supra note 4, at 4, 5, 7.5
Item 6, supra note 4, at 6-7.6
Item 4 (Credit report, dated November 2, 2007); Item 5, supra note 4.7
Id.; Item 2, supra note 2.8
3
cashed the checked and the police charged her with writing a bad check. She paid
restitution.4
In August 2004, Applicant’s employer of six years laid her off. She received
unemployment and began attending a technical college from which she graduated with
an associates degree in 2006. In January 2005, her husband stopped working for health
reasons. In March 2006, medical doctors diagnosed him with Myotonic Muscular
Dystrophy, Type 2. He applied for social security disability benefits and currently
receives $953 a month in disability benefits. He uses a wheel chair when needed.5
Applicant earns $2,162 a month in gross income and $1,756 in net income. With
her husband’s social security benefit, their total household net income is approximately
$2,709 a month. Their monthly expenses for rent, food, utilities, car expenses, medical
expenses, student loans, two credit accounts, and miscellaneous expenses totals
$2,615, leaving approximately $94 a month to pay old debts. She drives a 1998 vehicle
and her husband has a 1996 vehicle. Both vehicles are loan free. With the exception of
$251 in unpaid medical bills, Applicant and her husband have lived within their financial
means for the last five years.  She timely pays her current bills and limits her credit
debt.6
Applicant’s $251 in medical bills are approximately two years old and not paid.
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d) Applicant challenged the $1,996 gas bill, but has not provided
documented evidence of her challenge to the gas company. (SOR ¶ 1.e) She did
provide copies of pictures documenting a gas leak problem, which caused the high bill.
The credit card debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.f is not listed in either credit report in the record.
Even though Applicant admitted the debt, given the lack of evidence as to the existence
of this debt, this allegation is found in Applicant’s favor.  7
The debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.g -1.l total $3,657. All of these debts are between
five and seven years old. They are not paid, nor has Applicant challenged the validity of
the debts. Applicant has not consulted with a credit counseling service about her debts.8
The remaining SOR allegations are evidentiary factors discussed above, which I
must consider in making my decision.
4
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debt and was unable to pay some
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial worries arose between about 2000 and 2001. The record reflects that Applicant
has a long history of debt problems, which continues to the present. Her current bills are
paid, but finances remain tight. Although she is prudently managing her resources,
there is some likelihood that problems might occur in the future. The evidence is
insufficient for this potentially mitigating condition to apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant’s latest
financial problems arose when her husband sustained significant injuries in a
motorcycle accident and could not work for more than six months. Two years after he
returned to work, her employer laid her off. Six months later, her husband stopped
working permanently for health reasons. He now receives social security disability
benefits because he is totally disabled from working due to Myotonic Muscular
Dystrophy. During her husband’s recovery from the motorcycle accident, Applicant
worked a second job, but still could not earn enough money to pay their living expenses.
Subsequent to her lay-off, Applicant returned to school to develop new skills which
would increase her earning capabilities. She is now employed, and with her husband’s
disability benefit, they are able to pay the monthly household expenses.  Applicant
A  State Court of Appeals succinctly explained the societal and judicial value of application of the statute of9
lim itations:
Statutes of limitations embody important public policy considerations in that they stimulate
activity, punish negligence and promote repose by giving security and stability to human
affairs. The cornerstone policy consideration underlying statutes of limitations is the laudable
goal of law to promote and achieve finality in litigation. Significantly, statutes of limitations
provide potential defendants with certainty that after a set period of time, they will not be
ha[led] into court to defend time-barred claims. Moreover, limitations periods discourage
plaintiffs from sitting on their rights.  Statutes of limitations are, indeed, fundamental to our
judicial system.
Carolina Marine Handling, Inc. v. Lasch, 609 S.E.2d 548, 552 (Ct. App. 2005) (internal quotation marks and
citations omitted).
6
acted reasonably under the circumstances in which she found herself. This mitigating
condition applies.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not received financial counseling, nor has she
made a good faith effort to resolve these debts either by payment or settlement. For the
last five years, Applicant has managed her household income. She keeps current on
her monthly bills. She lives frugally. I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions
have minimal application.
If “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due
debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate
the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue”, mitigation
may be established under AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant indicates that she routinely talked with
the gas company about a gas leak problem in the property she was renting and
provided evidence of a problem. However, she has not provided documented evidence
of her contacts with the gas company and the results of these conversation as it relates
to her unpaid gas bill in SOR ¶ 1.e. This mitigating condition has some applicability as to
this debt.
She also receives some credit in the whole person analysis, infra, for the
application of the State’s 4-year statute of limitations, which applies to all the debts
listed in the SOR except the debts in allegations 1.a through 1.d, 1.f, and 1.n to 1.q.
Under State law, the creditors are time barred from collecting these debts See State
Code. Ann. §§ 2725 and 5525.  Elimination of these delinquent debts through the9
statute of limitations has ended her potential vulnerability to improper financial
inducements related to these debts as she no longer has any legal responsibility for
these debts. The fact that these debts are very old and not collectible under state law
does not negate her past conduct in not paying her outstanding debts, a factor I must
consider.  
7
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems began
at least 20 years ago. (See AG & 2(a)(4).) Nine years after the bankruptcy court
discharged the debts of she and her husband, they again filed for bankruptcy protection.
The reason for their second bankruptcy, other than excessive spending, are unknown.
One year after their second bankruptcy discharge, the mortgage company foreclosed on
their house and the bank repossessed their car. These major financial negatives
occurred not because of simple financial mismanagement and overspending, but as a
result of unexpected income loss beyond their control. Their inability to pay these bills
reflects that Applicant and her husband’s expenses equaled their income. Thus, they
had not yet learned how to live conservatively and manage their finances in a manner
which would not cause financial disaster if problems developed. 
Applicant’s debts problems began in 2001 when her husband sustained serious
injuries in a motor cycle accident and did not work for more than six months. Not only
did he lose income, but he incurred medical expenses, which are paid.  The loss of his
income caused severe financial problems with their budget, even though she worked a
second job. Apart from the car repossession debt, their unpaid debt from this period of
time totals about $5,600 including the gas leak problem. These debts arose following a
six-month loss of household income. Recovery from such an income loss takes time.
For Applicant, her ability to fully recover financially from her husband’s injuries was
derailed when she lost her job in 2004.  Six months later, her husband’s health forced
him to quit working permanently, leaving him without income for at least 18 months. He
now receives social security disability benefits, which are significantly below his
previous income level. These factors made it impossible for Applicant and her husband
to repay old debts. To their credit, they managed to pay their monthly expenses and not
8
incur significant additional debts. Their unpaid debts from 2004 forward amount to $251.
Applicant returned to school to develop additional skills which would enhance her
earning power, but, as most individuals, she used loans to pay for her education. The
monthly payment on her school loan debt is over $500, which she timely pays each
month.
Applicant has undergone significant behavioral changes. In regards to fiscal
management, she and her husband they have developed a budget which they follow.
They live more frugally, as shown by the very old cars they own and limited credit card
spending. They timely pay their current bills. She has not been able to pay her old debts
and currently lacks the resources to pay most of the debts, except the outstanding $251
in medical bills. Her old debts were never reduced to a judgment and the Statute of
Limitations has expired, making these debts uncollectible. (See AG & 2(a)(8).) Thus,
these debt cannot be a source of improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is
not simply whether all her debts are paidBit is whether her financial circumstances raise
concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. For a long time, Applicant and
her husband lived beyond their monthly income. Twice they used legal means to
resolve their financial problems. While they have not have paid their debts incurred
when her husband was injured, which is the majority of her unpaid debt, she never
resorted to illegal activities to raise money to pay these debts. Rather, she learned to
manage her limited finances and curtailed her spending habits. She changed her
lifestyle. Even though her old debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to raise security
concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-1.q: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
