 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-12461 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application on May 29, 2007 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 4). On January 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny her application, citing security concerns under Guidelines J 
and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 18, 2008, and answered 
it on January 30, 2008; but she did not state whether she requested a hearing. She 
resubmitted her answer on March 12, 2008, but again did not state whether she 
requested a hearing. On April 11, 2008, she stated she did not desire a hearing before 
an administrative judge. DOHA received her response April 16, 2008. Department 
Counsel submitted the government’s written case on April 30, 2008. On May 7, 2008, a 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on May 14, 2008. 
She did not respond. The case was assigned to me on July 7, 2008.  
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 The FORM includes responses to DOHA interrogatories that include a personal 
subject interview from a report of investigation (GX 5), without the authentication 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. Because Applicant did not object to any items in the 
FORM, she waived any objection based on lack of authentication. Accordingly, I have 
considered the personal subject interview in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR dated March 12, 2008, Applicant admitted all the 
allegations in the SOR. Her admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 24-year-old draftsman for a defense contractor. She has worked 
for her current employer since May 2007. She has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s police records reflect the arrests and citations listed in the table 
below. She admitted all the arrests and citations in her answer to the SOR. 
 
SOR Offense Date Disposition Evidence
1.a Shoplifting Apr. 02 Nolo contendere; fined GX 7, 8 
2.a No proof of insurance Oct. 03 Summons; disposition 
not indicated 
GX 12 
2.b Unregistered vehicle; 
Improper use of registration 
Jan. 04 Charged; disposition 
not indicated 
GX 11 
2,c Unregistered vehicle; 
Improper use of registration 
Feb. 04 Charged; disposition 
not indicated 
GX 10 
1.b Driving with suspended license Oct. 04 Nolo contendere; fined GX 14 
1.c Driving with suspended license  Feb. 05 Nolo contendere; fined GX 13 
1.d Driving with suspended license Nov. 05 Fined, jail for one night GX 4 at  
19-20 
 
When Applicant submitted her security clearance application in May 2007, she 
disclosed the November 2005 conviction of driving on a suspended license in response 
 
3 
 
 
to question 23f, asking about her police record. She did not disclose any of the earlier 
offenses.  
 
 During an interview with a security investigator in July 2007, she stated she did 
not actively steal any items during the alleged shoplifting but she falsely told the police 
she had taken some of the items to prevent her friend from being charged with stealing 
property worth more than $500, a felony. In her answer to the SOR, she admitted her 
denial of active participation in the shoplifting was false. She also told the investigator 
she did not disclose the shoplifting incident on her security clearance application 
because she thought it would be deleted from her police record after five years and no 
one would discover it.  
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the shoplifting, admitted falsifying 
her security clearance application by omitting all her arrests and citations except for the 
November 2005 incident, and admitted lying to the security investigator.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
 
4 
 
 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges shoplifting in April 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and three instances of 
driving with a suspended license (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d). It also alleges Applicant 
falsified her security clearance application and lied to a security investigator (SOR ¶ 
1.e). The concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a 
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). 
 
 It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the government of the United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are 
matters within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the government of the United 
States. A deliberately false answer on a security clearance application is a serious 
crime within the meaning of Guideline J. Applicant’s false answers on her security 
clearance application and her long record of minor offenses raise AG ¶ 31(a) and (c). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). Applicant’s latest 
criminal conduct was recent, when she falsified her security clearance application. None 
of the offenses happened under unusual circumstances, and they cast serious doubt on 
her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 32(a) is not 
established. 
 
Security concerns also may be mitigated if “there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). Applicant’s 
falsification was recent, and she presented no evidence of rehabilitation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges three motor vehicle offenses not alleged under Guideline J: 
driving with no proof of insurance (SOR ¶ 2.a), and driving an unregistered vehicle, and 
improperly using the registration for another vehicle (SOR ¶ 2.b and 2.c). It also alleges 
falsification of the security clearance application (SOR ¶ 2.d) and lying to the security 
investigator (SOR ¶¶ 2.e and 2.f). 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 A disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). Applicant’s falsification of her security clearance 
application and false statements to the security investigator raise this disqualifying 
condition. 
 
6 
 
 
A disqualifying condition may arise from “credible adverse information in several 
adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any 
other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.” AG ¶ 16(c). Finally, 
a disqualifying condition under this guideline may arise from “credible adverse 
information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be 
sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all 
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information,” such as “a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations” AG 
¶ 16(d)(3). Applicant’s police record raises AG ¶¶ 16(c) and (d)(3). 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant made no effort to correct the omissions from her 
security clearance application until she was confronted with the evidence by a security 
investigator. Even then, she worsened the situation by lying to the investigator. AG ¶ 
17(a) is not established. 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). None of the 
elements of this mitigating condition are established. Applicant’s falsifications are 
serious offenses and recent, her minor offenses are numerous, her conduct is not 
attributable to “unique circumstances,” and her pattern of conduct casts doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a young person who has not yet learned the importance of 
responsible behavior. Her lack of candor during the security clearance process casts 
serious doubt on her ability to protect classified or sensitive information. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline J and E, and evaluating all 
the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated 
the security concerns based on criminal conduct and personal conduct. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
