 
 
 
 
1
                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-15509 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
  Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Mr. Scott Harris, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
On June 4, 2007, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 30, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 15, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On April 9, 2008, DOHA assigned the case to 
me and issued a Notice of Hearing on May 7, 2008. The case was heard on May 29, 
2008, as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibit (AE) A into evidence 
without objection.  At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until June 13, 
2008, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. On June 3, 
2008, Applicant submitted an exhibit that I marked as AE B and admitted into the record 
without objection by the Government. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 11, 2008.  In early July 2008, I received additional documents from Applicant that I 
marked AE C and D. On July 9, 2008, Department Counsel indicated that he had no 
objection to those documents and I admitted them into the record.                                                          
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.f of the SOR, and provided additional explanations in support of her 
request for a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and married. She has one child from a former marriage, 
age 13, and two stepchildren, ages 15 and 20. Her father was in the Air Force for 20 
years and her oldest son recently joined the Navy. (AE A). In November 2003, she 
began working part-time for a federal contractor. In October 2006, she became a full-
time employee as a contract administrator.  
 
 Prior to this position, Applicant was unemployed for five months, having been laid 
off in May 2003 from a job where she worked for five years. At the time of the layoff, she 
was earning $32,000 annually. She received unemployment compensation of 
approximately $1,000 per month until she started her current job. Around the same 
time, her husband lost his $40,000 job. He then worked in his own business for the next 
couple years, until he obtained a full-time position in August 2007. He earns $9.75 per 
hour. He is looking for a higher paying position. (AE A; Tr. 28-30).  
 
 Applicant’s personal representative testified. He is Applicant’s direct supervisor 
and a founding partner in the company that employs her. He also operates as the 
facilities security officer for the company and holds a Top secret security clearance. He 
has known Applicant since she started with his company in November 2003. Her 
previous employer recommended her to him. He is aware of the circumstances 
underlying her layoff and the financial hardship it created for her family. He was 
immediately impressed by her performance, and as a result, the company loaned her 
$10,000 in October 2006 to purchase a car after her old vehicle broke down. She paid 
off the loan in October 2007. As the company has developed, her contract 
administrator’s duties have grown and she has received salary increases. In October 
2007, she received a promotion that increased her salary to $35,000. The company 
provides generous health benefits for her family. (AE A). He considers her to be a 
model employee. He also knows her family and recognizes her parenting skills. He 
 
 
 
 
3
noted that she drives a 100 miles a day to take her child to a special school. He thinks 
very highly of her. (Tr. 15-26). 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant failed to pay five delinquent debts and one 
judgment, totaling $24,255. However, the debt listed in ¶ 1.e is the same debt 
referenced in ¶ 1.f, resulting in a total debt amount of $15,620. The status of those five 
debts is as follows: 
 
1. The $213 debt listed in ¶ 1.a was paid in February 2008. (AE A at 24). 
 
2. The $5,467 debt listed in ¶ 1.b is unpaid and is owned to a department store. 
The balance was $2,900 when it became delinquent. She is attempting to 
establish a resolution with the company. She wrote them in January 2008 and 
sent another letter in June 2008. (AE B at 3). On July 1, 2008, Applicant paid 
that debt in full. (AE D). 
 
3. The $473 debt listed in ¶ 1.c was paid in January 2008. (AE A at 22). 
 
4. The $832 debt listed in ¶ 1.d was paid in April 2008. (AE A at 19 and 20). 
 
5. The $8,635 judgment listed in ¶ 1.f is owed to a credit card company and is 
unpaid. The balance at the time she closed the account was $6,900. (It is a 
duplicate of the debt listed in ¶ 1.e.) She recently sent a letter to the creditor 
requesting a repayment plan. (AE B at 4). On June 12, 2008, the company 
responded to her inquiry and noted that the matter had been resolved and 
deleted from her credit history. (AE C). 
 
 Since January 2008, Applicant paid or resolved all of the debts. She submitted a 
budget, itemizing her income and expense. She and her husband’s combined net 
monthly income is $3,310.  The monthly expenses are $3,265, leaving about $50 per 
month remainder. (AE B at 2).  
 
  Applicant had the above two credit cards for many years and paid them regularly. 
After she lost her job in May 2003, she tried to pay some of her debts with her 
unemployment compensation, but was unable to manage her essential expenses and 
make minimum payments on the credit card accounts. She eventually stopped making 
those payments. (Tr. 41-43). She has not received any credit counseling, and has not 
considered filing bankruptcy. She testified: 
 
Unlike most people, I never even considered filing bankruptcy. These are 
my debts. They will be paid. I may not be able to do it all now. I may not 
be able to do it as fast as they would prefer, but they will be paid. They’re 
my bills, my responsibility. I never had a problem with that. And I never 
tried to run away from any of my bills. They’ve always been there. I’ve 
always known it. I never hid it, never not talked about it. Am I proud of it – 
 
 
 
 
4
no. But I hit a situation in my life that I had no control over, that I am now 
recovering from and I’m doing the best I can. (Tr. 43). 
 
 Applicant submitted four letters of recommendation, including one from her 
personal representative. Her former employer of ten years considers her to be a 
“woman of high moral character and possess [sic] a strong work ethic.” [(AE A at 10). 
He strongly supports her request for a security clearance. Her former supervisor, from 
1998 to 2001, stated, “She was a high achiever, confidential, and appreciated by all her 
co-workers.” (AE A at 11). He recommended Applicant to her current employer.  The 
director for the school that her son attends also provided a letter on her behalf. He 
complimented Applicant’s commitment to her son’s education and role as an exemplary 
parent, recognizing the sacrifices she makes for her child. (AE A at 15).  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
 
 
 
 
5
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise security 
concerns. Applicant began accumulating a significant amount of delinquent debt that 
she was unable to pay after she and her husband became unemployed in early spring 
of 2003. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. The guideline includes six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated when “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s 
financial worries arose in 2003 and continued into 2008 when she began to resolve 
them. They were the result of unemployment for her and her husband, which is less 
likely to recur for her, given her employer’s support. The prior situation does not cast 
doubt on her trustworthiness or good judgment. Because the debt problems are ongoing 
for almost five years, this condition cannot receive full application.  
 
 
 
 
 
6
Under AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant’s debts began 
accumulating after she and her husband lost their employment in spring of 2003. Those 
circumstances were outside of her control. She presented evidence indicating that she 
attempted to manage some debts by paying her debts with her unemployment 
compensation. I find this potentially mitigating condition has application in this case.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where “the 
evidence shows the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.” Applicant did not obtain formal credit counseling; however, 
she submitted proof that she paid four debts and resolved the other one, indicating that 
she made a good-faith effort to resolve all of her debts. She submitted a copy of her 
budget, which demonstrates that her financial obligations are under control. She is 
carefully managing her limited funds. I conclude these mitigating conditions should be 
given consideration. 
 
The evidence does not support the application of any other mitigating condition. 
 
“Whole Person” Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a 38-year-old woman, 
who began experiencing financial hardships after she and her husband lost their jobs, 
and joint income of about $70,000 in spring of 2003. Prior to this misfortune, she had 
 
 
 
 
7
not experienced financial difficulties and regularly paid her bills. Since becoming a full-
time employee in October 2006, she began resolving her financial difficulties. Since 
2008, she paid four debts and resolved the outstanding judgment. She credibly 
acknowledged those debts as her responsibility and expressed a determination to 
resolve them. 
 
 Given her awareness of the effect delinquencies may have on her employment, 
along with a commitment to responsibly manage her finances, I do not believe similar 
financial problems will recur, despite a tight budget. The Appeal Board noted in ISCR 
Case No. 06-12930, “that an applicant is not required to show that she has completely 
paid off her indebtedness, only that she has established a reasonable plan to resolve 
her debts and has taken ‘significant actions to implement that plan.’ ISCR Case No.04-
09684 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jul.6, 2006).’” In this case, Applicant has addressed her 
obligations and has the strong and impressive support from her employer to assist her 
in doing so. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant is an intelligent, 
hardworking individual, who experienced an unanticipated period of unemployment and 
under-employment that seriously affected her finances. There is no other evidence in 
her background to indicate that her financial problems may create a security risk. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
