                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11039
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
July 10, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On January 15, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 2, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 18, 2008. Applicant did not file a
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 29, 2008. Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44 year old employee of a defense contractor.
In 1996, a judgment in favor of a bank in the amount of $1,679.00 was entered
against applicant. The debt remains outstanding.
In 1998, a judgment in favor of Zale Jewelers in the amount of $2,282.00 was
entered against applicant. The debt remains outstanding.
In 1999, a judgment in favor of Hechts in the amount of $329.00 was entered
against applicant. The debt remains outstanding.
In 1999, a judgment in favor of Citibank in the amount of $8,556.00 was entered
against applicant. The debt remains outstanding.
Applicant is indebted to Pace Financial in the approximate amount of $2,430.00.
This debt was placed for collection in 2000 and remains outstanding.
Applicant is indebted to Union Acceptance in the approximate amount of
$216.00. This debt was charged off in 2000 and remains outstanding.
Applicant became indebted to Montgomery Wards in the approximate amount of
$891.00 many years ago. As of August 2004, the debt remained unpaid.
Applicant became indebted to JC Penney/Arrow Financial Services in the
approximate amount of $787.00 many years ago. As of October 2004, the debt
remained unpaid.
Applicant became indebted to Bank of America in the approximate amount of
$5,373.00 many years ago. The debt was charged off, and as of July 2001, it remained
unpaid.
Applicant became indebted to Peebles in the approximate amount of $51.00
many years ago. The debt was charged off, and as of July 2001, it had not been paid.
Applicant became indebted to Sears/Risk Management Alternatives in the
approximate amount of $620.00 many years ago. The debt was placed for collection,
and as of July 2001, it had not been paid.
In his response to the SOR and in Exhibit 7, applicant stated that he has been
unable to pay his debts during the past eight years due to a bad relationship with his
former fiancee, the financial support he has been providing to his mother, “judgments
against [his] paycheck,” and poor management of his credit cards.
3
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to Financial Considerations is set forth in
Paragraph 18 of the new AG, and is as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one*s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual*s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially
4
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The AG note several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
Paragraph 19.a., an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 19.c., “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may
raise security concerns. The evidence shows applicant has a long history of an inability
or unwillingness to pay his debts. Accordingly, these disqualifying conditions are
applicable.
The guidelines also set out mitigating conditions. Paragraph 20.a. may apply
where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual*s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Although applicant’s numerous
debts appear to have been incurred years ago, they are still outstanding. His current
inability or unwillingness to address them casts doubt on his current judgment, reliability
and trustworthiness. Accordingly, this mitigation condition is not applicable.
Under Paragraph 20.b., it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person*s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Applicant
stated that a bad relationship, support provided to his mother, judgments, and poor
management of his credit cards caused his financial problems and prevented him from
satisfying his long-standing debts. Although these “conditions” may very well have
caused applicant’s financial problems, they were not largely beyond his control.
Accordingly, this mitigating condition is not applicable.
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”
is potentially mitigating under Paragraph c. This mitigation condition does not apply.
Paragraph d. applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” This mitigating
condition does not apply.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
5
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man who has
a history of not meeting his financial obligations. Although the debts listed in the SOR
appear to have been incurred years ago, applicant’s continuing inability or unwillingness
to address them reflects adversely on his current judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. Based on the foregoing, I conclude applicant failed to mitigate the
security concerns arising from Guideline F.
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
