1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-12374
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on December 11,
2006. On March 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F, and E
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on April 10, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 14, 2008,
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 7, 2008. The hearing was continued
on June 19, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE 1-7), which were received
without objection. Applicant testified in his own behalf, and presented the testimony of
one witness. He submitted Exhibits (AE A-D), without objection. DOHA received the first
2
transcript on May 15, 2008 and the final transcript on June 27, 2008. Based upon a
review of the record, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated March 14, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.o of the SOR. He also admitted the two answers on his security
clearance application were incorrect as indicated in ¶ 2.a-2.b of the SOR but denied any
intentional falsification. He provided additional information to support his request for
eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in June 2002. He has worked for his current employer since December
2004 (GE 1). Applicant held a security clearance from 2004 until the present (Tr. 40).
Applicant married in 2006. He and his wife have one infant son, aged eight
months (Tr. 19). His wife had many medical problems before her pregnancy. She had
surgery due to these medical conditions. The couple incurred many medical bills due to
the hospitalizations and treatments of his wife. They have incurred medical bills from the
birth of their child. His wife had a difficult pregnancy and more problems after the birth of
her son.
Applicant has diligently worked in an apprenticeship program for his current
employer for the past four years. He is almost at the completion of the program. He
enjoys the work and will get an increase in salary as soon as he finishes the
apprenticeship. This will be very soon. His wife has returned to work recently.
Applicant explained that he was the sole earner for his family for the past two
years. He had unexpected medical bills, doctor bills and various expenses involved with
the birth of his son. He also acknowledged that some of the delinquent accounts stem
from his ex-fiancée who charged things on his accounts without his permission. He
acknowledges he was not responsible enough at that time in his life. He is adamant that
now that he has worked very hard in his apprenticeship program and is so near to his
goal that he would not do anything to jeopardize his future with his employer. He is also
concerned about providing for his wife and infant son (Tr. 19). In fact, he has paid his
wife’s previous medical bills that are not really reflected in the SOR.
The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts, including two judgments for $160
(medical) and $875 and a truck repossession. The total amount of debt that Applicant
owes is approximately $20,000 (GE7). Some of the debts are medical in nature. The
largest debt is $7,112 for a truck repossession in 2005. Applicant turned the car back to
the dealer when he could no longer afford the payments. His counselor is trying to
negotiate the amount for settlement without interest and fees which would greatly
reduce the amount owed (Tr. 25). The next largest debt is $2,817 for a credit card. His
former fiancee used his credit card to charge items that he was not aware of at the time.
Applicant does not recognize the debt of $520 for a collection account. His counselor is
3
disputing this account. The furniture account for $1,093 is also being investigated by his
credit counselor because Applicant does not recognize it and he is paying on another
furniture account now (AE B).
Applicant admitted owing the debts listed in the SOR. The following account is in
repayment status: ¶ 1.b for a computer that he purchased in 2005. The amount of the
debt at present is $2,206. Applicant has paid $25 a month on that account since 2006.
He provided proof of that automatic debit from his bank account at the hearing (AE A).
The other debts have not been paid. Applicant is working with a counselor to prepare a
plan for payments or settlement. In addition, the income that his wife is generating now
will go toward paying all the smaller debts (Tr. 39).
Applicant and his wife are receiving financial counseling with Hall Enterprises.
His counselor is negotiating with various creditors that he contacted in the past few
months. Applicant had not looked at his credit report prior to the security investigation.
He does not recognize some of the debts. The counselor is investigating some larger
accounts that might settle for a lower amount or have the interest and fees reduced.
The counselor told Applicant that she discovered “violations” or duplications on his
credit report (GE 6) He has deferred to her judgment since she has experience in this
area (Tr. 24). As noted above some of the accounts may be duplicates.
Applicant’s current monthly net income is $3,848.36. After monthly expenses of
$1,610.26, he has a net remainder of approximately $1,1610 (AE C). He is paying on a
furniture bill that is not listed in the SOR. That account will be paid in full very soon (AE
B). He and his wife are current on their expenses. They do not have any current debt.
They are in the process of relocating to find a more affordable rent which would give
them more discretionary income to apply to the remaining debts (Tr. 22).
Applicant completed his December 26, 2006 security application. In that
application he answered “no” to section 28(a) and (b) which asks for information on
debts either 180 days delinquent in the last seven years or 90 days currently delinquent
(GE 1 ).
Applicant explained that he did not complete the security questionnaire by
himself in 2006.  He indicated that someone at the computer filled in the information that
Applicant provided by pencil. Applicant believed he answered “yes” to debts delinquent
for 180 and not 90 days. However, the SF 86 does not have anything checked for either
section 28(a) or (b). Applicant testified that he did not see the completed questionnaire.
He did sign the document. He said it was a misunderstanding. He was credible in his
testimony that he had no intent to deceive the government. He is looking forward to a
career with the shipyard and providing for his family. 
In May 2007, Applicant was interviewed as part of the security clearance
process. He explained his financial status and his delinquencies. He indicated that some
of the debt occurred in 2004 and most recently in 2006 due to his wife’s medical
problems and the birth of their son. He reiterated that he was the sole support for the
4
past two years. Applicant acknowledged that he bought a car at an auction and that he
became delinquent because he was irresponsible at that time (2003). He also believed
that some of the bills may have been paid but he is not sure. He did not receive a bill for
the cable account and he had moved. He could not afford the payments on his vehicle
and he returned the car to the dealership (GE 4). 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
5
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on numerous accounts and
judgments and did not meet some of his financial obligations from 2004 until the present
time. His credit reports confirm the debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial worries arose in 2004 and in 2006. He accumulated some delinquent debt due
to his ex-fiancee. He later accumulated debt due to his wife’s medical problems and the
birth of his son. He could not pay his bills on his salary alone. While those
circumstances may have precipitated the debt, the inquiry does not end at that point. He
admits that he was irresponsible prior to 2004. His conduct over the last six months with
his creditors and the financial counselor removes security concerns or doubts about his
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. However, he made payments on
one debt in the SOR and has 13 outstanding delinquent debts. This potentially
mitigating condition applies in part.
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
6
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant has been
steadily employed during the past five years. His wife’s medical problems and the birth
of their son combined with her inability to work until very recently contributed to his
financial difficulties but he also admitted that he was irresponsible prior to his marriage.
Applicant was not as aggressive as he should have been in initially addressing or
resolving his delinquent debts. I find this potentially mitigating condition partially applies.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant is receiving financial counseling. He is investigating
his credit report through his debt counselor. He has been paying on one debt since
2006. He is also paying on a furniture debt that is not listed in the SOR. He is current on
his daily expenses. His wife has recently returned to work. He is looking for a new place
to live which he hopes will increase his monthly net remainder. I find his efforts are
sufficient to carry his burden in this case. I conclude these potentially mitigating
conditions apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant stated that his
counselor had identified some problems or possible duplications on his credit report. He
presented a letter from his counselor. I conclude this potentially mitigating condition
partially applies.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities” is potentially disqualifying.
7
In this case, when Applicant completed his 2006 security application, he did not
list any debts that were 90 or 180 days delinquent. He explained that he did not
complete the security application himself. I found his testimony credible that he believed
he told the person at the computer that he did have debts more than 180 days
delinquent and believed that encompassed the 90-day question. Despite the fact that
the questionnaire was not checked ‘yes” on either section, I found him credible. The
allegation of falsification is unsubstantiated. He loves his job and the opportunity to
provide for his family and would not do anything to jeopardize that position. I do not find
that he deliberately provided false information on his SF 86 in 2006.
Thus, Applicant’s allegation of deliberate omission is mitigated under AG 17(f)
“the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.”
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must
be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are sufficient to
overcome the government’s case. Applicant has worked very hard for the past five
years in his apprenticeship program. He is nearing completion and has a promotion
ahead of him. He is now married and has an infant son. His wife appeared with him at
the hearing and testified in his behalf. He was credible in that he realizes he was
immature after high school and made mistakes in financial responsibility. He is receiving
counseling and his wife is helping with the family expenses by her return to work.
Applicant was very adamant in his resolve to clear his credit and pay all his bills. He is
current on his daily expenses and is looking for a way to increase his discretionary
income which he promises to apply to payment of his creditors. He works hard and
believes he has a good future with the shipyard. 
8
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations and personal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.I: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
