 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXX, XXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-11908 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
on (e-QIP), on February 22, 2006. On December 5, 2007, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 28. 2007, and requested 
a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on January 23, 2008, and I received the case assignment on January 28, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 5, 2008, scheduling the hearing 
for February 27, 2008.  The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 12, which were 
received without objection, except for GE 6. Applicant objected to GE 6 “due to the 
fact that [he] was actually not aware of the [hospital] bill.” After argument by counsel 
and Applicant, I overruled Applicant’s objection. Tr. 16-21. The government also 
offered a List of Government Exhibits, Exhibit (Ex.) I. The Applicant offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through Y, which were received without objection, and testified on his 
own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until March 12, 2008 to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted AE Z 
through FF without objection, which were forwarded to me by Department Counsel by 
Memorandum dated March 11, 2008 (Ex. II). DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on March 7, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations except for SOR 
¶¶ 1.l., 1.m., and 1.n. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After 
a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old logistics engineer, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2006. Tr. 75-77, GE 1. He is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance. Shortly after being hired by his current employer, he was granted an interim 
secret clearance, which was revoked as a result of these proceedings. His continued 
employment is dependent on his being granted a security clearance. Tr. 77-80. 
 
Applicant completed the 9th grade, but did complete the coursework for and 
was awarded a GED in July 2000. Tr. 74-75. He was married from February 2001 to 
December 2004. That marriage ended by divorce. Applicant has no dependents. GE 
1, Tr. 82. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his e-QIP, credit reports, financial interrogatories, and various 
documents submitted by the government. SOR. GE 1 – 12. The allegations are 
substantiated by Applicants admissions and documents submitted by the government. 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 14 separate line items, which included a chapter 7 
bankruptcy, six collection accounts, two charged off accounts, one Internal Revenue 
(IRS) tax debt, one state tax debt, and three judgments for a total of $23,111. SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. – 1.n. 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant provided the following explanation regarding how his financial 
problems began: 
 
[W]hen I was about 17 I was diagnosed as terminally ill and at that point 
due to the fact that I thought I was going to die within two, three years, I 
didn’t care about anything financially. As time went on and I realized that 
I would be alive longer, I started caring about the financial stuff but I had 
already started getting myself into a financial black hole of sorts. The 
thing that actually pushed me to file bankruptcy . . . is the . . . County 
Hospital bill for $2,600. They actually ended up taking legal action and 
locking my entire bank account. And when they locked my bank account 
I had direct deposit at the time, they at the same time locked up a direct 
deposit that had gone through so I couldn’t pay my rent, car payment, 
anything like that. And the legal advice I got when I talked to a lawyer 
was that the only way for me to get that money back from my paycheck 
was to file bankruptcy before the court hearing that was to take place on 
I believe, November 1st. So, I filed the bankruptcy with a lawyer and it 
was actually filed by October 31st (2000) so that I could actually get that 
paycheck back. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) Tr. 29-30. 
 
Applicant explained the reason he got into financial difficulties after filing 
bankruptcy in 2000 was due to “a combination of bad decision[s], [and] not making 
enough money.” Tr. 84. He became aware his credit history was poor when 
interviewed in March 2007 in conjunction with his security clearance application. Since 
then, he has taken aggressive steps to correct his indebtedness. Tr. 82-86.  
 
Since his SOR was issued, Applicant has paid off three debts (two collection 
accounts and one judgment) (SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.i., and 1.l.), has contacted six creditors 
(four collection accounts, the IRS, and state tax debt), set up payment plans, and is 
current on the payment plans. (SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., 1.f., 1.g., 1.j., and 1.k.) He made a 
good-faith effort to resolve two debts (one collection account and one judgment). 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.n.) Response to SOR, Tr. 35-62, GE 2, AE A – Q, AE Z, AE FF. One 
of the debts listed (judgment) was discharged in his 2001 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (SOR 
¶ 1.m.) Tr. 56-59, GE 10, AE B. Applicant retained the services of a credit counseling 
service in September 2007 and several of the debts included in the payment plans 
supra are included in a debt consolidation repayment plan. Response to SOR. 
Applicant submitted a comprehensive budget that was prepared by a credit counseling 
service reflecting a net monthly remainder of $531 after all his debts were paid. AE 
DD, AE EE. 
 
Applicant provided three employer-related reference letters, i.e. from his Task 
Supervisor, his Provisioning Support Services Division Manager, and his Task 
Supervisor III. These individuals were uniform in their praise of Applicant and 
described him as “an excellent worker,” “dependable, reliable, and trustworthy,” “top 
five in efficiency (out of 28 peers), on-time delivery and customer support,” and 
 
4 
 
 
“trustworthy, and independent.” All three individuals recommended Applicant for a 
security clearance. AE AA – CC. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),1 the government’s concern is 
that an Applicant’s 
 
 “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he made poor financial decisions, before and after his 
2000 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. His pre-bankruptcy problems occurred at a young age 
after being diagnosed with what he thought at the time was a terminal illness. He 
embarked on an irresponsible spending pattern, which lead to Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
After being awarded a Chapter 7 discharge, his health took a turn for the better and he 
fell into a pattern of spending beyond his means. His financial situation has 
substantially improved as a result of earning more income, maturity, and the 
realization that his failure to handle his finances responsibly may jeopardize his ability 
to obtain and maintain a security clearance. Since being interviewed in 2007, he has 
taken this process quite seriously and taken what appears to be all reasonable steps 
to correct his financial situation. He is current on his payments and provided credible 
documentation of good faith attempts to contact two creditors yet to be paid.  
 
 He participated in two separate types of financial counseling. The first financial 
counseling he participated in was mandatory and in conjunction with his chapter 7 
bankruptcy. The second financial counseling he participated in was voluntary and 
occurred more recently. Applicant’s financial picture has taken a sharp turnaround 
from where he was several years ago. His budget reflects a net remainder of $531 per 
month after his monthly bills are paid. What is different now as opposed to before is he 
has the means, tools and resolve to achieve financial stability. 
 
 His reference letters are noteworthy. He has proven to be a conscientious, 
trusted and valued employee, and a contributing member of society. 
 
¶ 19. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying 
include: 
1  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or 
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt. 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account 
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial 
breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; 
 
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling 
problems, or other issues of security concern; 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
 
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, 
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by 
subject's known legal sources of income; and 
 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or 
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling 
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family 
conflict or other problems caused by gambling. 
 
Of the nine Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) listed 
supra, three are applicable: ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; FC DC ¶ 
19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; ¶ (e) consistent spending beyond 
one's means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative 
cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; 
 
¶ 20. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 I conclude three of the six 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) are applicable or partially 
applicable: ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts, and ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute 
the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”3 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
2  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.n.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
