1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-16442
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on July 31, 2007.
On March 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines H, E,
and J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 16, 2008. He requested a
review on the record but on April 22, 2008, Applicant requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on May 20, 2008. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on May 30, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June
20, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1-4, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibit A without
2
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 30, 2008. Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, received April 16, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶ 1.a and 1.b of the SOR. He denied all other allegations. He also
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. 
Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1982 and then he enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in November of that year.
When he retired in 2003, he was a master sergeant (Tr. 20). He is married. He held a
top-secret security clearance for more than 20 years. He has been with his current
employer since June 2007 (GE 2).
Applicant received numerous medals and commendations while in the military.
He received specialized training and attended the USAF NCO academy in 1995, 1998
and 1989 (GE 3). During his career, he was promoted and given monetary recognition
for his efforts. When he transitioned into the civilian work world, he obtained a civilian
job with the federal government. 
In March 1986, while in the military, Applicant received a non-judicial punishment
for the Wrongful Use of Marijuana after testing positive during a drug urinalysis (GE 1)
He was reduced in rank and ordered to forfeit $400. He denied any use of drugs. He
was counseled by an air force physician due to the Article 15 on March 28, 1986 (GE 1).
At that time, he held a top secret clearance.
In October 2006, Applicant tested positive for cocaine during a random drug
testing at his place of employment. He was referred to an Air Force drug and alcohol
program, but he denied the use of any drug. He held a top secret clearance at the time.
Applicant resigned from his employment on January 19, 2007.
Applicant completed his security clearance application on July 31, 2007.
Applicant answered “no” to section 22 (your employment record), which has four
questions concerning circumstances or unfavorable reasons that a person may have left
employment (GE 2).
In that same 2007 security application, Applicant responded “no” to section 24(b)
(use of illegal drugs and drug activity art any time). He did not note the fact that he used
cocaine in October 2006 and marijuana in 1986, both times while holding a top secret
clearance. Thus, he failed to list his use of illegal drugs.
The Department of Defense interviewed Applicant in September 2007 as part of
his security clearance investigation. Applicant told the interviewer that he left his job in
3
2006 because he did not relish the commute and the congested tunnel traffic. He also
commented that his wife’s grandmother died and he needed to handle matters in that
arena (GE 5).
At the hearing, Applicant explained that after the October positive test result, he
cooperated with the command. In November and December he was on paid
administrative leave. He felt after the intervening months of not being in his position that
he would consider leaving for a number of reasons. He consulted with his wife and
decided to leave.  He noted that his boss had retired. He felt that perhaps his reputation
was tarnished and that his authority might be diminished. He also noted the traffic
congestion as another reason to leave. In sum, he believed he would no longer be
effective in his position (Tr. 24).
Applicant described the testing procedure for the drug program to the
investigator. He explained in great detail that the drug program was new and that he
had helped implement the program. Applicant remarked that the restroom was dirty and
the urinal and sink were taped up. He recalled taking the test and returning the
specimen.
Applicant elaborated at the hearing that he received a phone call on October 30,
2006, a few days later, from the physician at the test lab that was out of state. He was
informed that the test was positive for cocaine. The physician asked questions about his
health and did Applicant have any recent dental work. Applicant answered “no” and also
informed the doctor that he had not used cocaine.  Applicant was given an opportunity
at that point to request a recheck of the sample. The fee was $150. Applicant had 72
hours to decide if he wanted this done. Applicant declined the offer.
Applicant testified that on October 31, 2006, he told his captain that he had been
in the Air Force for 20 years and that he had not used cocaine. Applicant claimed that
the captain filed a complaint against the lab for calling Applicant directly instead of
calling the Command. 
Applicant’s current employer rates him as a successful contributor. He is a
competent performer and valued team player. He is valued for his leadership qualities
(AE A).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
4
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
5
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 25(a), Aany drug abuse@ is potentially disqualifying. AG & 25(b) “testing positive for
illegal drug use” is another disqualification. Under AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or
possession of drug paraphernalia” is also potentially disqualifying. Finally under AG
25(g) “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance” is a disqualifying
condition.  Applicant tested positive for marijuana in 1986 and in 2006, he tested
positive for cocaine. During both time frames he had a top secret clearance. The
evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer
examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
2006 positive test result for cocaine and his denial of use casts doubt on his
trustworthiness. I do not find that this mitigating condition applies.  
Under AG ¶ 26(b), it may be mitigating where Aa demonstrated intent not to
abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates
and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation.” This is not a factor for consideration in this
case.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
6
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority,
or other official government representative
I have considered all the facts and find Applicant deliberately omitted, concealed,
mislead, and falsified information on security clearance application and at the hearing
with respect to his answer to section 24(b). He answered the question “no.” He
deliberately failed to indicate that he tested positive for cocaine in 2006 while holding a
top secret clearance and failed to indicate that he tested positive for marijuana in 1986
while serving in the military possessing a security clearance.
Applicant answered “no” to section 22 (employment record). Applicant explained
that he left his position in January because he felt he would no longer be an effective
leader. He also mentioned the difficult commute. He was on paid leave for two months
during the investigation. I do not find that the government has proved through this
omission a deliberate falsification.
After considering the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, I find that none of
them apply in this case.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 30, ”Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules and regulation.”
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 31(a) an “single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” may be potentially
disqualifying. Also AG 31(c) “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted” is a
potential disqualifying condition.
Applicant’s deliberate falsification with respect to question 24 constituted a
violation of 10 U.S.C. §1001 and is sufficient to raise the disqualifying condition under
criminal conduct.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a) the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.” 
7
Under AG ¶ 30(d) it may be mitigating where “there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including, but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement.”
For the reasons discussed above, I do not find that Applicant has provided
mitigation under this guideline.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant served in the Air Force for
more than 20 years. He received numerous award and decorations.  Applicant held a
top secret clearance during that time period. He has no incidents or issues with
protecting information. However, in 1986, while holding a clearance, he tested positive
for marijuana. He denied the use.
Applicant successfully transitioned to a position with a federal government in
2006. He was in line for a promotion. He helped develop a drug testing program,
However, he tested positive for cocaine in October 2006. He denied use of cocaine. He
chose not to have the test examined again because he claimed he did not want to pay
the $150 fee and that the lab did not follow proper procedures. He remained on paid
administrative leave for several months and then resigned.
Despite the excellent military record and his current employer’s recommendation,
I find that the two positive test results and the deliberate omission of that information on
his 2007 security clearance leave me with doubts as to Applicant’s credibility.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility, judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. For all the
reasons discussed above, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
arising from his drug involvement, personal conduct and criminal conduct. 
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
