 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-13685 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application on May 3, 2007. On April 
3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 9, 2008; answered it on April 
10, 2008; and requested a decision on the record without a hearing. Department 
Counsel submitted the government’s written case on April 29, 2008. On April 30, 2008, 
a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on May 8, 2008. She 
did not respond. The case was assigned to me on July 7, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. Her 
admissions in her answer to the SOR are incorporated in my findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old switchboard operator working at a U.S. Air Force base 
as an employee of a defense contractor. She is married and has a 16-year-old son. She 
was a self-employed cosmetologist from February 1985 to September 2006, and an 
employee of a federal contractor from September 2006 until April 2007, when she 
began her current position. She has never held a security clearance.  
 
 After Applicant was involved in an automobile accident, she began accumulating 
numerous delinquent medical bills. The record does not indicate the date of the 
accident, the severity of her injuries, the extent of her medical insurance coverage, or 
the impact on her ability to work. The credit reports reflect that the medical bills were 
reported between August 2002 and August 2005, when she was self-employed. In her 
answer to the SOR, Applicant attributed all her delinquent accounts to being 
overwhelmed with medical bills. However, the record does not reflect the relationship, if 
any, between her medical bills and other delinquent debts such as the bad check (SOR 
¶ 1.j), satellite TV account (SOR ¶ 1.l), credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.m), cable TV bill 
(SOR ¶ 1.q), and the various collection accounts and judgments alleged in the SOR.  
 
Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in December 2007, solely in 
her name. She had made three payments to the bankruptcy trustee at the time the SOR 
was issued. The record does not reflect what actions, if any, Applicant took to resolve 
her debts before filing for bankruptcy. It does reflect, however, that she received the 
counseling required by the bankruptcy court on November 7, 2007 (GX 6 at 5). 
 
In her bankruptcy petition, Applicant reported her net monthly income as 
$3,210.33 and her spouse’s as $1,917.29, totaling $5,127.62 (GX 6 at 27). She reported 
total monthly expenses of $4,916.95 for the family, leaving a net remainder of $210.67. 
The family expenses include a “Spouse’s Monthly Chapter 13 Payment” of $469.95 (GX 
6 at 28). Applicant is required to pay $210 per month to the bankruptcy trustee (GX 6 at 
1). As of April 18, 2008, she had made three $210 payments to the trustee, the last on 
March 31, 2008, a few days before the SOR was issued (GX 7 at 2).  
 
 
3 
 
 
The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized in the 
table below. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Medical $1,782 Included in bankruptcy GX 5 at 1; GX 6 at 24 
1.b Medical $559 Included in bankruptcy GX 5 at 1-2; GX 6 at 24 
1.c Medical $836 Included in bankruptcy GX 5 at 2; GX 6 at 24 
1.d Medical $1,682 Same debt as 1.a GX 5 at 3; GX 6 at 24 
1.e Medical $806 Same debt as 1.c GX 5 at 3; GX 6 at 24 
1.f Medical $530 Same debt as 1.b GX 5 at 3; GX 6 at 24 
1.g Medical $432 Included in bankruptcy GX 5 at 3; GX 6 at 23 
1.h Medical $100 Included in bankruptcy GX 5 at 3; GX 6 at 23 
1.i Medical $263 Not in bankruptcy petition GX 5 at 3 
1.j Bad check $372 Included in bankruptcy GX 5 at 1; GX 6 at 24 
1.k Collection $127 Included in bankruptcy GX 5 at 3; GX 6 at 23 
1.l Satellite TV $110 Included in bankruptcy GX 5 at 3; GX 6 at 22 
1.m Credit card $1,290 Included in bankruptcy GX 5 at 4; GX 6 at 22 
1.n Collection $210 Included in bankruptcy GX 8 at 6; GX 6 at 23 
1.o Collection $1,632 Same debt as 1.d Department Counsel’s 
Submission 
1.p Collection $558 Included in bankruptcy GX 8 at 11; GX 6 at 24 
1.q Cable TV $325 Included in bankruptcy GX 8 at 12; GX 6 at 22 
1.r Judgment $4,735 Included in bankruptcy GX 8 at 4; GX 6 at 23 
1.s Judgment $547 Included in bankruptcy GX 8 at 4; GX 6 at 23 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts and two unpaid judgments totaling about 
$16,835. Nine debts are identified as medical bills. Only one debt, the medical bill 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i, is not listed in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. 
 
 The evidence indicates that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.o are 
duplicates of other debts alleged in the SOR. When the same conduct is alleged twice 
in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 
 
5 
 
 
3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.o in 
Applicant=s favor.   
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@ 
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e); however, AG ¶ 19(b) is not 
raised because there is no evidence of “frivolous or irresponsible spending.”  
 
Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c) and 19(e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
 The first two prongs (“so long ago” and “so infrequent”) are not established 
because Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing and numerous. The evidence is too 
sparse to show the debts occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to 
 
6 
 
 
recur. The record reflects that Applicant incurred medical bills as a result of a car 
accident while she was self-employed, but it does not reflect whether she had insurance 
in her own right or through her spouse’s employment. It does not reflect Applicant’s 
overall financial situation at the time the bills were incurred, the impact of the car 
accident on her ability to work, the attempts she made to resolve the medical bills, and 
the relationship between her medical bills and the other debts alleged in the SOR. 
Similarly, the absence of evidence showing her response to her medical debts makes it 
impossible to determine whether her conduct casts doubt on her currently reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant has not carried her burden of establishing 
AG ¶ 20(a). 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e, conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. While the car accident 
and resulting medical bills were a condition beyond Applicant’s control, there is no 
evidence on the issue whether she responded to that condition responsibly. Applicant 
has not carried her burden of establishing this mitigating condition 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition also has two prongs that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive. If 
the person has received counseling, it must also be shown that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or under control. However, if the person has 
not received counseling, this mitigating condition may still apply if there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or under control. 
 
The only counseling reflected in the record was required by the bankruptcy court. 
It is too soon to determine whether Applicant will adhere to the required payment plan 
and resolve her financial problems. I conclude she has not carried her burden of 
establishing this mitigating condition. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance.   
 
 Bankruptcy is a legally permissible means of resolving financial problems, but it 
does not necessarily establish the “good-faith effort” contemplated by AG ¶ 20(d). See, 
e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-25086 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 22, 2005); ISCR Case No. 01-26675 
 
7 
 
 
at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2003; ISCR Case No. 98-0445 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 1999). A 
Chapter 13 plan for repaying debts, instead of a Chapter 7 petition for discharge of 
those debts, tends to show good faith. In this case, however, there is an absence of 
evidence showing Applicant’s efforts, if any to resolve the debts before filing for 
bankruptcy, or relationship between her medical debts and the non-medical debts 
alleged in the SOR. Too little time has elapsed to establish a track record of complying 
with the Chapter 13 payment schedule. Applicant has not carried her burden of 
establishing this mitigating condition. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 The record in this case is very sparse. It reveals little about Applicant’s 
background and reputation, the circumstances leading to her financial difficulties, and 
her responses to those difficulties. The responsibility for the absence of evidence falls 
largely on Applicant, who has the burden of demonstrating her suitability for a security 
clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, 
and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1. Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p-1.s:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
