                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-10999
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Per Se
______________
Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On November 9, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 28, 2007, and requested a
hearing.  The case was assigned to me on April 2, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing
on April 28, 2008.  A hearing was held on April 28, 2008, for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny,
or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted
of 10 exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and two exhibits.  The transcript
2
(R.T.) was received on May 7, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified information is granted.
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Appellant requested leave to supplement the
record with possible documentation of indemnity with his insurance company covering
the reported balance on his vehicle repossession.  For good cause shown, Applicant
was granted 10 days to supplement the record.  Within the time permitted, Applicant
supplemented the record with an explanatory cover letter and two letters from his
insurance agent and carrier.  Department Counsel did not object to the submissions but
underscored Applicant’s changed perceptions about the intended nature of his
arrangement with the dealer he negotiated with over a Mitsubishi sports vehicle (i.e.,
from his emphasis on a purchase to his hearing perceptions of a lease). 
Department Counsel suggests different legal ramifications with a lease than with
a purchase: Specifically in a lease situation, Applicant would not be expected to ow
anything additional if the damaged vehicle were properly insured (see Department
Counsel’s memorandum re: Applicant’s post-hearing submissions). Both Applicant’s
post-hearing exhibits and Department counsel’s suggestions were admitted and
considered.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have accumulated one delinquent debt
in the amount of $19,199.00.  This debt represents a deficiency balance on a
repossessed vehicle. 
For his answer, Applicant denied the deficiency debt.  He claimed he never
signed any vehicle purchase papers and was permitted to drive the car off the lot to test
drive for a three-day period.  He claimed that the car was in an accident (no fault of his)
and was in and out of the shop for repairs for over a year before he told the seller he
wished to return the car.  He claimed he continued to make payments on the car during
the year it was in repairs at the urging of his insurance company.  He claimed that the
seller wanted $14,000.00 to put him in a replacement vehicle, which he refused and
demanded unsuccessfully to see original purchase papers the dealer claimed he and
his wife signed.  Applicant claimed that he has tried over the past few years to convince
the dealer that the purchase papers they eventually furnished him contained forgeries of
he and his wife’s signatures.  And he claimed that he has submitted handwriting
samples, depositions and requests to remove the alleged deficiency from his credit
report, but to no avail. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 59-year-old law-enforcement professional  for a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
3
Applicant are incorporated herein by reference and adopted as relevant and material
findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant is married and has two stepdaughters (both grown).  He has 13 years
experience as a police officer before leaving to establish his own consulting business in
2005.  Applicant spent the better part of three years in Iraq (between 2005 and 2008)
working with the U.S. Army in training Iraqi police (see exs. 9 and B; R.T., at 90).
In April 2001, Applicant in the company of his wife (W) contacted a car dealership
about purchasing or leasing a new Mitsubishi vehicle (compare ex 2 with ex. R.T., at 54,
64).  He completed paperwork with the dealership, and turned in his wife’s used
Mitsubishi as a trade-in (crediting him with about $7,000.00 towards purchase of the
new  Mitsubishi vehicle, and collateral for his test driving a new 2001 Mitsubishi Montero
sports utility vehicle (see ex. 2; R.T., at 58-59,64-65). By his own account in his
electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-qip) (see ex. 10) and in his
certified 2007 OPM interview, he agreed on terms of purchase and/or lease with a
purchase option of a 2001 Mitsubishi Montero with the dealer’s salesman (see exs. 1
and 2, R.T., at 65).
Applicant acknowledged, too, that he accepted finance terms with the dealer’s
finance company and initiated monthly payments of $461.00 a month to the finance
company (ex. 2).  While Applicant himself does not admit to signing required “proper
documentation” for the vehicle (R.T., at 64-65), his wife (W) certified to Applicant’s
purchasing a new 2001 Mitsubishi from the same dealer in an affidavit she executed in
April 2006 for an intended police report (see ex. 9). 
Both W and Applicant claim that someone forged their names to sales
documents: a credit application in W’s case (see exs. 8 through 10) and a sales contract
under date of April 20, 2001 with Applicant (see exs. 2 and 7).  In disclaiming his signing
the referenced sales contract in exhibit 7, or other proper documentation (his
characterization), he doesn’t define the contract provided him by the dealer’s agents or
attempt to explain its contents.  
Whatever sales terms Applicant and the dealer’s salesman agreed to in April
2001, it is most likely they committed their understanding of Applicant’s purchase of the
vehicle to some kind of written understanding, no matter how imperfect the document
might have been. Considering that Applicant was turning his wife’s car over to the
dealership as an intended trade-in, it is conceivable that the salesman applicant dealt
with considered the trade-in to be adequate collateral for release of the vehicle.  Without
documentation of the parties’ understanding, this can only be considered a possibility.
The purchase or lease document itself that the parties signed might have been brief and
lacking in all of the fine print, but sufficient to consummate a vehicle purchase and/or
lease/purchase arrangement.  Together with the trade-in collateral that Applicant and W
left with the dealership, the documentation might well have been legally sufficient to
justify the dealer’s permitting Applicant and his wife to drive the car off the lot for a
three-day test drive (a practice enforced by most states).
4
Apparently satisfied with the documentation Applicant provided, the dealer’s
salesman then permitted Applicant to drive the vehicle off the lot and return it in three
days time if he did not like it (R.T., at 65-66).  Applicant, in turn, drove the Mitsubishi
SUV off the lot with an insurance binder on the car from his own insurance company
(compare Answer with ex.2). 
Once away from the dealer’s lot, Applicant drove the Mitsubishi vehicle placed in
his custody well outside the geographical boundaries of his community.  While test
driving the vehicle in an area outside his immediate community, he was involved in an
accident, which was not his fault (see. exs. 2 and D).  After the incident, Applicant
promptly called his insurance company to report the accident and make a claim on the
offender’s insurance policy (see ex. D; R.T., at 72-73).  Contemporaneously, he called
the dealership to pick up the car and take it to their body shop for repairs (see ex. 2:
R.T., at 72-75).  At all times, Applicant dealt with his insurance company, who, in turn,
interfaced with the offender’s responsible carrier (R.T., at 73).  His account of this chain
of events is corroborated by his insurance carrier (see exs. C and D).  
Over the course of the ensuing year, the Mitsubishi SUV entrusted to Applicant
was in and out of the seller’s designated body and repair shops (R.T., at 61-62, 79-80).
While in for repairs, Applicant was furnished a loaner car by the repair shop (R.T., at 61-
62).  Applicant and his carrier deferred to the seller to take responsibility for the quality of
the work on the damaged vehicle (R.T., at 82).  Presumably, the seller had opportunities
to assess the condition of the car and make at least preliminary assessments about safe
and effective restoration of the vehicle to its pre-accident condition. The seller’s
approvals of the vehicle’s restoration to top condition are implicit in its joint endorsement
(with Applicant) of the $12,000.00 check from the offender’s insurance company in full
settlement of their joint and several damage claims from the offender’s insurance
company (see exs. C and D; R.T., at 74-92). 
Based on his completed purchasing and financing papers (in whatever document
form they were prepared), Applicant continued to make $461.00 monthly car payments
to the seller through August 2002, or thereabouts (see ex. 2; R.T., at 61).  Without the
ensuing April 2001 credit application and formal sales contract that Applicant and W
claim were forged, it is not clear just what specific documentation the dealer and its
financing arm were relying on, but they did continue to accept Applicant’s monthly
payments on the vehicle for over a year (i.e., April 2001 to August 2002).  
Frustrated with seemingly endless repairs (which exceeded $12,000.00 in
outlays), Applicant tired of retaining the vehicle and asked the dealer around August
2002 to trade in the Mitsubishi for a new vehicle (R.T., at 33, 92-93).  The dealer
(Applicant assures), in turn, offered to place Applicant in a new vehicle for an additional
$14,000.00 down payment (see ex. 1; R.T., at 28, 33, 63, 85-88).  When Applicant asked
the dealer for completed sales documents covering his supposed purchase of the
vehicle, the dealer advised that it could not find the sale documents (see ex. 2; R.T., at
33-34).  Applicant refused the dealer’s offer and requested the dealer to voluntarily
5
repossess the vehicle (apparently in Applicant’s possession at the time) (see ex. 2).  The
dealer complied with Applicant’s request.
At the time he turned the entrusted Mitsubishi SUV over to the seller, he claims
his outstanding balance on the vehicle was $18,072.00 (see ex. 2).  His claim is not
challenged and is a plausible amount under all of the circumstances.  The vehicle at
issue was a new and small 2001 Mitsubishi SUV that is carried as a joint purchase in
Applicant’s February 2007 credit report (ex. 4) with a listed purchase price of $31,431.00.
Without more to go on, this price would appear to represent the sticker price of the
vehicle without regard to any trade-in credits.  Both of his recent credit reports (exs. 3
and 4) report a $19,199.00 balance on an account closed and transferred.  This reported
sum (inclusive of some added interest) would appear to be a net sum that credits
Applicant for his trade-in and year’s payments.  What this reported deficiency does not
appear to cover is a credit for the proceeds of the vehicle’s resale, release, or public
auction sale. 
By taking responsibility for the repair of the Mitsubishi SUV vehicle at Applicant’s
request and joining in the settlement of Applicant’s insurance claims with the offender’s
carrier, the seller implicitly certified to restoration of the vehicle to its original condition.
As an almost new car in top condition (seller’s certification in endorsement of insurance
check), it could be expected to bring at least 75 per cent  of its new sticker price.  If this
were the case, Applicant could well be a net creditor of the seller and its collection agent,
not a debtor. 
Shortly after declining Applicant’s request for copies of the sales documents
covering his Mitsubishi purchase/lease, the dealer located the sale documents and faxed
them to Applicant (ex. 2; R.T., at 64).  When Applicant examined the furnished sales
documents, he claimed the signatures of himself and W had been forged.  Because he
did not specify which documents were forged, his forgery claims could not be
immediately pinned down (R.T., at 34, 57-58).  Once Applicant and his engaged attorney
advised the seller of their impressions, the seller suggested they file a police report.
Additionally, the seller asked for handwriting samples and an affidavit (R.T., at 34-35).
Applicant complied with the dealer’s affidavit request at the time, but did not provide any
handwriting samples
Once Applicant and W were alerted that the Mitsubishi dealer and its collection
agency had referred a deficiency claim on Applicant’s returned vehicle to credit reporting
agencies, they engaged attorneys to investigate their actions. Their engaged attorneys
who conducted their own investigation of the car dealer’s providing negative information
to credit reporting agencies confirmed their findings that an employee of the dealership
affixed  the names of Applicant and W to a credit application and sales contract in April
2001 without their approvals (compare exs. 2, 7 through 10 and A).
Acting on his attorneys’s advice, Applicant and W prepared affidavits in 2006 for
prospective filing of a malfeasance report with the local police department (see exs. 7
through 9).  The police detective who took Applicant’s inquiries in 2006 about filing a
6
malfeasance complaint on the Mitsubishi dealership advised him that due to the
remoteness of time and the difficulty in identifying the offending party the police would
not pursue an investigation and would not require handwriting samples (see ex. 9).
Consequently, neither Applicant, W nor their attorneys proceeded with the filing of a
police report covering the incident and furnishing handwriting samples.  Over the ensuing
years, Applicant’s attorneys and the seller’s collection agents exchanged
correspondence and proofs addressing the dispute (see exs. 7 through 10 and A; R.T.,
at 36).
Because no sales documentation was made available by either party, it is difficult
to ascertain what precise business arrangements Applicant made with the car dealer in
April 2001.  Applicant does provide potentially conflicting accounts of his arrangement.
In his e-qip and OPM interview summary he described the arrangement as a purchase.
At hearing, though, he offered a little bit different perception: characterizing his
impressions as a contemplated lease arrangement. 
Auto leases, like straight purchases, typically lock in monthly payments over the
life of the agreed lease and can result in repossessions for non-payment not unlike
vehicle purchases. Just as repossession of a leased vehicle before the expiration of the
lease term does not release the lessee from his remaining lease obligations under the
terms of his lease, a lessor’s repossession of the vehicle for non-payment or other lease
default still imposes responsibility on the lessor to mitigate its potential losses by
crediting the lessee with the proceeds of sale of the vehicle on his remaining lease
obligations.  In a lease/purchase arrangement, the lessee is typically offered the choice
of keeping the vehicle to term or buying off the remaining time on the lease with a
negotiated purchase of the vehicle based on the vehicle’s assessed blue book value at
the time of conversion.  Where payment suspensions are contemplated by the
consumer, it probably does not make a great deal of difference for consequential
purposes whether the legal transaction is characterized as a purchase or a lease.  
With the legal ramifications between a lease and purchase duly noted, several
pieces of evidence do point to Applicant’s completing a purchase of the vehicle.  His
acknowledgments of a purchase in his e-qip and OPM interview are quite probative (see
exs. 1 and 2).  His obtaining an insurance binder on the vehicle with his own insurance
company, and his taking possession of the vehicle (R.T., at 31) are certainly consistent
with ownership or lease of the vehicle.  At the very least, Applicant’s actions created  a
bailment, by which Applicant assumed legal responsibilities for the care of the car while
he had custody of the vehicle.  Arranged car payments of $461.00 a month with the
dealer’s financing agency before he assumed possession of the car are also consistent
with an ownership transfer or lease, even if reversible within the time specified in the
contract and state law.  
Applicant’s turning over his old vehicle in trade (R.T., at 58-59) is consistent, too,
with a purchase, or perhaps a lease.  W’s acknowledging Applicant’s signing purchase
papers at the dealership while denying any responsibility of her own provides further
evidence of Applicant’s purchase of the vehicle. So, too, Applicant’s continued car
7
payments for over a year on the SUV vehicle and his negotiated settlement with the
offender’s insurance carrier over repairs and any injuries (Applicant claims limits in the
offender’s insurance policy) are demonstrative, too, of a purchase or lease of the vehicle
in issue.
What remains unclear is what Applicant and W allegedly signed in April 2001.
Applicant swears in his affidavit that he never signed a sales contract in April 2001 that
contains his signature (see ex 7; R.T., at 60-62); while W swears she never signed a
credit application or sales agreement that bears her signature.  Both sworn affidavit
accounts are reconcilable with Applicant’s claims.  Missing, though, are copies of the
disputed documents themselves. Neither party has provided copies of sale
documentation of any kind (to include purchase memoranda agreements, with or without
all of the fine print, pre-test drive financial arrangements, agreements of terms and
conditions of release of the subject vehicle to Applicant, and any post-car release credit
applications, forged or otherwise).  Whether any of the underlying documentation is
currently available is unknown.
 The evidence is strong, though, that Applicant consummated a financed
purchase of the Mitsubishi SUV he drove off with in April 2001.  In addition to his
continuing to make payments on the vehicle, he completed a settlement agreement with
the offender’s insurance carrier to cover the car’s repairs.  If Applicant had neither
purchased nor leased the vehicle, a reasonable case can be made that the seller and its
carrier would have taken the lead in working out third-party compensatory arrangements
with the offender’s insurance carrier, and not required Applicant’s co-signature. As it
was, it appears that Applicant and his carrier took the lead in working with the offender’s
carrier, while collectively deferring to the seller for the supervising of repairs.   
Other events point, too, to the consummation of some kind of Applicant purchase
or lease of the vehicle at issue.  Applicant is of record in confirming that the vehicle he
turned in before taking custody of the Mitsubishi in April 2001 was worth approximately
$7,000.00 (R.T., at 59).  If he did sign over title to his turned in vehicle, realistically he
should have been entitled to a prompt return of the vehicle when he voluntarily turned
the SUV back to the seller.  His failure to demand return of his trade-in makes sense only
if he had completed transfer papers before taking possession of the Mitsubishi SUV. 
Applicant’s taking the vehicle on a three-day family trip outside of his immediate
community is difficult, too, to reconcile with an agreed test-drive of the vehicle without
any assumed purchase or lease obligation.  For a simple test drive arrangement, the
seller’s carrier would likely have born responsibility for any accidental damage.  That
Applicant felt the need to engage his own insurance carrier is more consistent with an
assumed purchase or lease of the vehicle.  Not only is there no sales agreement (forged
or not) to assess the respective obligations of the parties under the terms of the
document, but Applicant never filed any contemporaneous police report (see ex. 2).
Besides a lack of any paper record of Applicant’s sales dispute over the Mitsubishi
vehicle he is billed for, there is no documented evidence of any legal action initiated by
8
Applicant.  All that is compiled in the record are credit reports reflecting a deficiency
balance, written accounts from W, Applicant’s interview summary and answer, and
exchanged letters between the seller’s collection agent and Applicant’s attorney
documenting a dispute and threatened litigation over the vehicle’s purchase and the
balance owed, and Applicant’s insistent hearing claims that the sales papers faxed to
him by the seller after his disrupted test drive was a forgery.  
 
From the evidence compiled in the record, inferences warrant that Applicant
entered into some kind of lease or purchase arrangement with the seller that enabled the
seller to release the vehicle to Applicant in April 2001 for a try out.  Whatever
arrangement Applicant worked out with the seller quite likely had a three-day trial period
(a common requirement in most states).  Applicant’s actions are consistent with his
assuming some kind of purchase or lease of the vehicle when he drove it off the dealer’s
lot in April 2001 and took it on an extended in-state trip.  His trade-in of his own vehicle,
his continued monthly payments on the vehicle, and his settlement with the offender’s
insurance company on repairs made by the seller or its designee all serve to strengthen
the case for an imputed  purchase or lease.
 Of course, were Applicant able to provide firm proof of a forged credit application,
such proof could provide an affirmative defense to any purchase or lease claims of the
seller (regardless of any other paperwork completed by Applicant).  But neither of the
parties document any initiated legal proceedings to prove or disprove Applicant’s forgery
claims, and the time for initiating any such claims would appear to have expired.  So,
without more to corroborate Applicant’s forgery fraud claims, there is enough evidence
here to draw material inferences of Applicant’s acquired ownership or lease interest of
the disputed 2001 Mitsubishi SUV. 
Finding an Applicant purchase of his disputed vehicle arrangement does not end
the  matter.  Questions still persist about the overall merits and enforcement potential of
the seller’s demanded deficiency. Based on the seller’s demanded $18,072.00
deficiency (R.T., at 96), it is reasonably likely from the credit reports and other evidence
that Applicant was credited with his trade-in and his $5,562.00 in payments over the
2001-2002 period.  It is much more doubtful, though, that he was ever credited with any
proceeds produced by the seller’s resale, release or public sale of the SUV in issue.
Certainly, the seller and collection agency provide no evidence or clues as to how they
credited Applicant with the resale, release, or  the public sale of his fully repaired vehicle
(compare exs. 2 through 4 and 10). 
From the correspondence produced, there is good reason to question the
accuracy of the seller’s reported deficiency claim.  All together, the compiled evidence
covering the seller’s deficiency claim reflects a legitimate dispute of the merits of the
SOR debt.  The creditor has reportedly agreed to remove the debt from Applicant’s credit
report in exchange for Applicant’s dropping his threatened legal action (see exs. 10, A
and B; R.T., at 40).  Applicant’s most recent October 2007 credit report (see ex. 3)
reflects a transfer of sale of the account and no mention of the collection agent that
acquired  the deficiency claim.  
9
Applicant assures that he has good credit and was able to recently purchase a
Land Rover with an $11,500.00 down payment (R.T., at 42).  His accounts listed on his
most recent credit report are reported to be in current status (see exs. 3 and 4).
Applicant is highly regarded by his Army command, former military and civilian law
enforcement colleagues he has worked with over the years, and friends  He is
considered trustworthy and beyond reproach in his professional and personal life (ex. B).
He is credited with spending considerable time in Iraq training police professionals and is
vouched for in his endorsements as a man of outstanding moral character and personal
integrity (see ex. B).  
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if
any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued or
denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively in
arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon
a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
10
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw
only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of
record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on
speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is a law enforcement professional with considerable experience in local
and federal service (including a tour of duty in Iraq) who accumulated one major listed
debt in 2002 that he still disputes.  Without resolution that absolves Applicant from
obligation for this listed debt, it raises initial security significant concerns.
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially
overextended as to indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, which can raise questions about the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information, and place the
person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant’s
association with a major debt in his credit report and his past inability to resolve it
amicably, or by an initiated court action, warrants the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines for financial considerations: DC 19(a)
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and DC 19(c) “a history of not meeting
financial obligations.”
Applicant’s listed deficiency from a car repossession in 2002 is disputed by
Applicant in just about every way possible: the absence of a signed purchase
agreement, a produced forged sales agreement and credit application from the seller,
questionable sales tactics by the seller (e.g., the seller’s demand for $14,000.00 to
place him in another vehicle),and  the seller’s failure to properly credit him for the value
of the car he turned back.  
11
From the testimony and documented accounts placed in evidence, there is sound
reason to conclude that Applicant made some kind of purchase arrangement or lease
with the seller before driving off the lot with the vehicle. To create a sustainable meeting
of the minds for contractual purposes, a party need not have a detailed sales agreement
laden with fine print.  A simple memorandum of understanding specifying price, terms,
and any trade-in credit could have been sufficient to create a purchase arrangement
that complied with the state’s statute of frauds requirements. 
 Here, Applicant’s reliance on his own insurance company to cover his insurance
needs while test driving the SUV vehicle, his continued payments on the vehicle after he
turned it over to the seller for repairs, his failure to recover his trade-in, and the common
sense weighing of the plausibility of a dealer releasing a car for three days for extended
in-state travel, collectively present strong indicators of a purchase or lease arrangement
of some kind.  Whether or not his taking possession of the vehicle was pursuant to a
purchase, a straight lease, or a lease/purchase, Applicant’s probative actions at the very
minimum created a contractual relationship between the parties sufficient to satisfy his
State’s statute of frauds.
Still, all of the makings of a legitimate dispute are visible.  Failure of the seller to
recoup more money on a car it certified to be fully repaired with the responsible party’s
insurer, the seller’s failure to provide documentation of a valid, enforceable sales
agreement, Applicant’s forgery claims documented by affidavit and letters from his
attorneys, the absence of any accounted for credits on the vehicle he turned back to the
seller, and the collection agent’s apparent willingness to delete the debt from Applicant’s
credit reports without any documented payment arrangements, undermine any seller
showing of deficiency entitlement. 
Without any more documented accounts of the transaction than the testimonials
provided by Applicant and his attorneys, evaluation of the parties’ claims and defenses
is considerably complicated. The best that can be said is that the listed deficiency
remains a legitimate dispute, and quite possibly a credit entitlement of Applicant’s.  So,
under these case specific circumstances, MC 20(e), “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue,” has applicability to the listed deficiency debt.  
Even if the disputed deficiency debt can be resolved against Applicant on the
merits, mitigation credit is still available to Applicant based on the age of the debt
(2002).  Age of the debt at issue is covered by two of the mitigating conditions for
financial considerations: MC 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” has applicability,
while not dispositive.  For this account, regardless of whether it reflects an otherwise
valid debt owing, it may no longer be enforceable under the State’s applicable statute of
limitations for written contracts.  
12
The state statute of limitations in Applicant’s state for claims based on a written
contract is four years (see 16.004(a)(3) of T Civ. Practice and Remedies Code) and
claims not otherwise provided for (see 16.051 of T Civ. Practice and Remedies Code).  
While Applicant may have continuing individual liability for this debt, there would appear
to be little risk of collection on the debt which by the accounts of Applicant’s attorney
has been resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
While potentially applicable statutes of limitation have not been recognized by our
Appeal Board to absorb security risks associated with unresolved delinquent debts.
Statutes of limitation in general are considered important policy tools for discouraging
plaintiffs from pursuing stale claims and promoting finality in litigation.  They have never
been equated with good-faith efforts, though, to repay overdue creditors.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 02-30304, at 3 (App. Bd. April 2004)(quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020,
at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 2001).
Weight, if any, to be assigned to potential statutes of limitations under the new
Guidelines should be considered in light of all the circumstances surrounding the
existing debts, and must take account of the Applicant’s entire history of demonstrated
trust and responsibility.  Viewed in this whole person light, the controlling state statute of
limitation for written contracts is entitled to be accorded significant mitigation weight in
evaluating Applicant’s overall financial risk. 
                                                 
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in
financial cases (as here).
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
only listed debt, his documented steps taken to resolve the dispute over the debt with
the seller and its collection agent, and an overall whole-person assessment of his
demonstrated responsibility and trustworthiness in his work and financial relationships
with his creditors over time, Applicant mitigates security concerns related to his disputed
debt.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegation covered by sub-
paragraph 1.a of the SOR.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
13
GUIDELINE F: (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: FOR APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
