1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-16227
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray P. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On March 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 7, 2008, and requested a hearing. I
received the case assignment on April 25, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
May 1, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 9, 2008. During the
hearing, I received four Government exhibits and Applicant’s testimony. At the close of
the hearing, I left the record open at Applicant’s request, to allow her to submit
documents. Applicant then submitted seven documents that I incorporated into the
Applicant has been taking prescription depression medication since 1997 (Tr. 46).1
2
record. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 16, 2008. Based upon a
review of the record, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 37-year-old, woman with three children ages 20, 18, and 16. She
has been married twice. Both marriages ended in divorce. Her first husband is the father
of her three children. Applicant earned a GED in 1994. Currently, she works for a
contractor that manufactures night vision goggles.
Applicant is highly respected on the job. Her supervisor characterizes her as
“highly upbeat and helpful to other people with whom she comes in contact with”
(Exhibit C). A coworker describes her as “a very hard worker with a strong work ethic”
(Exhibit E).
Applicant has a history of financial problems that began with the deterioration of
her first marriage in the mid 1990s, and continue to the present. In 1997, the year she
and her first husband separated, she was hospitalized for three days after a prescription
medication overdose (Tr. 45). The treatment costs totaled approximately $14,000.
Applicant did not have health insurance benefits at the time, and was unable to pay it. A
judgment was rendered against her on this debt in 2003 (Answer, SOR subparagraph
1.v).
In 1999, Applicant’s divorce was finalized (Exhibit 1 at 17). That year, she also
obtained a job with health benefits (Id. at 14). In May 2001, she purchased a car (Exhibit
3 at 5). Three months later, she remarried (Id. at 17). Her second husband owned a
home worth approximately $200,000 (Tr. 47). Before they married, he had operated a
business that generated approximately $500,000 in yearly revenue (Tr. 48). Although he
no longer operated the business when he married Applicant, he had received a
significant cash settlement from litigation related to the business’ termination (Tr. 48).
He invested it in the stock market, and “decided not to work” (Tr. 17). Applicant then
began making mortgage payments on their home without any assistance (Tr. 18). 
Applicant purchased another car in February 2002 (Exhibit 3 at 13). Shortly
thereafter, her husband’s stock market investments began failing, and he still refused to
work. Applicant then lost her job (Tr. 17, Exhibit 1 at 14). 
Applicant could no longer afford the car payments for her two automobiles, and
she called the car dealer to arrange for their voluntary repossession (Tr. 24). For the
next three years, she struggled to make ends meet by working a variety of part-time,
menial jobs. None of them provided health insurance benefits (Tr. 43), and she
continued to experience health problems.  1
SOR subparagraph 1.s is a duplicate of SOR subparagraph 1.o. 2
Applicant acknowledges the delinquencies listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i, but has not been3
able to determine the original creditors.
3
Over the years, Applicant has received little assistance with child support from
her first husband. In 2001, with the help of an attorney, she successfully obtained a
modification of the child support order. Her ex-husband continued not to make
payments (Tr. 41). Currently, he owes $43,000 of delinquent child support payments
(Tr. 18).
By approximately 2007, Applicant owed creditors approximately $58,000 of
delinquent debt, as listed in the SOR, including medical bills(SOR subparagraphs 1.a
through 1.d, 1.f, 1.n, 1.u, and 1.v), utilities (SOR subparagraphs 1.e and 1.g), credit
cards (SOR subparagraphs 1.j through 1.q),  the remaining deficiencies from two2
automobile repossessions (SOR subparagraphs 1.r and 1.t, as described above), and a
rent delinquency (SOR subparagraph 1.y).  3
SOR subparagraphs 1.k through 1.m are owed to the same creditor (Exhibit 4).
This creditor obtained judgments, as listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.w and 1.x, on two
of these accounts (Tr. 51). It is unclear from the record which of the accounts the
judgments correspond (Tr. 50-51).
In March 2008, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. During the bankruptcy
process, she received one session of financial counseling by telephone from a credit
counseling company (Exhibit B). In the years preceding her bankruptcy filing, she had
neither received any counseling nor attempted to make any payment arrangements with
her creditors (Tr. 31). On July 8, 2008, the bankruptcy court discharged the debts
(Exhibit G).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information”
(AG ¶ 18). Applicant’s longstanding financial problems trigger the application of AG ¶¶
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations, and 19(e), “consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may
be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.”
Two consecutive troubled marriages, her first husband’s failure to pay child
support, a history of health problems, and frequent underemployment have contributed
to Applicant’s financial problems. In March 2008, Applicant filed for a Chapter 7
bankruptcy discharge, and in July 2008, a bankruptcy court discharged all of her
delinquencies.
Before filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy Applicant had never sought financial
counseling. Also, when her finances improved briefly between 1999 and 2001, she
appears to have made no effort to satisfy any of the debts that had accrued to that
point. Consequently, Applicant’s efforts at obtaining a discharge of her delinquencies
merits some mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” but I cannot conclude she acted
responsibly enough under the circumstances to apply the mitigating condition listed in
AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.” 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
5
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
Applicant’s delinquencies were caused primarily by circumstances beyond her
control, and have recently been discharged through the Chapter 7 bankruptcy process.
Absent a demonstrated track record of financial reform, and the age, number and the
amount of the discharged delinquencies, it is too soon to conclude that Applicant’s
financial problems no longer pose a security risk.
The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is
based on current disqualifying and mitigating conditions. Although Applicant’s current
circumstances do not warrant the granting of a security clearance, she may well
establish the requisite track record of financial reform to obtain a security clearance in
the future. Such a judgment at this point, however, would be premature. Clearance is
denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.t - 1.y: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
