1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )         ISCR Case No. 07-13722
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA) on October 6,
2006. On January 10, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial
considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). The action was taken
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted his answer to the SOR on February 19, 2008. DOHA issued
a notice of hearing on April 8, 2008, and the hearing was held on May 28, 2008. At the
hearing, three exhibits (GE 1 through 3) were admitted in evidence without objection to
support the government’s case. Applicant testified and submitted nine exhibits. (AE A-
AE I) In the time allowed for Applicant to furnish additional documentation, he submitted
AE J, AE K, and AE L. AE J is additional documentation relating to student loans
2
addressed in SOR 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c. AE K contains additional documentation relating
to the student loans, and a restructuring/refinancing of a new loan to accommodate four
new classes. AE L includes payoff documentation relating to a delinquent student loan
account identified in SOR 1.e. DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the
proceedings on June 5, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the eight delinquent financial accounts under the paragraph 1.
He denied falsifying his security clearance application (SCA) he submitted on October
6, 2006. Applicant is 43 years old, and married with two children. Applicant retired from
the United States (U.S.) Army in 2004 after 22 years of service. He has been working
for his current employer as a contract administrator since November 2007. He seeks a
security clearance.
Financial Considerations
The SOR lists eight delinquent debts. The eighth account (SOR 1.h.) has not
been included in the total past due amount as the debt was released in December 2002,
more than five years ago. Minus SOR 1.h., Applicant is responsible for $26,461.00 in
delinquent debt to seven creditors. Applicant was unable to point to any financial
hardship that prevented him from paying his debts. (Tr. 54-56)
" 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c., student loans (approximately $22,000.00). The first three
delinquent accounts in the SOR are related to the same student loan funding source.
The three accounts were charged off in November 2005. Applicant believed the
accounts were in deferment when he retired from the military in 2004. No
documentation was provided to establish official postponement of repayment of the
loans. Applicant has been paying $200.00 a month since May 2007 on the delinquent
accounts. (AE A, AE J)
" 1.d., student loan ($709.00). Applicant enrolled in a class in 2003 that was
supposed to be paid through his military education benefits. He paid the bill off in May
2007. (AE E)
" 1.e., military loan ($3,318.00). Applicant testified he was on active duty, and
was paying this bill through allotment. It is not clear how the allotment expired when
Applicant retired in 2004. Applicant has been making documented payments of $200.00
a month on the account since August 2007; the balance on May 2, 2008, was $1633.00.
(AE E, AE L) 
" 1.f. health bill ($145.00). The account was not paid through Applicant’s military
health insurance as required. He paid the bill on May 1, 2007. (AE F) 
3
" 1.g., telephone bill ($123.00). Applicant paid the phone bill on May 20, 2008
(Tr. 43). At the hearing, he produced a carbon copy of check #480 that he had written
on May 20, 2008, in full satisfaction of the debt.
" 1.h., state tax lien ($1,183.00) Applicant testified he purchased a car in 1995.
The record is not clear how Applicant’s purchase of the car resulted in him owing the
state taxes. Applicant provided documentation verifying the lien was removed on
December 31, 2002. Hence, this account is not included with the other delinquent debts
as it was resolved more than five years ago. Applicant’s repayment of SOR creditors
1.d., 1.f., and 1.g. and periodic partial payments of the other four creditors leave
Applicant with an outstanding delinquent balance of approximately $22,729.00.00.
Personal Conduct
On October 6, 2006, Applicant intentionally falsified his SCA when he answered
question 28.a. (debts over 180 days delinquent in last 7 years) and question 28.b. (over
90 days delinquent on any debt) in the negative. As noted earlier, in his answer to the
SOR in February 2008, Applicant denied he falsified his SCA. At the hearing, Applicant
explained, “Sir, as I alluded to you earlier, during that time I was going through what
was a divorce. And I really cannot answer why. I was embarrassed. I didn’t want to
admit to that. I think I really - - I don’t know why.” (Tr. 55) 
Applicant was asked about any additional omissions in the SCA. He indicated
that the negative answer to question 23.a. (charge or conviction of a felony offense) was
incorrect. At the time he was filling out the SCA he had forgotten about the battery
charge (he was charged in about 1998) lodged by his former wife. The charges were
dropped. Also, his negative response to question 24.a. (since age 16 or in the last 7
years, have you ever used a controlled substance?) was also incorrect. Applicant
entered the “No” answer because he was embarrassed to acknowledge he had used
drugs before. (Tr. 61) To be like his friends, he used marijuana about 18 months before
filing out the SCA. Applicant still associates with these friends. 
Applicant did not provide any evidence regarding his job performance and/or his
character on or away from the job. He entered the U.S. Army in 1983, and was
discharged in 2004. His highest rank in the Army was Captain. He has a Bachelors
degree in Business.
Applicant never received financial counseling, but did receive assistance on how
to manage his finances better. He has no set budget. His current monthly net income is
about $5,000.00; his monthly remainder after payment of all expenses, is approximately
$3,321.00. He has about $4,000.00 in his savings account. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
4
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Financial Considerations (FC)
A person who does not live within their means is at risk of engaging in illegal acts
to generate funds. 
Personal Conduct (PC)
Deliberately concealing information during the course of a security investigation
demonstrates dishonesty while representing a serious security concern.
5
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
18. The Concern. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”
Applicant still owes approximately $22,729.00 on four delinquent debts, after
repayment of creditors 1d., 1f., and 1.g. FC disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a. (inability
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC 19.c. (a history not meeting financial
obligations) 
Evidence of financial problems may be mitigated by FC mitigating condition (MC)
20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment) I am unable to apply this guideline
because the debts became delinquent within the last three years. Though only four
debts are still delinquent currently, the amount of the delinquency is more than
$22,500.00. More importantly, Applicant tried to conceal his indebtedness in October
2006, giving the impression he had no debt at all. 
FC MC 20.b. (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control and individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply because Applicant indicated there were no problems preventing him
from paying his debts. While FC MC 20.c. (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control) provides limited mitigation because some of the debt has
been paid. However, it is not enough to overcome the adverse evidence under FC DC
19.a. and 19.c. 
FC MC 20.d. (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts) receives some consideration because Applicant paid off
three of the smaller accounts, and has made a year’s worth of payments on the three
student loans. Also, he has been paying on the military loan since August 2007.
However, he has only paid about $3,700.00 on the four past due accounts. He still owes
more than $22,500.00. Having weighed all the evidence, Applicant’s repayment efforts
fall short of meeting his ultimate burden of persuasion under the FC guideline. 
6
Personal Conduct (PC)
15. The Concern. “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.” 
Applicant’s “No” answers to both debt questions (28.a., 28.b.) of his SCA in
October 2006 were deliberate falsifications of relevant facts as defined by PC DC 16.a.
(deliberate omission, falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire used to determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness)
Applicant knew that he was concealing information when he entered his “No” answers
on the form. Applicant continued to deny the debts in his answer to the SOR in February
2008. Even during the initial portion of the hearing, Applicant waffled about why he
falsified the SCA regarding his past due debt. His credibility is undermined even further
with his revelation of omitting his criminal charge of battery (question 23.a. of the SCA)
and his marijuana use about 18 months before he filled out the SCA. See, response to
question 24.a., SCA dated October 6, 2006. 
I have carefully considered the following mitigating conditions to determine
whether Applicant’s intentional omissions are mitigated: PC MC 17.a. (the individual
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission or falsification before being
confronted with the facts); PC MC 17.c. (the offense is so minor, or so much time has
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment); and, PC MC 17.d. (the individual has
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely
to recur) 
PC MC 17. a. does not apply because Applicant did not disclose the falsification
until after he was confronted at the hearing about his “No” answers to both questions on
the security form. PC MC 17.b. (the offense was so minor, or such time passed, or the
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment) does not apply as Applicant attempted to conceal seven debts less
than two years ago. Finally, PC MC 17.d. (the individual has acknowledged the behavior
and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur) applies in part as
Applicant admitted he deliberately omitted his debts from the form. However, he has not
presented any independent, mitigating character evidence to confidently conclude his
7
dishonesty is unlikely to recur. In sum, Applicant’s evidence in mitigation does not
satisfy his ultimate burden of persuasion under the PC guideline. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC) 
I have weighed the circumstances of this case under the general factors of the
whole person concept. Applicant was 41 when he certified to the government in October
2006 that he had no delinquent accounts. In May 2007, Applicant began paying $200.00
a month on the student loans in SOR 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c., and paid off the student loan
account identified in SOR 1.e. Yet, in his February 2008 answer to the SOR, he denied
that he deliberately omitted the financial information from his SCA. At the hearing, he
did not immediately come forward with his omissions until after initially trying to
perpetuate the dishonesty. Applicant does not successfully establish his case under the
FC guideline because there is no evidence of counseling and/or the financial tools
necessary to maintain control over his finances. Given Applicant’s failure to come
forward with his intentional falsifications before being confronted with his falsehoods,
and the absence of independent character evidence, the FC and PC guidelines are
found against him. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant.
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Personal Conduct, Guideline E): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a. Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
