 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-14435
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence concerns which arise from her close
family ties to her parents and sister who are citizens and residents of Iran. 
On March 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and C (foreign
preference). Applicant submitted a response to the SOR that was received by DOHA on
March 31, 2008. Applicant admitted all SOR allegations and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on April 23, 2008. A notice of hearing was issued on
April 24, 2008, scheduling the hearing for May 20, 2008. The hearing was conducted as
scheduled. 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
The government submitted 15 documentary exhibits that were marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-15. GE 1-4 were admitted into the record without objection.
Administrative notice was taken of the contents of GE 5-15 without objection. Department
Counsel submitted a document containing written comments on the contents of GE 5-15
for my consideration which was marked as Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex.) I, and made part
of the record without objection. Applicant testified and submitted two documentary exhibits
that were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 and 2, and admitted into the record without
objection. The transcript was received on June 2, 2008.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 30-year-old married woman who has been employed as a software
engineer by a defense contractor since 2005. She was awarded a bachelor of science
degree in 2005, after working for the same defense contractor as an intern while attending
college. She is considered to be a responsible person, a valued employee and a team
player. She held a variety of jobs outside the defense industry between the time she
immigrated to the U.S. in 1999 and when she began working for her current employer. She
has never possessed a security clearance. 
Applicant was born and raised in Iran. She attended college in Iran from October
1996 to April 1999. Her husband was born in the U.S. and is a U.S. citizen. His parents
were citizens of Iran but attending school in the U.S. when he was born. He returned with
his parents to Iran when he was about seven years old and resided there until he was
about 20 years old. Applicant met her husband in Iran. He then returned to the U.S. to
apply for an fiancee visa for her. She then immigrated to the U.S. in 1999 and they were
married in August 1999. They do not have any children, but Applicant is expecting a child
later this year. Her husband’s parents are now U.S. residents.  
Applicant’s mother, father and her sole sibling, a sister, are citizens and residents
of Iran. Her parents have visited with her in the U.S., most recently in December 2007.
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in January 2005, obtained a U.S. passport in
March 2005, and applied for her parents to become permanent resident aliens very shortly
thereafter. Her parents have now acquired permanent resident alien status and intend to
immigrate to the U.S. within the next two years after they complete selling property in Iran
and otherwise winding up their personal affairs. Applicant would like to sponsor her sister’s
entry into the U.S. but has been told that procedure would take about 15 years.    
Applicant’s mother is 51 years old and her father is 60 years old. Her father works
for a food importing and exporting company in Iran. Her mother is a homemaker.
Applicant’s sister is 27 years old, engaged to an Iranian citizen and resident, and currently
resides with her parents. Applicant’s sister and her fiancé will most likely be married in Iran
and want to emigrate from there as soon as they can following their marriage. Applicant
speaks with her parents and sister by telephone twice a week or more. 
3
Applicant visited her family in Iran for two months in 2001, for one month in 2003,
for one month in 2005, and for two weeks in 2006. He husband only accompanied her on
the trip in 2005. She possessed an Iranian passport and used that passport for the 2001
and 2003 trips. She used both passports for the trips in 2005 and 2006. She intends to
travel to Iran in the future to attend her sister’s wedding. She also will travel to Iran if It
becomes necessary for a reason such as the 2006 trip which was necessitated because
her father suffered a heart attack. She does not intend to renew her Iranian passport until
it becomes necessary to visit her family in Iran. 
Neither Applicant nor her husband own any property in Iran. The have purchased
a house in the U.S. that is valued at approximately $400,000. They made a $25,000 down
payment on this house which was obtained from the proceeds of the sale of a prior house
they owned. Applicant has about $5-6,000 invested in a 401K retirement plan and an
additional couple of thousand dollars in a savings account. Her annual income is about
$50,000. 
Iran has been identified by the U.S. to be the most active state sponsor of terrorism.
(GE 10) 
The U.S. Government defines (Iran’s) areas of objectionable behavior as the
following:
• Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other
weapons of mass destruction;
• Its support for and involvement in international
terrorism;
• Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East
peace process, as well as its harmful activities
particularly in Lebanon, as well as in Iraq, Afghanistan,
and elsewhere in the region; and
• Its dismal human rights record and lack of respect for its
own people. (GE 5)  
The Department of State continues to warn U.S. citizens to carefully consider
the risks of travel to Iran. Dual national Iranian-American citizens may
encounter difficulty in departing Iran. . . .
Some elements of the Iranian regime and the population remain hostile to
the United States. As a result, American citizens may be subject to
harassment or arrest while traveling or residing in Iran. Recently (as of
January 3, 2008) Iranian authorities prevented a number of Iranian-American
citizen academics, journalists, and others who traveled to Iran for personal
reasons from leaving for several months, and in some cases detained and
imprisoned them on various charges, including espionage and posing a
threat to national security. Americans of Iranian origin should consider the
risk of being targeted by authorities before planning travel to Iran. Iranian
authorities may deny dual nationals access to the United States  Interests
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
4
Section in Tehran, because they are considered to be solely Iranian citizens.
. . . (GE 7) 
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guidelines B (foreign influence) and
C (foreign preference), with their disqualifying and mitigating conditions, are most relevant
in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the5
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to6
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
her.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
 Id at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
5
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      11
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as
whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Applicant’s parents and sister are citizens and residents of Iran. She maintains very
close ties with each of those individuals as evidenced by her frequent telephone contact
with them, her parents’ recent visit to the U.S., her frequent and lengthy trips to Iran to visit
with them, her sponsoring of her parents in their acquisition of permanent U.S. resident
alien status, her expressed desire to do the same for her sister, and her emphatic assertion
that she will return to Iran to attend her sister’s wedding. While each of these actions is
understandable and even commendable, individually and collectively they raise security
concerns under Disqualifying Condition (DC) 7(a): contact with a foreign family member .
. . or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country it that contact creates
a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
I have considered all mitigating conditions and find that none apply. Specifically,
Mitigating Condition (MC) 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located . . . are such that it is unlikely the individual will
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual
. . . and the interests of the U.S. does not apply because of the obvious close relationship
between Applicant and her parents and sister and the nature and history of the Iranian
Government. 
Likewise, MC 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person . . . is so minimal, or the individual has
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. does not apply because
of the obviously very strong feelings of attachment that Applicant has for her parents and
sister, the comparatively short time she has been a U.S. citizen and employed by defense
contractor, her expressed intent to return to Iran for her sister’s wedding and any other
6
family matters that might arise, and the nature of the Iranian Government and its
relationship with the U. S.   
Applicant’s frequent contact with her family members in Iran, her repeated travel to
that country and her parents travel to the U.S. prohibit application of MC 8(c): contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood
that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. The remaining mitigating
conditions have no applicability to the facts of this case.
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Foreign preference is a concern because when an individual acts in such a way as
to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may
be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the
United States.
Applicant exercised her Iranian citizenship rights by using an Iranian passport to
travel to Iran on four occasions between 2001 and 2006. The last display of the passport
occurred after she became a U.S. citizen. While the passport has now expired and she has
not renewed it, she has made very clear that she will renew and use it in the future to travel
to Iran to attend her sister’s wedding and for any unexpected future family matters that
might arise. However, her use of the Iranian passport was mandated by Iranian law and
not by any preference she had for Iran over the U.S. I have considered all potential
disqualifying conditions and conclude none apply under the particular facts of this case.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” In this case, there is no reason to doubt that Applicant is a loyal American
citizen or suspect she would ever consider doing harm to the interests of the United States.
Still, her continuing contacts with Iran as a result of her parents’ and sisters’ residency in
that country, her expressed intent to travel to Iran in the future, and the nature of the
Iranian Government and its relationship with the U.S. create a security concern that has
not been overcome.    
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
his or her acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying conditions, Applicant has failed to mitigate the foreign influence
security concern that exists in this case. She has failed to overcome the case against her
in this regard or satisfy her ultimate burden of persuasion. Guideline B is decided against
Applicant. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security
clearance. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
