                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12399 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
______________ 
 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 1, 2008, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) on May 5, 2008. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on 
May 7, 2008, and it was received on April 23, 2008. Applicant was afforded an 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the FORM and submitted additional material. The case was 
assigned to me on June 27, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted within the FORM a formal request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts relating to the People’s Republic of China (PRC). In 
addition, Department Counsel requested that the source documents be admitted for 
administrative notice. Applicant did not object and the request is approved. The request 
and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but are included in the 
record as part of the FORM. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except he denied a part of 
1.f. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old project manager who has been employed by a 
government contractor since1993. He was born in China, immigrated to the U.S. in 
1989, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 2005. He attended a Chinese 
university from 1979 to 1983 and received a bachelor’s degree. From 1989 to 1990 he 
attended an American university and received a master’s degree. He married in 1992 
and divorced in 2002. From 1983 to 1989 he was employed in China as a 
translator/interpreter. He also worked as a freelance linguist/interpreter in 2005. 
 
 Applicant’s mother, father, brother, uncle and aunt are citizens and residents of 
China. Prior to retiring, Applicant’s mother worked for a Chinese government owned 
shipbuilding company. His father, prior to retiring, worked for a Chinese government 
owned research institute. Upon retiring Applicant’s father worked as a production 
manager on a joint venture. No information was provided regarding the joint venture, 
other than it entailed work similar to what he had previously done. He retired from this 
position and Applicant believes his father might work as a consultant/technical advisor 
in the production of a gem product. No other information was provided regarding 
aspects of his work. Applicant’s aunt, prior to retiring, worked for a Chinese government 
owned hospital. No information was provided as to how Applicant’s brother or uncle are 
employed. Applicant did not provide any additional information about his family 
members. It is unknown how long they each worked in their respective employment. 
Presumably they each receive a pension from the Chinese government.1  
 
1 Answer to SOR; Item 5. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant traveled to China to visit his family in April 2004 to May 2004, for 
approximately two weeks to attend his brother’s wedding. He again traveled to China in 
August 2007 to September 2007, for approximately three weeks. His mother was sick at 
the time. No other information was provided about Applicant’s brother or his wife or her 
family. Applicant believes his brother lives with his parents. He also believes his brother 
disappeared from the family in around 2005. He believes he went through some type of 
trauma. He does not know the specifics. The family did not where his brother was when 
he disappeared. The brother reappeared a year later. No further information was 
provided regarding his brother’s mysterious disappearance. Applicant disputes he 
traveled to China in October 2004.2  
 
 Applicant acknowledges he attended various parties hosted by the Chinese 
Embassy in Washington D.C. He estimated he attended a total of three to four holiday 
celebrations hosted by the embassy. He would receive the invitation through a coworker 
or a friend. He stated he did not have any additional contact with the Chinese Embassy 
directly before or after the parties. He stated in his Answer to the SOR that the last 
event he attended was two or three years ago for a Chinese New Year party. This 
would mean that he attended the party after becoming a U.S. citizen.3  
 
 Applicant provided minimal information about his contacts in China. It is unknown 
whether he has any property interests or financial interests in China. Applicant claimed 
he contacts his parents about once or twice a year.4 
 
People’s Republic of China   
 
 China is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over a 
billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. China has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. China has a 
poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and its practices 
include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners.  
 
China is one of the most aggressive countries in targeting sensitive and 
protected U.S. technology, and economic intelligence. It has targeted the U.S. with 
active intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. In China, authorities have 
monitored telephone conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, 
and internet communications. Authorities opened and censored mail. The security 
services routinely monitored and entered residences and offices to gain access to 
computers, telephones, and fax machines. All major hotels had a sizable internal 
security presence, and hotel guestrooms were sometimes bugged and searched for 
sensitive or proprietary materials. 
 
 
2 Id. 
3 Id. His Answer to the SOR is dated April 1, 2008. 
4 Id. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
Applicant’s mother, father, brother, aunt, and uncle are citizens and residents of 
China. His parents and aunt all worked for Chinese government owned entities and are 
retired, presumably receiving some type of Chinese government pension. Applicant 
traveled to China as recently as 2007. He attended his brother’s wedding and visited 
when his mother was sick. He attended parties at the Chinese Embassy in the past two 
or three years, which would have been after he became a U.S. citizen. China has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Communist Party, with a poor human rights 
record, and targets the U.S. for espionage. Applicant’s foreign connections create a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
They also create a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised 
by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide enough information about his relatives, travels and 
Chinese contacts to meet his burden of mitigating the security concerns raised by 
foreign influence. He failed to provide any information as to what his property interests 
are in China or the U.S. The record is silent as to whether Applicant visited any of his 
relatives, other than his mother, when he was in China in 2007. He failed to elaborate 
on his relationship with his brother or his mysterious disappearance. It is clear he still 
maintains his family relations in China and has visited them for family events, such as a 
wedding and when his mother was sick. Applicant has been in the U.S. since 1989, but 
only a citizen since 2005, a relatively short period of time. He has not met his burden to 
convince me that his contact with China and his relatives are minimal and that he has 
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties to the U.S. that he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. Based on his 
relationships and ties with his family in China, which are more than casual and the 
nature of that foreign country, I am unable to find any of the mitigating conditions 
applicable.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has been a naturalized 
U.S. citizen since 2005. He has family ties to China and failed to provide sufficient 
information to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns raised. He has attended 
parties at the Chinese Embassy, but not fully elaborated on his contacts while in 
attendance. Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from foreign 
influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
