 
1 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13052 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
On December 14, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline C, Foreign Preference and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 14, 2008, and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 31, 2008, 
Department Counsel requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge under ¶ 
E3.1.7 of the Directive. The request is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) X. The case was 
 
2 
 
assigned to me on March 11, 2008. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 26, 
2008, scheduling the hearing for April 29, 2008. The case was continued at the request 
of both parties. Another Notice of Hearing was issued on April 30, 2008, and I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on May 29, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were received without objections. Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
called four witnesses and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were received 
without objections. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until June 6, 
2008, to submit additional matters. Applicant electronically submitted two letters, which 
were marked AE E and F, and admitted without objections. The e-mail is marked HE XI. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 5, 2008.  
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the country where Applicant was born (country A). Applicant 
did not object and the request was approved. The request and the attached documents 
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as HE I through IX. The 
facts administratively noticed are set out HE IX, and will not be completely restated in 
the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his early 50s. He was born in country A. Applicant has a Ph.D., 
awarded in country A. He worked as a scientist for country A, holding the equivalent of a 
security clearance. He came to the United States with his family in the early 1990s to 
work in research for a year and then to return to country A. He decided not to return and 
was sponsored for a work visa by a U.S. company. He has been contacted periodically 
by former colleagues and others in country A, asking him to return. Some of the e-mails 
were unpleasant, but none of the e-mails contained an explicit threat. He received the 
last such e-mail in about 2003. He is married with two adult children. They all became 
U.S. citizens in 2000. He is a partner in the ownership of the defense contracting 
company requesting a security clearance on his behalf.1 
 
 Applicant’s wife was also born in country A. She is a scientist like her husband, 
but with a different area of expertise. When they came to this country, she and her 
husband worked very hard to assimilate into American culture. Their children went to 
American schools and have become very successful. Their youngest child recently 
graduated from college and will be pursuing a master’s degree. Their eldest child has a 
master’s degree and has worked for a major U.S. corporation for a number of years. 
Their eldest child’s spouse is a native-born U.S. citizen who works for a defense 
contractor and holds a top secret clearance. They have an infant child (Applicant’s 
grandchild).2 The spouse wrote of Applicant becoming “Americanized”: 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 83-86, 104-108, 124-125; GE 1-5 
 
2 Tr. at 67-81; GE 4; AE A-C. 
 
3 
 
[I]f you ask me if whether [Applicant] has embraced the language, shops 
like a healthy consumer, is involved in the community, and encourages his 
children to be involved in local/national activities, then he is a perfect 
American.3 
 
 Applicant visited country A about six years ago when his father passed away. His 
wife did not make the trip. This was his first trip back since he left country A, and he had 
not seen his father since he left. His father was a career military officer, and retired at a 
high rank. Applicant has not formally renounced his citizenship in country A. Country A 
provided him a visa on short notice because of the death of his father and he traveled 
on his U.S. passport. When Applicant obtained the visa, he was informed that it was 
issued because of his father’s death and that the next time he traveled to country A, he 
would have to travel on a passport from that country. The other option was to formally 
apply to renounce his country A citizenship. He decided it would be much simpler to 
maintain dual citizenship and conduct any future travel to country A on their passport. 
He renewed his country A passport after he made the trip for his father’s funeral. The 
following year, he traveled to country A to visit his mother and sister on the anniversary 
of his father’s death, utilizing his country A passport. His wife did not make this trip 
either. Applicant had no contacts on either trip with any representatives of the 
government of country A, except for the standard entry and exit customs officials. He 
also had no contacts with any of his former colleagues. The country A passport has 
since expired. Now that he understands the security ramifications of possessing a 
foreign passport, he does not intend to renew it or obtain another country A passport.4 
 
 Applicant’s mother and sister are citizens and residents of country A. His mother 
is in her mid-80s and is not in good health. She was injured about three years ago, 
requiring hospitalization for about three weeks. Applicant did not return to country A, but 
his wife went there to be with his mother. She has been retired for several decades. 
Two of her siblings live in the United States. Applicant’s sister is in her mid-50s. She 
has had medical problems since birth and has never worked. His mother and sister 
visited Applicant in the United States on several occasions before his father’s death. 
Applicant would like his mother and sister to come to the U.S. to live, but at this time his 
mother is firmly settled in country A. Applicant does not provide his mother and sister 
financial support. His mother receives a government pension and his sister receives a 
type of disability. He talks to them on the telephone several days a week.5 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of country 
A. They are in their mid-80s and have been retired for a number of years. They receive 
a government pension, but have no current direct connection to the government of 
country A. His wife speaks to her parents about once a week. Applicant speaks to them 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
3 AE C. 
 
4 Tr. at 93-99, 103; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 5; AE D. 
 
5 Tr. at 99-102, 111, 119-120; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 5. 
 
 
4 
 
much less frequently, on special occasions such as holidays or birthdays. His wife has 
visited her parents in country A about five times in the last eight years. She also visited 
Applicant’s mother and sister on the trips. She used her passport from country A to 
enter and exit country A, and her U.S. passport otherwise. Applicant did not go to 
country A with his wife on any of those occasions. Other than customs officials, she had 
no interaction with country A government officials.6  
 
 Applicant does not own any foreign assets. He has considerable assets in the 
U.S. He has not voted in country A since he became a U.S. citizen. He has voted in 
U.S. elections. He is willing to renounce his dual citizenship, but he has not formally 
done so. He does not intend to return to country A. His wife is willing to travel there 
again if necessary to assist his mother or sister.7 
 
 Two very senior engineers who work for the U.S. military testified on Applicant’s 
behalf. They are working on a defense program that looks at our defense systems 
through the capabilities and technologies of other countries. One of the witnesses 
admitted that there are certain systems that the U.S. just does not understand. This 
particular program has been in effect for a number of years and utilizes “world class 
scientists” from countries that have the desired technologies. Applicant is one of those 
“world class scientists.” His background and expertise have provided the Department of 
Defense with information it would not otherwise obtain. The witness testified that 
Applicant “is an excellent individual to help us develop these capabilities.” He met the 
Applicant in about 2001, and is familiar with his work. He has met and interacted with 
Applicant periodically since then. He is very familiar with Applicant’s background and 
recommends him for a security clearance.8 
 
 The second senior government engineer testified similarly. He has known 
Applicant since 2004, as a defense contractor. He and Applicant are at different 
geographic locations, but they are in contact as often as a dozen times a week, and the 
witness visits Applicant’s location about four to six times per year. He also testified that 
Applicant’s background and research provides as he stated “a perspective that we didn’t 
really pursue in the United States,” with “techniques that we still don’t understand.” He 
would like Applicant to be able to work directly with his team on their projects. To truly 
harness Applicant’s expertise and test the data, it is necessary that he have access to 
classified data. He also recommends Applicant for a security clearance.9 
 
 The manager of the U.S. Government program that is seeking to have Applicant 
work on their classified projects was unable to attend the hearing but wrote a letter on 
Applicant’s behalf. He oversees the team of “world class scientists” and has known 
Applicant since 2000. He wrote that Applicant brings a unique perspective to their effort. 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 67-81, 104; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5. 
 
7 Tr. at 112-119, 130-131; GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. at 17-32. 
 
9 Tr. at 33-43. 
 
 
5 
 
His experience and ability to apply non-traditional techniques has “opened [their] eyes 
to many possibilities previously ignored.” He believes Applicant is a tremendous asset 
to their program, the U.S. military, and the U.S. Government.10 
 
 The chief executive officer of Applicant’s company testified on his behalf. He and 
Applicant are business partners. He is a retired military officer, with extensive 
experience in intelligence. He knew Applicant even before he came to the U.S. He 
testified that he and Applicant share the same political, ethical, and moral convictions 
and he trusts him completely. He stated that Applicant has unique insight and has the 
ability to create new technology for the government’s benefit. He recommended 
Applicant for a security clearance.11 
 
Country A 
 
The facts pertaining to country A are set out HE IX, and will not be completely 
restated here. It has serious human rights issues, including torture, summary 
executions, disappearances, arbitrary detentions, corruption, media suppression, life-
threatening prison conditions, and corruption in law enforcement. There is a threat of 
terrorism, including taking hostages and bombings. Country A’s intelligence capability is 
significant and it aggressively targets the United States.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
                                                          
10 AE F. 
 
11 Tr. at 44-65. 
 
 
6 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
7 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 Applicant possessed and used a country A passport while a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 
10(a) is applicable. The renewal of his passport from country A while a U.S. citizen 
could raise concerns under AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain recognition of his country 
A citizenship.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Because he had not formally renounced his country A citizenship when he 
became a U.S. citizen, country A continued to consider Applicant a citizen of that 
country. As such, he was required to use a country A passport to enter that country. 
Country A permitted Applicant to enter country A for his father’s funeral using his U.S. 
passport because it was an emergency. He was informed that he would have to travel 
there in the future with a country A passport. The alternative was to formally apply to 
renounce his citizenship and apply for a visa. Applicant renewed his country A passport 
for expediency and used it to travel to country A the following year. The passport is now 
expired and Applicant does not intend to renew it or obtain another one. He is willing to 
renounce his country A citizenship and is resigned to the fact that he may never travel 
there again. AG ¶ 11(a) is partially applicable. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) are applicable.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
8 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
  Applicant’s mother, sister, and in-laws are citizens and residents of country A. 
Applicant received e-mails from people in country A after he did not return from his trip 
to the U.S. He traveled to country A on two occasions in the last six years. Country A 
has serious human rights issues, has been threatened by terrorism, and aggressively 
targets the United States for intelligence. His contacts, connections, and family 
members in country A create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion, both through him and through his wife. It also 
creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) have been raised by the 
evidence.  
 
  SOR ¶ 2.c states “Your concern about your disabled sister in [country A] keeps 
you in conflict with the needs of your employer to serve in full and on your best to the 
United States interests.” This allegation is already embodied in SOR ¶ 2.b, which states 
“Your sister is a citizen and resident of [country A].” SOR ¶ 2.c is concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
 
9 
 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant came to this country in the early 1990s to work for a year and then 
return to country A. He loved the United States and wanted his family to benefit from 
everything that it means to be American. He decided to remain in the United States, 
which likely caused some consternation in country A. He and his family have prospered 
here. It is a reciprocal relationship as his family has much to offer the U.S. They all 
became U.S. citizens in 2000. Applicant is a loyal American and a respected scientist 
that can provide the Department of Defense with knowledge they would not otherwise 
have access to. His children and grandchild are firmly planted in the U.S. I expect 
Applicant to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests. AG ¶ 11(b) is 
partially applicable. However, because of his close foreign family ties and the nature of 
that foreign country, I am unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be fully 
applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
10 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in country A. He 
came to the U.S. in the early 1990s for what was to be a one-year assignment, but he 
never left. He traveled to country A for his father’s funeral about six years ago. Because 
it was an emergency, he was given a visa and permitted to enter using his U.S. 
passport. He was told that he would have to use a country A passport in the future. He 
traveled to country A the following year on the anniversary of his father’s death. He 
used a country A passport. The passport has expired; he does not intend to renew it or 
obtain another country A passport. He is willing to renounce his dual citizenship.  
 
Applicant’s mother, sister and parents-in-law remain in country A. I considered 
the totality of Applicant’s family ties to country A. The nature of a nation’s government, 
its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country 
has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent 
upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against 
the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. Country A 
has human rights issues, has been victimized by terrorism, and is known to conduct 
intelligence operations against the United States. The complicated relationship of 
country A to the United States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his immediate family members in country A 
do not pose a security risk. 
 
Applicant possesses unique background, experience, and knowledge. Three 
U.S. Government representatives attested to the value of Applicant’s work. While 
extremely impressive, those are not relevant factors for consideration, as the Appeal 
Board has held: 
 
The value of an applicant’s expertise to a defense contractor or military 
service is not relevant or material to determining the applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. An applicant’s expertise is not a measure of 
whether that applicant demonstrates the high degree of judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness that must be reposed in persons entrusted 
with classified information.12 
 
While Applicant’s expertise may not be relevant, his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are clearly relevant. Those characteristics, as proven by Applicant’s 
witnesses, are undisputed. 
 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 06-20062 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 15, 2008) (internal citation omitted). 
 
11 
 
Applicant’s mother is elderly and his sister is disabled. His father-in-law and 
mother-in-law have been retired for a number of years. They all receive some form of 
compensation from the country A government, but have no direct connection to that 
government. Applicant was sincere, open, and honest at the hearing. In the unlikely 
event that his mother, sister, in-laws, or his wife through his in-laws, were subjected to 
coercion or duress from the country A government, I find that because of his 
uncompromising commitment to this country and his children, that Applicant would 
resolve any attempt to exert pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the 
United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
