1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-10092
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on September
16, 2005. On March 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on May 27, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 12, 2008,
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 30, 2008. The Government offered
Exhibits (GE 1-10), which were received without objection. Applicant testified in his own
behalf, and submitted Exhibits (AE A-B), without objection. I left the record open until
July 7, 2008 for Applicant to submit additional documentation. He did not submit any
2
documents. The record closed on July 7, 2008. DOHA received the transcript on July 9,
2008. Based upon a review of the record, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated April 7, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.i, of the SOR. He denied the other allegations in the SOR
because the debts were paid or he had no knowledge of them. He provided additional
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 55-year-old. He graduated from high school in 1971. He married in
1984 and has two children from that marriage. His youngest daughter, who is 18 years
old, lives with him. He is currently separated. Applicant served in the Navy on active
duty for almost 31 years until his retirement in May 2002 (GE1). He had a top secret
clearance for his entire career. He also had access granted to sensitive compartmented
information (SCI) due to the nature of his work.
After Applicant left the Navy, he worked for six years with a government
contractor (Tr. 18). He worked out of the country for the majority of that time. His wife
had responsibility for the finances during their marriage. He was last deployed in
February 2007 for a period of four months.  
In May 2007, Applicant received a phone call from his daughter. She reported
that her mother (Applicant’s wife) had not been home for two months (Tr. 21). Applicant
left his overseas employment and returned home due to the emergency situation. When
he returned home, he found unpaid bills and past due notices in plastic bags all over the
house. His wife did not use the money that Applicant sent her to pay the bills (GE 2). 
When Applicant returned home, he learned that his wife had not paid the
mortgage for approximately ten months. He paid the total amount of $11,172 that was
owed. He also paid many smaller bills that he learned about that were not listed on the
SOR (Tr. 53).
In June 2007, Applicant found employment as an assistant property
administrator. He immediately contacted his creditors and made arrangement to pay his
bills. However, on March 4, 2008, he was laid off from that position. He could not
continue to pay the delinquent bills. Applicant is limited to local employment because he
provides for his daughter and his wife never returned to the home. Thus, Applicant
cannot find more lucrative employment deployed overseas as he once did. He is still
unemployed (Tr. 26).
Applicant contacted a credit company to help with his financial difficulties.
However, he was not pleased with their customer service. He now has a person who is
a financial manager to help him discuss an equity loan (Tr. 55). He realizes that without
employment, he will most likely be denied a loan.
3
Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories in September 2007. He addressed
the items listed on the interrogatories. He had not received any bills or letters for some
of them. He contacted creditors with the intention of paying them. He paid several
medical bills for his wife. He included another list of bills that he paid that were not
identified on the SOR. He paid a total of approximately $3,795 for those medical bills.
His plan to pay the smaller bills first and then the larger ones have been disrupted due
to his unemployment since March 2008. 
Applicant has no knowledge of some of the accounts because his wife opened
them without his approval. He intends to pay them even if he is not legally responsible
for them.  
In April 2008, Applicant and his wife attended divorce mediation. His wife decided
upon advice of counsel to pursue the matter in court. The judge ordered Applicant to
pay his wife $1,500 a month for support. Applicant is trying to have the amount modified
(AE B). 
The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts/ collection accounts, four judgments,
and approximately two unpaid medical debts. The total amount of the delinquent debt is
approximately $27,000.
SOR ¶ 1.a is for a collection account in the amount of $513. He denied this debt
because he has no knowledge of this account. 
SOR ¶ 1.b is an unpaid medical account for $211. It is his wife’s medical bill (Tr.
36). This is an unpaid portion that Applicant owes after his insurance paid.
SOR ¶ 1.c is another unpaid medical bill for $166. He believes this is his wife’s
balance after insurance payment. 
SOR ¶ 1.d is for an unpaid pizza in the amount of $25. He denies this is his.
SOR ¶ 1.e is for a collection account in the amount of $1,290. Applicant does not
have any knowledge about this account.
SOR ¶ 1.f is for a charged off account in the amount of $12,158. Applicant denies
this bill. He believes that his wife took out a loan or charged the amount on a credit
card. He has no knowledge of the account.
SOR ¶ 1.g is for a charged off account in the amount of $1,381. He has no
knowledge of this bill.
SOR ¶ 1.h. is another charged off account in the amount of $1,120 for which
Applicant has no knowledge.
4
SOR ¶ 1.i is a judgment in the amount of $615 for a dental bill that his wife did
not pay. This judgment was satisfied in 2007. Applicant’s pay was garnished (GE 4).
SOR ¶1.j is a judgment in the amount of $1,161 for a credit account. Applicant
has no knowledge of the origin of this judgment.
SOR ¶1.k is a judgment in the amount of $1,165 for late condominium fees that
his wife did not pay in 2004. When Applicant learned that this matter was handled by a
law firm, he contacted them. This judgment was satisfied by Applicant in 2007 (GE 7).
SOR ¶1.l is a judgment in the amount of $8,045. Applicant has no knowledge of
this account.
The accounts that are listed above for which Applicant had no knowledge remain
unpaid at this time due to his unemployment.
Applicant’s current monthly net income is $3,400. This is his retirement and
disability income. After monthly expenses and civil support of $1,500 to his wife
monthly, he has a negative net remainder. He has approximately $5,000 in savings. He
has a prospect for a permanent position. He could gain more work overseas but that is
not feasible at this time due to his daughter at home (Tr. 50).
Applicant recently applied for a permanent position. He passed the academic
entrance exam and physical fitness exam. He is scheduled to take a polygraph test. He
hopes to be offered the position (Tr.49). 
Applicant’s military career for more than 31 years and his six years with a
defense contractor involved work of a highly sensitive nature. He has had no security
issues or incidents during those 37 years. He received many medals and
commendations during his career service with the Department of the Navy (AE A).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
5
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
6
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant has delinquent debts and four judgments and could not
meet his financial obligations from 2004-2007. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying
conditions may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@
Applicant=s financial worries are the result of his wife’s inability to handle the household
finances while he was deployed. His wife left the home and her daughter while Applicant
was out of the country. He found the unpaid bills in the house. He immediately paid
delinquent bills, including a mortgage and medical bills. He became unemployed
through no fault of his own in March 2008. He does not have sufficient income to
continue paying on all the delinquent debts. Because of his dedicated recent efforts to
establish financial responsibility, it is unlikely that the magnitude of financial difficulties
will recur or that there is any doubt about his current reliability or good judgment. This
potentially mitigating condition applies. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, his
financial problems arose from his wife’s irresponsibility and his unemployment. When
Applicant learned about the situation, he returned home and immediately started paying
creditors. He acted responsibly in identifying and resolving these debts. He had to stop
paying his delinquent debts because he pays $1,500 a month for civil support to his
wife.  I find this potentially mitigating condition fully applies.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). This partially applies. Applicant’s plan to pay
all the delinquent bills was disrupted because he became unemployed in March 2008.
He is being considered for a position and will continue to search for employment so that
he can resume paying the delinquent debts. Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant contacted a credit company to help with the financial
crisis. He did not like their manner. He also sought help from a business manager.
While unemployed, he will not be a candidate for a home equity loan. He plans to
continue paying all debts despite the fact that his wife incurred them without his
knowledge. He is not shirking from his responsibility. The financial problems were
caused by his wife and his current unemployment and not frivolous spending. I conclude
this potentially mitigating condition partially applies.
7
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant stated that the alleged
debts were his wife’s but he understands that legally he is responsible for them through
the marriage. He did not have knowledge of many of them.  I conclude this potentially
mitigating condition does not apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude that under the whole
person, there is sufficient mitigation to overcome the government’s case.
Applicant retired from the Navy after 31 years of service. He was deployed and
out of the country for the majority of that time. He did not have any financial concerns or
issues. He held a top secret clearance. After his retirement, he worked for a defense
contractor and maintained his security clearance without incident.
Applicant had no knowledge that any financial problems existed until he received
a phone call from his daughter alerting him that his wife left the home and his daughter
had no idea where she was. Applicant immediately left the assignment abroad and
returned home. He found bags of unpaid bills in the home. Due to Applicant’s wife’s
financial irresponsibility, Applicant had many delinquent accounts. He immediately
began paying the creditors. He found that his mortgage payment was not made for
approximately ten months and he paid the $11,000. Applicant paid many medical bills
that had not been addressed, including a $1,000 bill for his daughter’s orthodontist.
Applicant had to leave his job requiring him to travel abroad so that he could be
home and take care of his daughter who is finishing high school. Thus, his income was
not as lucrative as prior. In March 2008, he lost his current job through no fault of his
own. 
8
He is court ordered to pay his wife who left the home a monthly sum of $1,500.
He has appealed that amount. His plan to pay all the remaining debts is derailed due to
his current unemployment. He will resume payments when he is employed. Also,
Applicant will have more income if his appeal is successful to modify the civil court order
of $1,500 a month to his wife. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.I: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
