1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-14708
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                            
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information must be granted.
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on August 31,
2006. On March 28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines B and C
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 3, 2008. She answered the
SOR in writing on April 3, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative
GE 1 (Security clearance application, dated August 30, 2006) at 1, 8-9.1
GE 1, supra note 1, at 1, 6, 15-20; Tr. 14, 34, 36.2
2
judge. DOHA received the request on April 8, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared
to proceed on April 22, 2008. DOHA initially assigned this case to another
administrative judge on April 29, 2008. For case load management, this case was
reassigned to me on May 5, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 9, 2008,
which Applicant received on May 14, 2008.  I convened the hearing as scheduled on
June 5, 2008. The government offered two exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received
and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and one witness testified on her
behalf. She did not submit any exhibits at the hearing. However, I held the record open
until June 16, 2008, for the submission of additional matters.  Applicant timely submitted
the evidence, which I marked and admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, without
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 16, 2008, and the
record closed on the same day.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to Nigeria. (Tr. at 10-12.) The request and the attached
documents were not admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as
Administrative Exhibits I through V. Administrative notice will be limited to matters of
general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. The facts
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact below. 
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, dated March 28, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.e, and 2.a-2.d of the SOR, with explanation. She also provided
additional information to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance.  
Applicant, who is 25 years old, works as an electrical engineer for a Department
of Defense contractor. She began her employment in July 2006 and completed her
request for a security clearance less than two months later.1
Applicant was born in the United States (U.S.), while her parents were students
at a U.S. university. When she was 18 months old, her parents returned to Nigeria, the
place of their birth. Applicant indicated on her SF-86 she is also a citizen of Nigeria. She
remained in Nigeria until 1999 when she returned to the U.S. with her older sister, who
was attending college. She completed her high school education in 2000. She
graduated from a major U.S. university with a Bachelor of Science degree in electrical
engineering in 2006. She has lived in the U.S. since 1999 and intends to continue living
in the U.S. She is single with no children.2
Tr. 15-18, 45-49.3
GE 1, supra note 1, at 18; Tr.19, 35-37.4
GE 1, supra note 1, at 18-19; Tr.18, 37-42.5
Tr. 38-40, 42-44, 48-49.6
3
Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and residents of Nigeria. They live in
southern Nigeria and are not politically active. Her father works as an electrical engineer
with an electric company in Nigeria. Applicant does not know if his employer is a private
company or a government owned company. Her father owns several rental properties,
and her mother manages the business for him because she is an accountant. Her
mother worked as a principal for a number of years in her grandfather’s school. In 2005,
Applicant’s mother decided to open a private high school, which she now operates and
manages. Like most schools in Nigeria, the school is funded through tuition and not by
the government. The school complies with general educational guidelines and curricula
developed by the Nigerian government. However, the government is not involved in the
dat-to-day operations of the school.3
Applicant and her older sister, who is also a U.S. citizen by birth, came to the
U.S. in 1999 to attend school. Her older sister continues to reside in the U.S. and they
live together. Applicant’s sister attends college part-time while working towards her
second bachelor’s degree and works in the medical profession. Although she also
claims dual citizenship, her older sister intends to remain in the U.S. Their father has
encouraged both to remain in the U.S.4
Applicant’s brother, who is 23-years-old, is a citizen of and resides in Nigeria. He
recently graduated from college with a degree in accounting. He plans to return to
school to obtain a masters degree. Her two younger sisters are ages 22 and 17 and are
citizens of and reside in Nigeria. Her 22-year-old sister is a  college student, majoring in
accounting, and her 17-year-old sister just graduated from high school. None of her
siblings are married or have children.5
Applicant generally communicates with her family in Nigeria by telephone. She
occasionally sends her dad information on cars by e-mail, but does not otherwise use e-
mail to communicate with her family. She talks with her mother one to two times a
month and her father whenever he is at home. She talks with her brother and 22-year-
old sister two or three times a year. She talks with her youngest sister about once a
month. To her knowledge, her siblings in Nigeria do not plan to emigrate to the U.S. Her
parents have not visited the U.S. since their return to Nigeria more than 20 years ago
and her siblings in Nigeria have never visited the U.S.6
Applicant obtained her current U.S. passport in 2001, and used this passport and
a Nigerian visa when she traveled to Nigeria for the Christmas holiday in December
2001. During this trip, Applicant learned that her mother had applied for a Nigerian
passport on Applicant’s behalf to ease her entry into Nigeria in the future. Applicant
GE 2 (Interrogatories and answers) at I-12, I-16; Tr. 21-22, 26-29, 33, 57-61. 7
GE 2, supra note 7, at I-19, I-41; App Ex A (Documents on passport destruction); Tr. 27-30, 61, 63-65.8
Tr. 20, 52-59, 68, 70.9
Tr. 30.10
Tr. 72-74.11
4
received the Nigerian passport before she left Nigeria sometime in January 2002.
Applicant used her U.S. passport to exit and enter the U.S. and her Nigerian passport to
enter and exit Nigeria when she traveled for the Christmas holiday in December 2002
and in the summer of 2006.7
Applicant’s Nigerian passport expired in January 2007. When she traveled to
Nigeria for the 2007 Christmas holiday, Applicant obtained a single-entry Nigerian visa
which she used along with her U.S. passport for exit from the U.S. and entry into Nigeria
and return to the U.S. While in Nigeria, her family took a vacation to a neighboring
country, a trip she did not learn about until she arrived in Nigeria. Nigeria allowed her to
re-enter Nigeria on her expired Nigerian passport, but not on her single entry visa. At
the hearing, Applicant expressed a willingness to give up her Nigerian passport, and
has done so. She has expressed a willingness to give up her Nigerian citizenship. The
record contains no evidence that by giving up her passport, she renounced her Nigerian
citizenship. She does not know how to renounce her Nigerian citizenship, nor does she
know when she will travel next to Nigeria.8
Applicant visits her maternal grandfather when she is in Nigeria, but not her
paternal grandmother, who lives some distance from the family. She stays with her
parents when in Nigeria and her siblings are at home during this time. She has one
uncle and cousins who are citizens and residents of the U. S. She spends all her time
with her family when in Nigeria, but not with anyone else as she has no friends in
Nigeria. The Nigerian government has not approached her during her visits, nor has any
member of  her family had any problems with the Nigerian government. She does not
discuss her job with her family.9
Applicant has never voted in a Nigerian election. She does not own property or
hold any bank accounts in Nigeria. She does not receive any money from the Nigerian
government for any reason, including education.10
Applicant’s former first-line supervisor and current section head testified on her
behalf. He described her as a hard worker, intelligent, highly motivated, reliable, and a
person of integrity. She is an asset to his organization and a person in whom he has
confidence and great respect personally. While holding her interim clearance, she did
not violate security rules.11
Administrative Exhibit I (U.S. Department of State, Bureau of African Affairs, Background Note: Nigeria,12
dated April 2008); Administrative Exhibit II (CRS Report for Congress Nigeria: Current Issues, dated January
2008); Administrative Exhibit V (U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in
Nigeria 2007, dated March 2008).
5
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Nigeria became an independent
country in 1960. Because of many changes in its governing structure following gaining
independence, Nigeria suffers from political instability, economic crisis, ethnic and
religious conflict, extreme poverty, lack of law and order, and judicial corruption. IN may
1999, Nigeria returned to civilian rule and is now an emerging democracy with strong
ties to the U.S. The current Nigerian government is focusing on economic reform and is
successfully building a market-based economy, including privatizing its
telecommunications and petrochemical industries. It is focused on rebuilding its
infrastructure, not espionage against the U.S. Nigeria is a key strategic and trading
partner of the U.S. in Africa. While its human rights record still needs serious
improvement, police actions appear to target political activists and criminals.  Crime
remains a serious problem in certain areas. Muslims live in northern Nigeria, where
religious conflict is prevalent, and Christians live in southern Nigeria. Applicant’s family
lives in southern Nigeria where there is less internal conflict. If they travel, family
members travel to the homes of other family members in the south.  The Nigerian12
government does not support or sponsor terrorism or terrorist organizations, but some
acts of terrorism have occurred within Nigeria.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
6
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
7
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(I) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign
person, group, government, or country.
Six of Applicant’s immediate family members are citizens of and reside in
Nigeria. She maintains a normal personal relationship with these family members.
These relationships are not per se a reason to deny Applicant a security clearance. The
government must establish that these family relationships create a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion or would create a
potential conflict of interest between her obligations to protect sensitive information and
her desire to help her family members.  
In determining if a heightened risk exists, I must look at Applicant’s relationship
and contacts with family members as well as the activities of the government of Nigeria.
See ISCR Case No. 07-05809 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008). Applicant regularly talks with
her parents. She talks with two of her siblings two or three times a year and her
youngest sister on a monthly basis. She visited her family in Nigeria four times between
2001 and 2007. During these visits, she stayed at her parents home, as did her siblings.
She visited her nearby grandfather, but had no other contacts with extended family or
others, including government officials during her visit.
Although Nigeria is regarded as friendly to the U.S., the distinction between
friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with caution. Relations between
nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Nevertheless, the nature of
a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members would be at a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion
or would create a potential conflict of interest between her obligations to protect
sensitive information and her desire to help her family members. The risk is significantly
greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is
associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct
intelligence operations against the U.S. Nigeria is an emerging democracy. Nigeria has
serious economic, human rights issues, and criminal problems The government of
Nigeria, however, does not support terrorism and the active collection of intelligence or
proprietary information.
ISCR Case No. 07-02485 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008); ISCR Case No. 07-02715 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 13
8
Applicant’s family members live in southern Nigeria which is predominately
Christian. Her family members do not receive and are not dependent upon government
funds. Applicant is unaware of any serious problems in the south as a result of politics
and government policy. While Nigeria has significant Human Rights problems, there is
little risk that the Nigerian government could apply pressure or subject Applicant’s family
members to duress because her family members are neither political activists nor
criminals. I do not find a heightened concern exists as to Applicant’s family members in
Nigeria.13
Should a heightened risk exist, I must consider if Applicant has mitigated the
government’s concerns. Under AG ¶ 8 (a), mitigation is established if  
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual,
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.
and under AG ¶ 8(b), if
 
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests.
Applicant maintains a normal relationship with her family members. Applicant
clearly has close ties with her family in Nigeria. However, her family members are not
involved in politics and do not rely on the Nigerian government for any financial support.
Rather, her mother runs a private school and her father works for the electric company.
Three of her siblings are students in Nigeria and her fourth sibling lives with her in the
U.S. Given that the U.S. and Nigeria have a strong relationship and the lack of
counterintelligence activity by Nigeria, there is little likelihood that the Nigerian
government would pressure or coerce her family members for information. By living in
southern Nigeria, her family members are less vulnerable to government pressure.
Applicant has established mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a). With her significant connections
to the U.S., she has also established mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b). Given her regular
contacts with family members in Nigeria, AG ¶ 8(c) is not applicable.
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
The remaining disqualifying conditions are not applicable to this case. See AG ¶¶ 10(b) - 10 (e).14
9
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
Under AG ¶ 10, the following conditions could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying in this case:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member.  This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms
for a foreign country;
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement,
social welfare, or other such benefits from a
foreign country;
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship
requirements;
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial. or
business interests in another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign
country; and,
(7) voting in a foreign election.14
Applicant is a citizen of the U.S. by birth. Her parents, however, are not U.S.
citizens, but citizens of Nigeria. They returned to Nigeria when they completed college
education and Applicant was 18 months old. Applicant became a citizen of Nigeria
because of her parents. She lived in Nigeria until she was 16 years old, when she
returned to the U.S. In 2002, her mother obtained a Nigerian passport for her, which she
used to enter and exist Nigeria through January 2008. She has never voted in Nigeria,
held political office, served in the military or owned property in Nigeria. She receives no
financial assistance of any type, including educational funds, from the Nigerian
government. Disqualifying condition AG ¶¶ 10(a) and 10(a)(1) apply. The remaining
disqualifying conditions in ¶ 10(a) do not apply.
10
Under AG ¶ 11, Applicant could mitigate the government’s security concerns
through any of the following:
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a
foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the
individual was a minor; and
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.
When she traveled to Nigeria in December 2007, she used her U.S. passport and
a Nigerian visa to travel between the U.S. Nigeria. The only way Nigeria allowed her to
enter from a family vacation to nearby country was on her expired Nigerian passport.
Since this trip, Applicant submitted her expired Nigerian passport to her security officer,
who destroyed it. She has expressed a willingness to renounce her Nigerian citizen
which she acquired because of her parents. Outside of holding a Nigerian passport for
five years, Applicant has not exercised any other rights of Nigerian citizenship. She
plans to remain in the U.S. She has mitigated the government’s security concerns under
¶¶ 11(b) and (e).
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
11
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a U.S. citizen by birth,
who was raised in Nigeria by her Nigerian parents. While still a high school student, she
returned to the U.S. where she completed both high school and college. She has lived
in the U.S. for nine years and has no intent to return to Nigeria to live. She continues to
maintain regular contact with her parents and travels there mainly for the Christmas
holiday season. Her contacts with her family and her travels to Nigeria have not and do
not place her at a heightened risk because the Nigerian government is not a collector of
intelligence nor a sponsor of terrorism. Nigeria and the U.S. are not economic or military
rivals. Although crime is a problem in Nigeria, as in the U.S., Applicant and her family
are not at any greater risk because of the crime. The Nigerian government has
problems with human rights violations, but there is no evidence such violations occur
because of a person’s relationship to the U.S. Because of all these reasons and her
family lives in southern Nigeria and are not politically active, they are not at risk for
problems from the Nigerian government.
As a Nigerian citizen, Applicant held a Nigerian passport, which expired 18
months ago and is destroyed. She has not exercised any other rights of her Nigerian
citizenship and is willing to renounce her citizenship. She complies with U.S. laws and is
a model citizen. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising because of her foreign
influence and foreign preference.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
12
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
