                                                              
                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
 )       ADP Case No. 07-13107 
 SSN: ) 
) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
                                                                             
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on August 
14, 2006. On February 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations; Guideline E, Personal Conduct; and Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct, for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended 
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 22, 2008, and requested a decision on the 
written record.  On March 27, 2008, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM).  The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on March 28, 2008. Applicant 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
signed the receipt on April 7, 2008. Applicant had thirty days from the receipt of the FORM 
to submit a response.  No additional response was submitted. On June 24, 2008, the 
FORM was forwarded to the hearing office.  The case was assigned to me for decision on 
that date. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.k, and 2.a 
and 2.b. She neither admits or denies the allegation in ¶ 3.a. In addition, after a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor who is 
seeking a position of public trust. She has worked for her current employer since January 
2006. She is a high school graduate and has some college credit.  She is single and has a 
15-year-old daughter. (Item 4.)  
 
On August 14, 2006, Applicant submitted a questionnaire for public trust position, 
Standard Form 85P. She answered, “No” in response to question 22a. which asks, “Your 
Financial Record. In the last 7 years, have you, or a company over which you exercised 
some control, filed for bankruptcy, been declared bankrupt, been subject to a tax lien, or 
had a legal judgment rendered against you for a debt? If you answered “Yes,” provide date 
of initial action and other information requested below.” She did not list the judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g.  She also answered, “No” in response to question 22b, which asks, 
“Are you now over 180 days delinquent on any loan or financial obligation? (Include loans 
or obligations funded or guaranteed by the Federal Government.) If you answered, “Yes,” 
provide the information requested below.” (Item 4.) She did not list the delinquent debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a -1.j.   
 
A subsequent background investigation discovered the following delinquent 
accounts: an $858 catalogue account charged off as a bad debt in June 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.a; 
Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 2.); a $1,923 credit card account charged off as a bad debt in 
September 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.b; Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 2); a $1,231 credit card account 
charged off as a bad debt in November 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.c; Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 1); a $1,241 
credit card account charged off as a bad debt in November 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.d; Item 5 at 3; 
Item 6 at 2); a $3,090 credit card account charged off as a bad debt in December 2003 
(SOR ¶ 1.e; Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 2); a $1,028.36 credit card account charged off as a bad 
debt in April 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.f; Item 5 at 4; Item 6 at 2); a $2,034 judgment entered in May 
2005 (SOR ¶ 1.g; Item 6 at 1); a $3,114 account  placed for collection in July 2005 (SOR ¶ 
1.h; Item 5 at 4; Item 6 at 1); a $2,798 account, charged off as a bad debt in October 2005 
(SOR ¶ 1.i; Item 5 at 3); a $590 account charged off as a bad debt in December 2005 
(SOR ¶ 1.j; Item 5 at 4; Item 6 at 2); and a $1,608 credit card account placed for collection 
in July 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.k; Item 6 at 7). 
 
In response to interrogatories, dated November 8, 2007, Applicant indicated that she 
began to have financial problems while in college. She made poor financial decisions and 
 
3 
 
over extended herself on credit cards. She indicated that she intended to research her 
accounts and is considering filing for bankruptcy. (Item 5.)  
 
Applicant claims that all of these debts are old and that she is current on her recent 
accounts. Her net monthly income is $1,360. Her monthly expenses are $1,305. She has 
$55 left over each month after expenses. The expenses do not include payments towards 
her delinquent accounts. (Item 5 at 5.) No proof was provided that any of these accounts 
were paid or resolved.   
 
Applicant initially stated that she did not list the delinquent accounts on her 
trustworthiness application because they were so old. (Item 5 at 4.) In her response to the 
SOR, she admits to deliberately failing to list her debts in response to questions 22.a and 
22.b on her trustworthiness application. (Item 3.)  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as Asensitive positions.@  
(See Regulation && C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  AThe standard that must be met for . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person=s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive 
duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.@ (See Regulation & 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will apply 
to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of Personnel 
Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. (See Regulation & C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant=s suitability for a public trust position, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge=s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole person concept.@ The 
Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting Awitnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .@ The Applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk 
of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has a history of not meeting 
financial obligations.  She admits to having 11 delinquent debts with a total approximate 
balance of $19,518.       
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable.  Applicant has not 
 
5 
 
resolved any of the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR.  Her financial issues remain.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances) does not apply. There is no information in the record raising the 
potential application of this mitigating condition.  
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. There is nothing in the record which indicated Applicant attended financial 
counseling.  Applicant has not provided evidence indicating that any of her delinquent 
accounts have been paid and/or resolved. It is unlikely her financial situation will be 
resolved in the near future.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply because Applicant made not attempt to resolve 
any of her delinquent accounts.  
 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under Guideline F.    
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in AG 
&15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant failed to list a judgment 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.g) entered against her within seven years of the date she completed her 
trustworthiness application in response to question 22a. She also failed to list her 
delinquent debts that were over 180 days old (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.j) in response to question 
22b.    
 
 Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) applies to Applicant’s case. In her 
response to the SOR, she admits that she deliberately omitted a judgment and her 
delinquent debts in response to questions 22.a and 22.b on the trustworthiness application. 
 
6 
 
(Item 3.)   
 
 Personal conduct concerns can be mitigated.  The following Personal Conduct 
Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) potentially apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) does not 
apply.  There is no evidence that Applicant attempted to correct the omission of her 
financial issues on her trustworthiness application.  
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) does not apply.  Applicant’s deliberate omission of her financial difficulties on her 
trustworthiness application is considered serious.  Her failure to provide full disclosure of 
her financial history raises questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur) because Applicant did not acknowledge 
the behavior until she received the SOR.  There is nothing in the record evidence to show 
that Applicant has taken positive steps to prevent this behavior in the future.  
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised under personal conduct. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 30 of the 
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
 willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
There are two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) that apply to 
Applicant’s case. They are CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses); CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted).  Applicant’s 
deliberate omission of her delinquent debts, including one judgment, on her  
trustworthiness application violated Title 18 U.S.C §1001.  While somewhat redundant to 
the concerns raised under guideline E, personal conduct, her deliberate omissions on her 
trustworthiness application raises a concern under criminal conduct because it violates a 
federal statute. When Applicant signed the trustworthiness application, she certified that 
“My statements on this form, and any attachments to it, are true, complete, and correct to 
 
7 
 
the best of my knowledge and belief and are made in good faith. I understand that a 
knowing and willful false statement on this form can be punished by fine or imprisonment or 
both. (See section 1001 of Title 18, United States Code.)” (Item Gov 4.)  Applicant was on 
notice that any false information deliberately provided on the application was a crime.  
 
The criminal conduct concern can be mitigated. I find that it is premature to apply 
Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition (CC MC) ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since 
the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) because Applicant’s deliberate falsification was recent.   
 
It is premature to apply CC MC ¶ 32(d) (there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal 
activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement) for the same reasons mentioned above.   
 
At this time, it is premature to conclude that Applicant has mitigated the criminal 
conduct concern. 
   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; 
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole 
person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Financial consideration concerns remain 
due to the extensive amount of Applicant’s delinquent debt and her lack of effort towards 
resolving her delinquent accounts. Her deliberate failure to provide truthful answers about 
her delinquent debts in response to question 22.a and 22.b on her trustworthiness 
application raise questions about her reliability, trustworthiness and judgment. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under financial 
considerations, personal conduct, and criminal conduct. 
                                        
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
