                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16606 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James D. McFarland, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a Sudan born, naturalized U.S. citizen, who has lived in the United 
States since August 2000. His parents, oldest son, and siblings are citizens and 
residents of Sudan. Applicant has substantially more connections to the United States 
than to Sudan. After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
evidence, I conclude Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security 
concerns under guideline B, foreign influence. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
 1
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 13, 2008, detailing security 
concerns under Foreign Influence.  
  
 On March 4, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. On March 28, 2008, I was assigned the case. On April 14, 
2008, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on April 22, 2008. 
The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through H, which were 
admitted into evidence. On May 9, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Sudan. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) 1─10. 
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanation, the factual 
allegations of the SOR. 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old interpreter who has worked for a defense contractor 
since October 2006, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Applicant served in 
combat as an interpreter with the U.S. Army in Iraq. He is intelligent, unflappable, 
dependable, reliable, loyal, confident, competent, and possessing impeccable oral and 
written communicative skills. Applicant puts into practice the U.S. Army’s values of 
loyalty, duty, respect, selfless service, honor, integrity and personal courage. (Ex. A) 
Applicant’s Certificate of Appreciation is signed by a U.S. Army colonel. (Ex. B) His duty 
performance rated him as high as possible stating he exceeded expectations, his work 
was exceptional, his job knowledge superior, his dependability exceptional, and his 
judgment outstanding. (Ex. C) His overall duty performance was outstanding and his 
impact with the U.S. military remarkable.  
 
 Applicant was born and grew up in Southern Sudan in a Roman Catholic family. 
(Tr. 39) His father, a retired primary school teacher, and mother, a housewife, are 
citizens and residents of Sudan. Applicant’s father was trained by the British before 
Sudan became independent. (Tr. 39) Applicant last saw his parents in 1987 and has 
telephone contact with them every six months. (Answer to SOR, Ex 2, Tr. 121) His 
father has tuberculosis and Applicant sent him $200 per month for a total of $1,300 to 
cover the cost of food, medical treatment, and medicine. In Sudan, a person is expected 
to bring their bed and mattress for any hospital stay. Tuberculosis patients routinely 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 2
under go six-month treatments. Applicant was serving in Iraq when he learned of his 
father’s illness. (Tr. 85)  
 
Southern Sudan is made up of ten providences. (Tr. 37) In 1969, the first civil war 
between North and South Sudan started. It ended with a 1972 peace agreement. (Tr. 
39) In 1982, a new civil war started. The people of the South are targeted and terrorized 
by Northern Central government forces. Life in the South is very difficult. (Tr. 40) A 2005 
peace agreement stated Southern Sudan is to be independent until 2011. (Tr. 77) In 
1987, Applicant was in his first year of high school when there was an attempt on his 
life. People were shooting into his house and he had to flee to a church. Applicant has 
also been beaten several times by government security forces. (Tr. 38, 42) 
 
Applicant spent six months hiding in the jungle before walking to Khartoum and 
into a UN displaced persons camp. (Tr. 83) At university in Khartoum, Applicant studied 
Arabic/English translation. He first began studying Arabic at age seven. (Tr. 106) 
Applicant speaks English, Dinka, Gbaya, and Arabic. (Tr. 159) In 1997, after graduating 
from the university, Applicant decided to leave Sudan. (Tr. 40)  
 
It was in 1987 that Applicant last saw his family except for his half-brother who 
lives in the U.S. (Tr. 84) Applicant’s oldest son is 12 years old and is a citizen and 
resident in Sudan. His son is a full time student who Applicant has not had contact with 
since his son was two. (Tr. 128) Applicant hopes to bring his son to the U.S. His son 
currently lives with Applicant’s sister who lives with Applicant’s parents. (Tr. 89) His 
son’s mother died and his son was placed in an orphanage before he went to live with 
Applicant’s sister. (Tr. 123)  
 
 Applicant has four brothers, two sisters, a half-brother,2 and three half-sisters 
who are citizens and residents of Sudan. He has little contact with them. Three of his 
brothers are students and one is a high school teacher. (Tr. 134) Applicant’s one sister 
is a business owner trading in peanuts and the other is a firefighter. (Tr. 137) Applicant 
has a half-brother who is a major serving as a medic in the Sudanese Army of the 
South. Applicant last talked to this half-brother when Applicant called his father and his 
half-brother happened to be there. Applicant had not spoken to this half-brother for 
years before that call. Applicant’s half-sisters are a teacher, a housewife, and one is 
unemployed. (Tr. 135, 138) Applicant has a half-brother who is a production line worker, 
is a citizen of Sudan, and resides in the U.S. Applicant has nothing to do with this half-
brother, who will become a U.S. citizen after completing the five year requirement to live 
in the U.S.  
 
 In September 1997, Applicant fled from Sudan and went to Syria where he was 
employed in housekeeping duties and washing dishes in a restaurant. (Tr. 45) In 
November 1998, he left Syria because of its hostility towards the U.S. and went to 
Egypt. While in Egypt, he worked as a custodian for a Canadian oil company. (Ex. 2, 
Ex. D, Tr. 46-49) In Egypt, Applicant met and married his wife, having known her from 
                                                          
2 Under Sudanese law, a man is allowed to have two wives. (Tr. 145)  His father’s first wife was 
Applicant’s mother.  
 3
southern Sudan. (Tr. 50) She went to Egypt with her three children. Her husband had 
been killed in Sudan by the Sudanese government. (Tr. 52) Two or three of his wife’s 
siblings had also been killed in Sudan. (Tr. 139-140) 
 
 In August 2000, Applicant travel to the U.S. from Egypt, having been granted 
refugee status by the U.S. His wife came with him to the U.S. She was pregnant with 
their first child. He left Egypt on a travel document supplied by the Red Cross, which he 
used only that one time. (Ex. 2) Upon his arrival in the U.S., Applicant mailed the travel 
document back to the Red Cross. As a refugee, it was impossible to renew his expired 
Sudanese passport.  
 
 Applicant obtained a job as a machine operator in a printing company. (Tr. 54) 
He took classes in the U.S. at a community college on ethics and responsibility in 
translations, writing, and reading English. (Tr. 38) After four months as a machine 
operator, Catholic Social Services need someone from the Sudan who could speak the 
language, understand the culture, and was willing to help with the “Lost Boys.” (Tr. 55) 
The “Lost Boys” were homeless children from Southern Sudan whose families were 
killed by the Sudanese government. (Tr. 56) Applicant was hired and supervised 45 
boys and worked with other refugees. Applicant started working at a non-profit 
organization as a refugee case manager, which continued until October 2006. (Tr. 58) 
He also worked with a program helping people with mental issues or disabilities. (Tr. 60) 
In August 2006, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Ex. E)  
 
 His supervisor at the non-profit organization worked with Applicant for 
approximately five years and knew him well. (Tr. 154) While there, Applicant treated 
everyone equitably and conducted himself in an outstanding professional manner. His 
supervisor testified that she would trust Applicant with her life and the lives of her 
children. (Tr. 163) 
 
 In October 2006, Applicant went to work for a defense contractor that had a 
contract with the U.S. Army to provide Arabic speaking linguists. (Tr. 60, 61) In 
November 2006, he went to Iraq and spent 14 months ─ from November 2006 to 
January 2008 ─ working for the U.S. Army headquarters in Baghdad as a linguist and 
advisor. (Tr. 66) In January 2008, he returned to the U.S. on leave to see his family. He 
was not allowed to return to Iraq because he has foreign relatives. If his security 
clearance is granted, he will return to Iraq to continue serving with the U.S. Army. (Tr. 
96) Since returning from Iraq, Applicant called to check on his father, which is the only 
contact he has had with his foreign relatives. (Tr. 144)  
 
 Applicant has had minimum contact with his relatives in Sudan. The majority of 
contact with his relatives has been through his wife. (Tr. 68) They do not know he 
worked as a translator in Iraq, but believed he works for an oil company. (Tr. 67) 
 
 Applicant’s wife, step-daughter, and two step-sons are citizens of Sudan residing 
with Applicant in the U.S. His wife is a permanent resident who has applied for 
naturalization and hopes to become a U.S. citizen within the next two months. (Tr. 36) 
When his wife becomes a U.S. citizen, her children, Applicant’s step-children, will also 
 4
become U.S. citizens except for the oldest daughter who would no longer be a minor. 
Applicant has two daughters and a son, ages seven, two, and one, all of whom were 
born in the U.S. (Ex. 2)    
 
 In 2003, Applicant purchased a home with a fair market value of $124,000 on 
which he owes $109,000. (Tr. 64) Applicant has $2,500 in a U.S. savings account, 
$3,500 in his checking account, and $10,800 in his 401(k) retirement fund. (Tr. 101) 
 
Sudan 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. The Northern government in 
Sudan is hostile to the U.S. The Southern government is not. Sudan had seventeen 
years of civil war between 1955 and 1972. (HEx. 1, U.S Department of State, 
Background Note: Sudan) A peace agreement was signed in 1972 and lasted until 
January 1983, when civil war started again. In January 2005, a Comprehensive Peace 
Agreement was signed, establishing a new Government of National Unity and the 
interim Government of Southern Sudan. 
 
A rebellion in Darfur resulted in the death of tens of thousands of persons and 
lead to an estimated two million internally displaced persons in Sudan and 234,000 
refugees in Chad. (HEx. 1) The Northern Sudanese Government is complicit with the 
bombing, murder, and rape of innocent civilians in Darfur. (HEx. 1) 
 
In August 1993, Sudan was designated by the Secretary of State as a state 
sponsor of terrorism. (HEx. 6, State Sponsors of Terrorism) Sudan remains on the list 
even though it has aggressively pursued terrorist operations directly involving threats to 
U.S. interest and U.S. personnel in Sudan. (HEx. 7, Country Reports on Terrorism) The 
U.S. government has received indications of terrorist threats aimed at American and 
western interests in Sudan to include suicide operations, bombings, or kidnappings. 
(HEx. 2, U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information, Sudan)  
 
Sudan is under a U.S. embargo, with extensive trade restrictions on exports to 
Sudan. (HEx. 8, U.S. Department of State, Overview of Treasury and Commerce 
Regulations Affecting U.S. Exports to Sudan). The U.S. Department of State warns U.S. 
citizens against all travel to Sudan. (HEx. 3, U.S. Department of State, Travel Warning, 
Sudan) 
 
The Government of Sudan’s human rights record has remained poor, and there 
are numerous serious problems including genocide, extrajudicial and unlawful killings, 
torture, beating, rape, cruel and inhumane treatment by security forces, arbitrary arrest 
and detention, executive interference with the judiciary, denial of due process, 
infringement of rights to privacy, freedoms of speech, press, assembly, association, 
religion, and movement, the trafficking of persons, violence and discrimination against 
women and ethnic minorities, and forced labor. (HEx. 12, U.S. Department of State, 
Sudan, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices – 2007) Government security 
forces continue to torture, beat, and harass political opponents. (HEx. 12) The 
 5
government continues to arbitrarily arrest and detain people under the National Security 
Act. (HEx. 12) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 6
 7
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, 
or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign 
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain 
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG & 6) 
 
Applicant’s parents, siblings, and oldest son are citizens and residents of Sudan. 
His wife and her children are citizens of Sudan, but reside with him in the U.S. His wife 
is a permanent U.S. resident who hopes to get her U.S. citizenship within the next two 
months. He also has a half-brother who is a citizen of Sudan living in the U.S. Applicant 
left Sudan as a refugee first traveling to Syria, then to Egypt before coming to the U.S. 
In August 2006, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. In October 2006, he deployed to 
Iraq for 14 months, working with the U.S. military forces.  
 
Having considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, applicable 
conditions that could possibly raise a security concern are AG & 7(a) “contact with a 
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who 
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” and AG & 7(b) 
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and the individual=s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information” apply. 
 
The new Iraqi government relies upon the U.S. for support as it moves forward 
with its new form of government. While Iraq=s human rights record under Saddam 
Hussein was very dismal and some problems continue, its human rights record is slowly 
improving under the new government.  
 
In every case where parents, children, or siblings live overseas, there is a risk of 
pressure on these relatives and through them upon the holder of a security clearance. 
Under the facts of this case, a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation pressure, or coercion is not substantiated. Applicant has significant ties to 
the U.S. and few ties to Sudan. While his parents and siblings live in Sudan, he lives 
with his wife, children and step-children in the U.S. He has no financial or property 
interests in Sudan. His three children were born in the U.S. He owns a home in the U.S. 
where he maintains his saving account, checking account, and 401(k) retirement plan. 
Applicant=s ties with the U.S. are much stronger than his ties with Sudan. 
 
 
 
 
 
8
Applicant worked 14 months as an interpreter supporting the U.S. military 
mission in Iraq. He worked long hours in austere conditions with an ever present risk of 
hostile fire. The Army holds his work in high regard. His commander in Iraq stated 
Applicant is intelligent, unflappable, dependable, reliable, loyal, confident, competent, 
and possessing impeccable oral and written communicative skills. Applicant puts into 
practice the U.S. Army’s values of loyalty, duty, respect, selfless service, honor, integrity 
and personal courage. Applicant’s duty performance was rate as high as possible. He 
exceeded expectations, did exceptional work, had superior job knowledge superior, and 
outstanding judgment outstanding. As his certificate of appreciation states, his diligence 
and proficiency significantly contributed to the moral and life support of the U.S. military 
personnel.  
 
If a heightened risk exists because he has parents and siblings in Sudan, he has 
mitigated that concern under AG & 8(a) “the nature of the relationships with foreign 
persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of 
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.” and AG & 8(b) “there is no 
conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” 
 
Applicant’s has a half-brother who is a medic in the Army of Southern Sudan. 
The southern part of Sudan is pro U.S. and pro west. Applicant has had limited contact 
with this individual. None of his siblings are involved with organizations which seek to 
harm the U.S. Since 1987, Applicant has not seen his parents, son, or siblings except 
for his half-brother who lives in the U.S. Since returning from Iraq, he has called his 
father once to check on his health. During his deployment to Iraq, he did not contact his 
parents or siblings and all communications with them were through his wife. His parents 
and siblings think he is working for an oil company. His parents, son, and siblings have 
not experienced any repercussions from any source because of Applicant.  
 
The Government of Sudan’s human rights record has remained poor, and there 
are numerous serious problems including genocide, extrajudicial and unlawful killings, 
torture, beating, rape, cruel and inhumane treatment by security forces, and arbitrary 
arrest and detention. Life in the South is very difficult. Applicant has no love for the 
Government of Sudan. During his first year of high school, there was an attempt on his 
life and he has been beaten several times by government security forces. He spent six 
months hiding in the jungle before walking to a UN displaced persons camp. He left 
Sudan as a refugee. Additionally, his wife has no love for the Sudanese government. 
Her former husband and some of her siblings were killed in Sudan by the Sudanese 
government. 
 
There is little likelihood that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of the U.S. and a foreign entity. Likewise, because of his 
 
 
 
 
9
                                                          
close ties and his loyalties to the U.S., he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the U.S. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iraq and the heavy burden 
an Applicant carries when he has family members in a foreign country.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
Since leaving Sudan, Applicant has not returned. His communication with his 
parents is limited and with his siblings almost non existent. Because he guided the Army 
personal on customs and nuances related to the spoken word, translated documents, 
and responded very well in highly dangerous situations, the Army views him as a 
valuable resource in helping it achieve its mission in Iraq.3  
 
3In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006), the Appeal Board recognized an 
exception to the general rule in Guideline B cases when “an applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and regulations occurs in the context 
of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the 
national security . . . [and therefore he] can be relied upon to recognize, resist and report a foreign 
power=s attempts at coercion or exploitation.” 
 
 
 
 
10
While danger certainly exists for all who go to Sudan, Applicant’s son, parents, 
and siblings are in no greater danger than any other individual living and working in 
Sudan.  
 
As previously stated neither Applicant nor his wife have any love for the 
government of Sudan. Not only was he beaten by security forces, but his wife’s former 
husband and some of her siblings were killed in Sudan by the Sudanese government. 
Frequently, Applicant went in harms way to assist U.S. military forces in performing their 
duties in Iraq. The only reason he is not there now is because he lost his clearance 
because of his relatives living in Sudan. Should he be granted a clearance, he intends 
to return to Iraq to continue working with the U.S. military. 
 
I have carefully weighed the evidence in favor of Applicant against the 
government=s concerns about Applicant=s ability to protect classified information. I find 
that there is little potential for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, or exploited because 
he has four siblings living in Iraq. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
