1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )       ISCR Case No. 07-16117
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tom Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel
   John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant completed Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), on May 23, 2007. On March 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns
under Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December
29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after
September 1, 2006. 
In an undated response, Applicant answered the SOR allegations by admitting
all four allegations raised and submitting one document. The case was ultimately
assigned to me on May 2, 2008. Department Counsel and Applicant agreed to a May
28, 2008, hearing date and a Notice of Hearing was issued on May 13, 2008.
 Ex. 1 (Administrative Notice) and Ex. 7 (Annual Report to Congress, 2000).1
 Applicant’s husband is an immigrant from ROC. Like the rest of his own family, however, he is a naturalized2
U.S. citizen. Tr. 52-53.
 The ROC passport issued in 2002 was marked as valid through 2012, ten years. Consequently, it may be3
assumed the prior ROC passport was obtained in 1992, before Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen.
 Ex. B (Citizenship Renunciation documents and translations, dated April-May, 2008).4
 Ex. C (Cancelled passport, photographic image).5
2
The hearing took place as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted 10 exhibits
(Ex.). which were accepted into the record as Exs. 1-10 without objection. Applicant
submitted three exhibits, accepted as Exs. A-C without objection. No witnesses were
called. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 5, 2008. Based upon a review of the
case file, exhibits, and testimony, security clearance is granted.
Administrative Notice
The Government requested administrative notice of certain facts regarding
Taiwan, including that country’s precarious position in relation to the People’s Republic
of China and the U.S. Government’s “one-China” policy. Citing to an eight year old
Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage
from the National Counterintelligence Center, it notes that Taiwan is an active collector
of U.S. economic intelligence.  It points to a 2006 conviction of an individual found guilty1
of aiding Taiwan in information gathering. It also references several documents
accepted into the record as Exs. 4-8. The Government’s request is granted. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old program analyst who works for a defense contractor.
She was born in Taiwan, but immigrated to the United States (U.S.) with her family
when she was an 18-year-old. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1996, three
years before completing a bachelor’s degree. Applicant is married and has no children.2
At the time of her application for a security clearance in 2007, Applicant
possessed both a U.S. passport, issued in May 2002, and a passport issued by the
Republic of China (ROC), issued in July 2002.  She considered herself to be a dual3
national of the U.S. and Taiwan. In early 2008, Applicant submitted her ROC passport
for cancellation and applied for renunciation of her ROC/Taiwanese citizenship. On
April 14, 2008, her renunciation of foreign citizenship was completed and a Certificate
of Citizenship Renunciation was issued.  Her ROC passport, valid through 2012, was4
returned to her by the appropriate authorities and has been cancelled.  Applicant’s5
exercise of dual citizenship and possession of an active Taiwanese passport were
 SOR allegations 1.a (dual citizenship issue) and 1.b. (possession of valid foreign passport issue).6
 SOR allegations 1.c (2006 trip) and 1.d (2007 trip).7
 Tr. 15.8
 Tr. 48.9
 Applicant was unclear as to precise work her procedures entailed. Compare Tr. 13 and Tr. 29; 48.10
 Tr. 48.11
 Tr. 49.12
 Id.13
 Tr. 61.14
 Tr. 14.15
3
subject to the first two of four allegations contained in the SOR.  These two issues are6
moot in light of Applicant’s recent efforts and her supporting documents. 
Remaining at issue are two extended trips to Taiwan.  In June 2002, Applicant7
was unemployed and had the free time to travel. She and her boyfriend went on a two
week pleasure trip to Taiwan. She traveled on her ROC passport, which was nearing its
expiration date the following month. With the exception of visiting a sister who was still
residing in Taiwan, but who has since moved, the trip was purely a pleasure vacation.8
While on holiday, Applicant experienced some dental problems which caused her
physical pain and demanded immediate care.  9
Applicant visited a dentist who proceeded to address a problematic wisdom tooth
which required a root canal. Upon further examination, it was discovered that the tooth
was impacted and multiple root canals were required.  The dentist also identified all of10
her wisdom teeth as having similar problems.   Such dental work then necessitated11
dental crown molding and fitting. The price of the dental work recommended was less
expensive in Taiwan that it would have been in the U.S.  This was a major12
consideration given her lack of employment and insurance. She believes the dental
charges billed would have been the same price regardless of her nationality.  The13
Government concedes that the dental work received was not a benefit of citizenship.14
The surgeries were conducted and medication was prescribed. Applicant was
advised against air travel before she had recovered.  Her boyfriend flew home.15
Applicant remained in her sister’s care through August 2002 before returning home.
In the interim, Applicant’s ROC passport expired in July 2002. Before leaving for
her trip, Applicant had no intention of renewing the ROC passport, having recently
acquired a U.S. passport in May 2002. When her dental issues required she stay
beyond the expiration date, she had to apply for a replacement in order to return
 Tr. 14.16
 See, e.g., Tr. 14.17
 Tr. 16.18
 Tr. 43.19
 Tr. 42.20
 See, e.g., Tr. 29-30.21
 Tr. 46.22
 Tr. 54.23
4
home.  Having recently acquired a U.S. passport, she had not previously considered16
renewing the ROC passport.  That replacement passport was eventually issued with a17
July 30, 2002, date of issuance and it allowed her to leave Taiwan and return to the
U.S.
Four years later, the sister who Applicant visited in Taiwan emigrated from
Taiwan to the U.S. Like the rest of Applicant’s immediate family, that sister is now a
naturalized U.S. citizen.  Today, her only contact with citizens in Taiwan are with a a18
couple of casual acquaintances. Her main contact in Taiwan is a man she knew when
she was a schoolgirl. They chat in passing every few months as Internet pals.  19
In 2006, Applicant and the man she has since married were choosing a place for
a vacation. An offer was extended for her to attend a female acquaintance’s marriage in
Taiwan. When the wedding was mentioned to the Internet pal, he offered Applicant the
use of an apartment he owned at a very reasonable rate.  The couple consequently20
decided to accept the invitations and go to Taiwan in late May to early June for a two
week holiday. Applicant traveled on her U.S. passport. Once there, they attended the
wedding and otherwise treated the trip as a pleasure holiday.21
Applicant has never visited mainland China, has no plans to visit mainland
China, and has no immediate plans to return to Taiwan. If she wished to visit, she is
unable to do so for the next four years due to an administrative mix-up with her 2006
exit paperwork.  Her renunciation of ROC/Taiwan citizenship is considered permanent,22
thus requiring her use of her U.S. passport should she ever return in the future.23
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior,
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).24
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).25
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).26
 Id.27
 Id.28
5
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative
process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial
and common sense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny
of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative
Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a24
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  25 26
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access27
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily28
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.29
 AG ¶ 9.30
 AG ¶ 10(a). 31
6
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the29
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) to be the most pertinent to the case. Conditions pertaining to this
adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as
well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find the following adjudicative
guideline to be the most pertinent to the evaluation of the facts in this case: Guideline
C – Foreign Preference. Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would
mitigate security concerns, are set forth and discussed in the appropriate sections
below.
The concern regarding foreign preference is that when an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the U.S., then he or she
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the U.S.  Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying30
include exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  At the31
time the SOR was issued, Applicant possessed a valid, current ROC passport, which
was sufficient to give rise to Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC) AG ¶
10(a)(1) (possession of a current foreign passport). Previously unexplained, Applicant’s
dental work in Taiwan was sufficient to raise security concerns and give rise to FP DC ¶
10(a)(3) (accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such
benefits from a foreign country). Similarly, her identification of herself as a dual
U.S.–Taiwan citizen gave rise to FP DC ¶ 10(b) (action to acquire or obtain recognition
of a foreign citizenship by an American citizen). With such disqualifying conditions
raised, the burden shifted to Applicant to explain or mitigate the security concerns
raised under this guideline.
Applicant provided proof she successfully renounced her Taiwanese/ROC
citizenship and obtained the cancellation of her ROC-issued passport prior to the May
2008 hearing, obviating the applicability of the disqualifying conditions identified above
and the first two of the four allegations set forth in the SOR. Consequently, only the
extensive dental work received in 2002 while in Taiwan remains at issue inasmuch as
two pleasure trips to Taiwan are not sufficient to raise a FP DC alone.
7
In describing her 2002 trip to Taiwan, Applicant explained the trip was originally
planned as a two week holiday with her then-boyfriend to visit Taiwan and see her
sister. A dental emergency occurred, demanding immediate medical attention.
Unemployed and uninsured, she decided to stay in Taiwan for care which would be
both immediate and which would cost less than it would in the U.S. A medical warning
not to fly during her recuperation, the necessity of multiple of root canals, and the
preparation of crowns protracted her stay, as did the need to obtain a new ROC-issued
passport to permit her to travel out of Taiwan once her old passport expired. Given the
extensive and painful nature of the procedures described, her extended stay for
medical procedures and familial care is understandable. The Government conceded
that the dental care received was not a government benefit received based on her prior
Taiwanese citizenship. Consequently, she has addressed FP DC AG ¶ 10(a)(3) as well.
With only the fact that Applicant took two pleasure trips to Taiwan remaining, the
potential disqualifying conditions raised have been nullified.
Applicant’s testimony, however, also raised foreign preference mitigating
conditions (FP MC). Her former dual citizenship status was based solely on her birth in
Taiwan, thus raising FP MC AG ¶ 11(a) (dual citizenship is based solely on parents’
citizenship or birth in a foreign country). Applicant has not only expressed a willingness
to renounce her dual citizenship, she has successfully completed the ROC-Taiwan
renunciation process, thus raising FP MC AG ¶ 11(b) (the individual has expressed a
willingness to renounce dual citizenship). Finally, Applicant has also returned her ROC-
issued passport to the appropriate authorities. It has been formally accepted and both
officially cancelled and facially marked as such. Therefore, FP MC ¶ 11(d) (the passport
has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise
invalidated) applies. With all of her immediate family, her husband, and her in-laws
living in the U.S. as U.S. citizens, with only a very small number of casual, infrequently
contacted acquaintances remaining in Taiwan, Applicant has little to no contact with
Taiwan, ROC, or its people. Her life and her preferences are here in the U.S. In light of
the above, Applicant has mitigated foreign preference security concerns.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a public trust position must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
8
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
factors noted above. Applicant is a mature, credible, and forthright individual who has
severed all official ties to the country of her birth. Her dual citizenship was nullified with
renunciation of her Taiwanese citizenship and her one remaining government benefit,
her ROC-issued passport, was cancelled. Both her family and her husband’s family
have emigrated to the U.S. en masse, and Applicant has been a U.S. citizen since she
was a teen. Her only remaining ties to Taiwan are two or three causal friends. 
Today, Applicant’s sole country of preference is the U.S., and her only passport
is U.S.-issued. No evidence has been presented that she has an residual indications of
foreign preference which have not been addressed, nor is there any hint that she might
be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the U.S.
Consequently, foreign preference security concerns are mitigated. I conclude it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance is granted.
__________________________
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
