  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 07-16210
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on February 29, 2008. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline J for criminal conduct, Guideline G for alcohol
consumption, and Guideline H for drug involvement. For the reasons discussed below,
this case is decided against Applicant.
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant’s response to the SOR was received on April 7, 2008, and he
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 19, 2008. The hearing took
place as scheduled on June 25, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on July 3, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline J, the SOR alleges seven alcohol-related incidents of criminal
conduct. Under Guideline G, the SOR alleges a pattern of alcohol consumption to the
point of intoxication during the period 1995–2006, and it refers to the alcohol-related
incidents under Guideline J. And under Guideline H, the SOR alleges Applicant
engaged in drug abuse by using cocaine, crack cocaine, and marijuana, and by
misusing a prescription drug. In his Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
the SOR and he provided a detailed explanation about his efforts to rectify his situation.
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for
his current employer since September 2006. His educational background includes a
bachelor’s degree in computer science, and he currently works as a senior database
administrator. His manager is very satisfied with Applicant’s work performance and
describes Applicant as a “highly competent, completely reliable, and absolutely
trustworthy” employee (Exhibit A).  
Applicant is seeking to obtain an industrial security clearance. To that end, he
completed security-clearance applications in October and December 2006 (Exhibits 1
and 2). In each, he reported that he was a recovering alcoholic and  disclosed multiple
alcohol-related offenses. Also, he disclosed his use of cocaine, crack cocaine,
marijuana, and his misuse of the prescription drug. 
He married in 1987 and divorced in 1994. There is one child from the marriage, a
son. Alcohol was not a problem during the marriage, but it appears his problems with
alcohol started after the divorce. Both he and his ex-wife attribute his substance-abuse
problems to falling in with the wrong crowd (Tr. 78, 121–122). At one point in 2006, his
wife became concerned enough about his condition that she refused to allow him to see
their son, although that is no longer the case.
3
Applicant has a history of criminal conduct, which he does not dispute. The
several incidents alleged in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are summarized as
follows:
• August 1995–arrested and charged with driving under the influence (DUI) of
alcohol; pleaded guilty.
• September 1998–arrested and charged with DUI, driving with a suspended
driver’s license, and carrying a pistol in a vehicle without a permit; guilty of DUI
and the other charges against him were nolle prossed.
• May 2000–arrested and charged with third-degree assault and menacing; he had
been drinking alcohol at the time. Charges dismissed.
• June 2004–arrested and charged with third-degree domestic violence; he had
been drinking alcohol at the time. Charge dismissed.
• December 2004–arrested and charged with DUI; found guilty of lesser offense of
open container.
• September 2005–arrested and charged with DUI; pleaded guilty.
• February 2006–arrested and charged with DUI and possession of a controlled
substance (a prescription drug); guilty of DUI and the possession charge was
dismissed.
The most recent incident is discussed below.
The February 2006 charges were adjudicated in approximately March 2007, and
the court sentenced Applicant to serve confinement for one year (suspended) and
probation for two years. His probation was scheduled to conclude in March 2009 (Tr.
111). According to his court-referral officer (probation officer), as of March 26, 2008,
Applicant was in good standing and had completed 6 of 12 monitoring sessions, passed
drug screens, and attends Alcohol Anonymous (AA) meetings four times per week
(Exhibit H). In addition to the criminal case, on March 21, 2007, the state
administratively revoked Applicant’s driver’s license for four years (Tr. 118–120). 
Although his license is revoked, Applicant has been driving on a regular basis
(Tr. 115–121, 125–127). Several days before the hearing in this case, on June 14,
2008, the police stopped Applicant because his vehicle matched the description of a
stolen vehicle. As a result, the police discovered and cited Applicant for driving with a
revoked driver’s license. Applicant was not arrested, but was given a court date of July
11, 2008. He had not yet reported the incident to his probation officer, but he had plans
to do so.  He has continued to drive after the incident on June 14, although he is trying
to minimize his driving.   
Applicant has abstained from alcohol and drug abuse since May 16, 2006. He no
longer associates with people who abuse alcohol or drugs, and he no longer goes to
bars or nightclubs. He is an active participant in AA, he is quite familiar with the 12-step
program and is working the program, and he attends several AA meetings per week. In
addition to attending AA, he was also active in a church-based 12-step program led by a
qualified counselor (Exhibit G). Also, he has been under the care of a medical doctor
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
4
and a licensed clinical social worker since October 2006 (Exhibit J). The main focus is
treating Applicant’s depression and other issues related to his recovery. He has made
good progress and is clinically stable. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes5
any existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 21–22 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 21. 15
 DC 1 is “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses.”16
 DC 3 is the “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally17
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
 DC 4 is the “individual is currently on parole or probation.”18
5
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the concern is that “criminal activity14
creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very
nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules,
and regulations.”  15
In general, a security concern is raised by Applicant’s pattern of criminal conduct.
In particular, DC 1,  DC 3,  and DC 4  apply against Applicant as evidenced by his16 17 18
multiple arrests, charges, and convictions, as well as his status as a probationer until
March 2009. In addition, his admitted practice of driving with a revoked driver’s license
is of concern because it shows a willful disregard of the law. Although the state court
has not yet determined the outcome of the June 14 incident, it is a misdemeanor
 See Ala. Code 1975 § 32-6-19 (driving a motor vehicle while a license is cancelled, denied, suspended, or19
revoked is a m isdemeanor that carries with it a penalty of a fine of $100 to $500 and imprisonment for not
more than 180 days.).  
 Revised Guidelines at 15–16 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating20
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 15. 21
 Revised Guidelines at 17–18 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating22
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 23
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 24
6
criminal offense.  This means that Applicant is facing the possibility of yet another19
conviction, a probation violation, or the state court could set aside or vacate the
suspended sentence to confinement, or all three. To sum up, the totality of Applicant’s
criminal conduct calls into question his judgment as well as his ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
The guideline also contains several conditions that could mitigate security
concerns, but none apply in Applicant’s favor. It is true that Applicant has abstained
from alcohol and drug abuse since March 2006. But the 2006 DUI was not resolved until
2007, and Applicant is now a probationer until about March 2009. This means he is now
serving a lawful sentence imposed by a state court. In addition, he was pending
disposition of a misdemeanor offense for driving with a revoked license with a court date
of July 11, 2008; this may also constitute a probation violation. These are key facts.
They show that Applicant’s criminal conduct is current and ongoing, and they militate
against a successful case in reform and rehabilitation. In other words, it is too soon to
tell if Applicant will serve probation without violation and then go on to be a law-abiding
citizen. Accordingly, Guideline J is decided against Applicant. 
The alcohol consumption and drug involvement guidelines will be discussed
together because Applicant’s drug abuse was intertwined with his alcohol use. Under
Guideline G for alcohol consumption,  the security concern is that “excessive alcohol20
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness.”  Under Guideline H for drug involvement,  the security concern is that21 22
“use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations.”  The definition of drug abuse is “the illegal use of a drug or use23
of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.”24
Applicant’s pattern of alcohol-related incidents and his drug abuse raise security
concerns. But unlike his criminal conduct—which is an ongoing concern—he has
7
successfully resolved the concerns under Guidelines G and H. Importantly, he has
acknowledged that he is a recovering alcoholic. He has abstained from alcohol and
drugs since March 2006, a period of more than two years. He has sought out
professional counseling and medical assistance. He attends AA regularly and is actively
working the 12-step program. And he no longer associates with people who abuse
alcohol and drugs. Taken together, his efforts constitute substantial evidence of reform
and rehabilitation. On this  basis, Guidelines G and H are decided for Applicant. 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this
conclusion, the whole-person concept (to include his good employment record, his
several favorable character witnesses, Exhibits A–Q, and his rehabilitation efforts) was
given due consideration and that analysis does not support a favorable decision. This
case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.g:  Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.a–2b:  For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline H: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 3.a–3c:  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
