 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-15506 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on November 16, 2006. 
On February 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 28, 2008; answered it 
on March 15, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on April 4, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
April 25, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on April 29, 2008. DOHA issued a 
hearing notice on May 9, 2008, scheduling the hearing for May 28, 2008. On May 16, 
2008 Applicant requested a continuance to enable him to gather documentary evidence, 
and I granted his request on the same day. Applicant’s request and my ruling are 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX I).  
 
DOHA issued a second notice of hearing on May 29, 2008, rescheduling the 
hearing for June 17, 2008. I convened the hearing as rescheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through E, which 
were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open 
until July 2, 2008, to enable him to submit additional documentary evidence. Applicant 
timely submitted AX F, and it was admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s 
response to AX F is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit II. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on June 26, 2008. The record closed on July 2, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR and 
offered explanations. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated 
in my findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old multimedia producer for a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since November 2006. He also works part-time as a 
self-employed multimedia producer. He has never held a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant has been married since June 2005. In May 2007, his spouse was 
seriously injured in a boating accident and has been unable to work (GX 5 at 2; AX C). 
Even with health insurance, Applicant has incurred significant medical expenses for the 
care and treatment of his spouse. 
 
 Applicant testified he began having financial problems in 1997 or 1998, when he 
worked as a salesman for a computer retailer. After the retailer went out of business, 
Applicant worked for his father for eight years and was able to resolve his debts (Tr. 36-
37). When the market declined and Applicant started making less money, he again 
started having financial problems (Tr. 37). 
 
 Applicant accumulated the 14 debts alleged in the SOR, totaling about $89,273, 
by purchasing media equipment for his part-time business (GX 4 at 2). Most of the 
debts became delinquent in late 2005, before his spouse’s boating accident, except for 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and 1.h, which became delinquent in early 2007. None 
of the debts alleged in the SOR were resolved as of the date of the hearing, and no 
payments had been made on any of the debts.  
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant testified he had several settlement offers pending that he would resolve 
in 10 to15 days. He presented documentary evidence that one debt had been settled, 
but he could not connect the evidence to any debts alleged in the SOR (AX B; Tr. 51-
53). He did not present any evidence of settlements in his post-hearing submission. He 
presented one post-hearing document (AX F) from his landlord, showing that he and his 
spouse have been tenants since July 2006 and have never been late in paying their 
rent. 
 
 Applicant’s biweekly net pay is about $1,840 (Tr. 45). He presented a budget 
worksheet at the hearing (AX A), listing his monthly net income as between $3,650 and 
$3,700, and itemizing monthly expenses totaling $3,650, leaving no net remainder. His 
monthly budget includes some apparently discretionary items such as cable/internet 
($120), books and magazines ($50), movies and concerts ($20), and hobbies ($100). 
No expenses attributable to his part-time business are included. He testified he has 
canceled his credit cards and now pays cash for all his purchases (Tr. 40-41). 
 
 Applicant consulted with a debt counselor in 2006 and a bankruptcy attorney in 
2007, but he took no action after these consultations. He testified he suspected his 
inability to manage his finances might be due to attention deficit disorder, and that he 
intend to undergo evaluation (AX D and E; Tr. 39, 43). He presented no evidence at the 
hearing or in his post-hearing submission reflecting a diagnosis of attention deficit 
disorder. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
4 
 
 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling about $89,273. The concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history 
of not meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent 
spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
 The first two prongs (“so long ago” and “so infrequent”) are not established, 
because Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that are not resolved. None of the 
debts appear to have been caused by unusual circumstances. Applicant’s long history 
of overspending casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s financial 
problems are partially the result of business downturns, but he neglected to adjust his 
spending habits when they occurred. His medical expenses and loss of a second 
income after his spouse’s injury were beyond his control, but they occurred after the 
debts alleged in the SOR already were delinquent. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not 
established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
 
6 
 
 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
has consulted with a debt counselor and a bankruptcy attorney; but he has taken no 
action, and his financial problems are not under control. I conclude this mitigating 
condition is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
Applicant presented no evidence of payment, compromise, or settlement of any debts 
alleged in the SOR. I conclude this mitigating condition is not established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is intelligent, well-educated, and articulate, but he seems unable to 
adjust his spending to his income. He was personable, sincere, and candid at the 
hearing, but he seems to be drifting through life, with no plan for resolving his financial 
problems. He is understandably distracted and concerned by his spouse’s serious 
injuries, but they occurred after the debts alleged in the SOR were already delinquent. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
