  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-----------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 07-14752
SSN: --------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on February 25, 2008. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of
financial problems. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided for Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant’s response to the SOR was received on March 21, 2008, and he
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on April 10, 2008. The hearing took
place as scheduled on June 5, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 16,
2008.
The record was left open until June 20, 2008, to allow Applicant an opportunity to
submit documentary evidence. He made a timely submission and those matters are
admitted, without objections, as follows: (1) Exhibit A–letter summarizing Applicant’s
employment record at his current employer; (2) Exhibit B–property settlement
agreement from his 1994 divorce; and (3) Exhibit C–paperwork related to a debt-
management plan from 1999-2000. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges eight delinquent debts ranging from $399 to
$7,449 for about $37,500 in total. The delinquent debts include credit card accounts, a
phone bill, and other consumer debts. In his Answer, he admitted the debts and
indicated that the $399 phone bill was paid in March 2008. In addition, the following
facts are established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for
this company since August 2004. He is seeking to obtain an industrial security
clearance for the first time. He completed a security-clearance application in November
2005 (Exhibit 1). In doing so, he disclosed a number of delinquent accounts and
provided a brief explanation for his financial condition.  
Applicant has married twice. His first marriage ended in divorce in 1994. There
are three children of that marriage and they are now adults living on their own. As a
result of the divorce, Applicant was required to pay child support and provide
comprehensive medical and dental insurance for his then minor children (Exhibit B).
Each spouse became the sole owner of a vehicle and Applicant took on debt for his
vehicle. In addition, he agreed to be responsible for six of eight debts stemming from
credit card or other consumer accounts.
Applicant remarried in February 1998, and he became the stepfather to two
children both of whom are now adults living on their own. Sometime in late 1998 or early
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
3
1999, Applicant’s regular overtime at the paper mill was reduced due to an equipment
upgrade. As a result, he had difficulty paying some bills. Then in late 2000, Applicant,
along with 500 to 600 other employees of the mill, learned that the company was
closing the mill in 90 days. Applicant—who had worked at the mill since September
1981—found himself without a job in January 2001. 
Applicant returned to school as part of a program to retrain workers. Initially, he
was required to exhaust 26 weeks of unemployment benefits before receiving grant
money. He was a student at a local university from January 2001 until his graduation in
May 2003 when he was awarded an associate’s degree in computer networking
technology. 
Finding gainful employment proved difficult for Applicant. From May 2003 until he
started his current job in August 2004, Applicant had two jobs where he was
underemployed and two periods of unemployment for a total of about five months. He
was hired by the federal contractor as a material handler and he has since been
advanced in that line of work. He now earns about $29,000 annually as compared with
the $50,000 to $55,000 he made at the mill. He has a good employment record as
evidenced by favorable ratings he received for 2005–2007 (Exhibit A). 
Applicant describes his current financial condition as tight, but making it. In
March 2008, he paid the $399 phone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. Otherwise, he has not
paid, settled, or otherwise resolved the remaining seven delinquent debts in the SOR.
Applicant has a number of accounts that are in good standing, to include a loan on a
mobile home, a lease for the land for the mobile home, and a car payment. Applicant
would like to pay off the delinquent debts, but he simply does not have the extra income
to do so after paying for his regular expenses. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any5
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
4
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order6
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at p. 13. 15
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 16
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 17
5
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically14
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be15
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. His history of financial problems is a security concern because it
indicates inability (not unwillingness) to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting16
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence is more17
than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns. The most pertinent here is MC 2, which provides as follows:
The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant receives the full benefit of MC 2. His financial problems can be traced
back to a combination of conditions largely beyond his control: (1) his divorce in 1994;
(2) the reduction of overtime in 1998–1999; (3) his unexpected job loss in January 2001
after working nearly 20 years for a paper mill; and (4) his period of underemployment
and unemployment during 2003–2004. Indeed, the mill closure was a devastating
financial event from which Applicant has yet to fully recover as shown by the huge
reduction in annual income ($55,000 to $29,000). In addition to the conditions beyond
his  control, Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances when he sought
further education to improve his job skills and employment prospects, and when he
sought and took work where he could find it.  
This case presents both unfavorable and favorable evidence, which requires
thoughtful balancing in light of the whole–person concept and the clearly-consistent
6
standard. I have considered the totality of facts and circumstances and conclude the
favorable evidence is persuasive. The evidence shows that in all likelihood Applicant
would have never experienced such difficult financial problems but for his unexpected
job loss in 2001 when the mill closed. In addition, his efforts to remake himself were
made more difficult by underemployment and unemployment after he obtained his
degree in 2003. 
In addition, despite the difficult circumstances, the evidence in no way suggests
Applicant engaged in illegal activities to generate funds, which is a concern under
Guideline F. And the evidence in no way suggests Applicant engaged in high living or
irresponsible spending on frivolous items. Instead, the evidence shows that Applicant
has demonstrated fortitude and he has endeavored to make the best of a bad situation.
Taken together, these circumstances suggest that he has the requisite self-control,
good judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.
Although Applicant has made little progress in resolving the delinquent debts in the
SOR, his lack of progress is not attributable to unwillingness or deliberate avoidance.
Given the facts and circumstances here, an unduly rigid or strict application of the
guideline is not appropriate.  
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain
a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with national interest  to
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
