 
1 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-14830 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
On March 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 1, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2008. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on May 20, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on June 5, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
 
2 
 
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits 
(AE) A through N, which were received without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on June 16, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. Applicant did not object and the request was approved. 
The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record as HE I through XII. The facts administratively noticed are set out 
in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was born in Iran. 
He came to the United States in the late 1970s to attend college. He graduated with a 
bachelor’s degree from an American university. He remained in the United States and 
became a U.S. citizen in 1986. Applicant married a native-born U.S. citizen in 1982. 
They divorced in 1997. They have two children, ages 17 and 14. His first wife is of a 
different religion than the official religion of Iran. His two children have been raised in 
that religion.1 Applicant married again in 2002. His wife was born in Iran. She was 
introduced to Applicant through relatives in the United States. She became a U.S. 
citizen in 2006. As discussed below, U.S. citizens who were born in Iran are considered 
Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities. She maintained an Iranian passport in order to 
visit her relatives in Iran. They have a three-year-old child.2 
 
 Applicant’s parents are deceased. He has three siblings who are all citizens and 
residents of the United States. They live in the same geographic region as Applicant. 
They have children who were born in the U.S. His mother-in-law and father-in-law are 
citizens and residents of Iran. They are retired professionals with no association with the 
Iranian government. They have both applied for immigrant visas to become U.S. 
permanent residents. Their applications are pending. His wife speaks with her parents 
about once a month. She has a sibling who is a citizen and resident of Iran. He is a 
student. Applicant and his wife would like to bring him to the United States after her 
                                                          
1 A person’s choice of religion, or to have no religion, is very personal and is protected by the 
Constitution. It is not a basis for the granting or denial of a security clearance. It is addressed here only as 
evidence of Applicant’s open-mindedness and tolerance of differences and diversity. 
 
2 Tr. at 19, 48-49, 58-63, 83-84; GE 1-3. 
 
 
3 
 
parents have arrived. She has another sibling who is a citizen and resident of a country 
that is an ally of the U.S.3   
 
 Applicant visited Iran on six occasions between about 2002 and 2006. The 
purpose of his trips in 2002 was to meet and marry his wife. In 2003, he returned to Iran 
to bring his wife to the United States. He visited Iran on two other occasions so that he 
and his wife could visit his in-laws and so that his in-laws could see their grandchild. He 
traveled to Iran using an Iranian passport. When he realized that possession of a 
foreign passport posed a security concern, he “surrendered” it to his facility security 
officer (FSO). The FSO certified the receipt of the passport and that the company would 
maintain the passport until Applicant “no longer requires a security clearance or no 
longer works for this company, which ever is sooner.” The FSO further stated “in the 
event [Applicant] requests his passport, we will immediately notify DOHA of his 
request.” The passport is now expired and Applicant has no intention to renew it or 
obtain another Iranian passport. Applicant is willing to renounce his dual citizenship, but 
he has not formally renounced his Iranian citizenship, as that would be ill-advised. He 
does not intend to return to Iran.4 
 
 Applicant does not own any foreign assets. He has considerable assets in the 
U.S. In addition to his current job with the defense contractor, he has other interests. He 
has a real estate license. He is a very experienced, highly trained instructor in a 
discipline that combines athleticism, self-defense, endurance, self-discipline, and 
respect for others. Character letters on his behalf describe him as trustworthy, 
organized, efficient, respectful, and a man of great integrity. He is recommended for any 
endeavor that involves trustworthiness.5 
 
Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. The President’s National Security Strategy has stated 
that the United States “may face no greater challenge from a single country than from 
Iran.” The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
  
• Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD);  
• Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
• Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and 
• Its dismal human rights record. 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 52-54, 60, 72-82; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE B-E. 
 
4 Tr. at 54-58, 63-72, 85-87, 92; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 82; AE F-M. 
 
 
4 
 
Iran’s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq is also a concern. 
 
 The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the world’s leading state 
sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. 
 
 The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens, even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian, 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter/depart Iran using their U.S. 
passport; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. 
U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. 
Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, 
telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personal possessions in hotel 
rooms may be searched. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
5 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 
6 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 Applicant possessed and used an Iranian passport while a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 
10(a) is applicable. The renewal of his Iranian passport while a U.S. citizen could raise 
concerns under AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain recognition of his Iranian citizenship.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Iran continued to consider Applicant an Iranian citizen after he was naturalized as 
a U.S. citizen. As such, he was required to use an Iranian passport to enter Iran. When 
he became aware that the passport was a security concern, he surrendered it to his 
company’s security officer. The passport is now expired and Applicant does not intend 
to renew it or obtain another one. To the extent that Iran considers him an Iranian 
citizen, he is very willing to renounce that citizenship. AG ¶ 11(a) is partially applicable. 
AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) are applicable.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
7 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
  Applicant’s in-laws are citizens and residents of Iran, a country that is clearly 
hostile to the United States.6 He traveled to Iran on six occasions between about 2002 
and 2006. Iran is considered the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism, and the 
government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses against its 
people. His family members’ presence in Iran creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, both through him and 
through his wife. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) 
have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007). 
 
8 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant has been in this country for about 30 years and has been a U.S. citizen 
for more than 20 years. He came to the U.S. as a young man to pursue his education. 
He married a native-born U.S. citizen in 1982, and they have two children who were 
born in the U.S. Other than his in-laws, Applicant has no family left in Iran. His parents 
are deceased and his three siblings and their families are all American citizens. His 
current wife is an American citizen and their child was born in the United States. His life, 
career, assets, interests, and allegiance all lie in the United States. His in-laws in Iran 
have no connection to the Iranian government and no incentive to bring Applicant to the 
attention of the Iranian government. It is therefore, unlikely Applicant will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of the Iranian government, a terrorist 
organization, or his family members in Iran and the interests of the United States. I 
further find there is no conflict of interest, because Applicant has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in America, that he can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) is partially applicable. AG 
¶ 8 (b) is applicable. No other mitigating condition is applicable.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Iran. He came 
to the U.S. about 30 years ago to attend college. He remained and become a U.S. 
 
9 
 
citizen in 1986. He met a U.S. citizen and married her. They have two children who 
were born in the U.S. This marriage ended in divorce. He met an Iranian woman 
through relatives and traveled there on an Iranian passport to meet and marry her. The 
use of his Iranian passport was not because Applicant maintained a sense of loyalty or 
allegiance to Iran; it was the only viable option for Applicant to travel to Iran, and was 
consistent with the information provided by the State Department, as stated in the 
Hearing Exhibits. He has surrendered the passport to his security officer and it is also 
expired. To the extent that Iran considers him one of its citizens, he is very willing to 
renounce that citizenship. He has no intention on returning to Iran for any purpose. His 
wife is now an American citizen and their three-year-old child was born in the United 
States. He has been very successful and is highly regarded personally and 
professionally. 
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is clearly 
hostile to the United States, and the heavy burden an applicant carries when he or she 
has family members in a hostile country. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the 
likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. 
The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country 
has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent 
upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against 
the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. Iran is the 
world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism and has a dismal human rights record. 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for more than 20 years. All his blood relatives are in 
the United States and are U.S. citizens. His in-laws remain in Iran. His parents-in-law’s 
immigrant visas are pending. Once they are in the U.S., the focus will be on bringing his 
wife’s sibling to the U.S. His in-laws have no connection to the Iranian government and 
have no reason to raise Applicant’s profile with the Iranian government. These facts 
minimize any potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. Applicant was 
sincere, open, and honest at the hearing. In the unlikely event that his in-laws were 
subjected to coercion or duress from the Iranian government or terrorist groups, I find 
that because of his deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., 
including his uncompromising commitment to his country and his children, that Applicant 
would resolve any attempt to exert pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of 
the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
10 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
