 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-02042 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application on April 24, 2007. On 
March 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 31, 2008; answered it on 
April 17, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received 
the request on April 21, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 29, 
2008, and the case was assigned to me on May 8, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on May 12, 2008, scheduling the hearing for May 29, 2008. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through P, which were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until June 13, 2008 to enable her to submit additional 
documentary evidence. On June 5, 2008, Applicant requested additional time to submit 
evidence, and I extended the deadline until June 27, 2008. Her request and my ruling 
are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. Applicant timely submitted AX Q 
through WW, and they were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s 
response to AX Q through WW is attached to the record as HX II. Applicant’s reply to 
Department Counsel was marked as AX WW instead of a hearing exhibit because of its 
testimonial nature. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX WW are attached as 
HX III. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 5, 2008. The record closed on July 
15, 2008.  
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel offered GX 5, a personal subject interview extracted from a 
report of investigation, without calling an authenticating witness as required by the 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. I explained the authentication requirement to Applicant, and she 
waived it (Tr. 25-28). Accordingly, I admitted GX 5 without authentication. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations, but she 
explained that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.r had been satisfied by 
garnishment. Her admissions in her answer to the SOR and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old personnel clerk employed by a federal contractor. She 
served on active duty in the U.S. Army from February 1978 until she accepted early 
retirement as a sergeant (pay grade E-5) in September 1994. She held a security 
clearance while in the Army. After she retired, she worked at a discount retail store and 
four separate temporary jobs as a government contractor’s employee (Tr. 47). She 
worked as a warehouse supervisor from April 1999 to August 2003, when she quit her 
job because of a disagreement about compensatory time. She was unemployed from 
August 2003 to May 2004 (Tr. 48-49). She has worked for her current employer since 
May 2004. She does not have a current security clearance.  
 
 Applicant’s immediate supervisor considers her a trusted and valuable employee 
(GX 2 at 2). He describes her as a person with a “large heart” who cares about the 
people she serves (AX H). Her program manager considers her highly self-motivated, 
 
3 
 
 
dedicated to team building, and “willing to go the extra mile” to do her job (AX A). She 
received a letter of commendation in December 2006 and an award for excellence in 
December 2007 (AX B and C). At the hearing, she presented copies of numerous hand-
written notes from military personnel, thanking her for her help, consideration, and 
attentiveness to their needs (AX D-G). 
 
 Applicant is unmarried, but she has a 25-year-old daughter with three children. 
Applicant testifies she helps her daughter “abundantly” with financial support, because 
the father of her children is financially irresponsible (Tr. 42). She also gives money to 
her older brother, who promises to repay her but never does (Tr. 42, 59-60). She 
testified she purchased a townhouse in 1999, and accrued most of her debts between 
2001 and 2003. When Applicant quit her job in 2003, the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.n already were delinquent (GX 3, GX 4). After the 
mortgage on her townhouse was foreclosed, she moved in with her boyfriend and “just 
gave up” on meeting her financial obligations (Tr. 42, 50). 
 
 Between June 23 and June 25, 2008, Applicant resolved all the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. She borrowed money from her aunt to resolve the debts, and she is 
now obligated to pay her aunt $1,000 per month until the debt is paid. She told her aunt 
she needed to pay off her delinquent debts in order obtain a security clearance (AX XX). 
Several other delinquent debts not alleged in the SOR also were paid off at the same 
time, including a delinquent debt of $5,121 to an instrumentality of the U.S. (AX W).  
 
 The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized below. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Medical $140 Paid, 6-23-08 AX R, Y 
1.b Utility bill $351 Paid, 6-23-08 AX Z, AA, BB, CC 
1.c Credit card $360 Paid, 6-23-08 AX S 
1.d Credit card $1,837 Partial payment, 6-24-08 AX DD 
1.e Credit card $2,851 Compromised and paid, 6-23-08 AX T, EE, FF 
1.f Credit card $2,996 Paid, 6-24-08 AX GG 
1.g Utility bill $351 Same as 1.b Tr. 18 
1.h Collection $1,003 Paid, 6-24-08 AX HH 
1.i Mail order $232 Paid, 6-24-08 AX II 
1.j Clothing $2,216 Compromised and paid, 6-24-08 AX JJ 
1.k Credit card $3,600 Partial payment, 6-25-08 AX VV 
1.l Credit card $6,193 Satisfied by garnishment Answer; AX WW 
1.m Bank loan $3,061 Satisfied AX V, AX KK 
1.n Clothing $932 Compromised and paid, 6-24-08 AX LL, MM 
1.o Credit card $1,158 Partial payment, 6-24-08 AX NN 
1.p Credit card $760 Settled 6-24-08 Tr. 65; AX P, JJ 
1.q Mortgage 
Foreclosure 
$85,578 Department Counsel conceded 
allegation is unfounded 
Tr. 18 
1.r Judgment $8,347 Same as 1.l  Answer; AX WW 
 
4 
 
 
 
 During an interview with a security investigator in June 2007, Applicant attributed 
her financial problems to “bad financial judgments” and mismanagement of her money 
(GX 5 at 3). At the hearing, she testified her bad financial judgments included paying too 
much for a car that needed extensive repairs, and allowing her daughter to go on a 
beach vacation in 2001 and run up a large credit card balance (Tr. 74-75). 
 
 Applicant once consulted with a financial planner but dropped out of the program 
after a couple of payments. She also considered bankruptcy, but decided to handle her 
debts herself (Tr. 73-74). 
 
 Applicant’s current net pay is about $1,600 per month (Tr. 66). She receives 
$878 per month in military retired pay (Tr. 67). She has no car payment because she 
uses her boyfriend’s car. Her boyfriend pays the mortgage but she contributes about 
$300 per month for groceries, $400 for household expenses, $200 for her 
grandchildren, $220 for credit card payments, and $170 for her cell phone, leaving a 
monthly remainder of about $1,118. 
 
 Applicant recently inherited an interest in real property from her mother. At the 
hearing, she stated her intent to ask the executor of the estate to allow one of her 
siblings to purchase her interest in the property as a means of raising funds to pay her 
delinquent debts (Tr. 78). In her post-hearing submissions, she did not submit any 
further evidence regarding her interest in this property.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
5 
 
 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts totaling about $113,080. The evidence 
shows that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.g are the same debt, and the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.r are the same debt. When the same conduct is alleged 
twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 
3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.l. in Applicant=s 
favor.  
 
Department counsel conceded that the $85,578 mortgage foreclosure debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.q could not be established by substantial evidence. Accordingly, I have 
resolved SOR ¶ 1.q in Applicant’s favor. 
 
 
6 
 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@   
 
 Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶ 19(a), (b), (c), and (e). Her loans to her 
irresponsible older brother and allowing her daughter to incur a large credit card debt on 
a beach vacation were “irresponsible” within the meaning of AG ¶ 19(b). 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise several 
disqualifying conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
 The first two prongs of AG ¶ 20(a) (“so long ago” and “so infrequent”) are not 
established, because Applicant accumulated numerous delinquent debts, several of 
which were not resolved until after the hearing. They did not arise because of unusual 
circumstances that are “unlikely to recur.” Her conduct in responding to financial 
 
7 
 
 
problems by “just giving up” casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e. conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s loss of 
employment in August 2003 was voluntary, and she already had numerous delinquent 
debts when she quit her job. Her response, by “just giving up,” was not responsible. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition also has two prongs that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive. If 
the person has received counseling, it must also be shown that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or under control. However, if the person has 
not received counseling, this mitigating condition may still apply if there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or under control. Applicant sought and 
received financial counseling for a short period, but she terminated her participation 
after making a couple payments. Applicant now has the debts alleged in the SOR under 
control, but she did so by incurring a new debt to her aunt, on which the monthly 
payments will consume all of her net remainder, leaving nothing for unexpected 
expenses. It is too soon to tell whether she has her finances under control. I conclude 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@  ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. Applicant held a clearance while in the 
Army, and she knew her delinquent debts would raise security concerns, but she did 
virtually nothing until she received the SOR. None of the debts except the debt satisfied 
by garnishment were resolved until after the hearing. When she borrowed money from 
her aunt, she told her aunt she needed the money to pay off her delinquent debts so 
that she could obtain a security clearance. The evidence shows her motivation for 
resolving the debts was not a sense of obligation, but rather a desire to obtain a 
clearance. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army for 17 years, and held a clearance 
for many years, apparently without incident. She is a kind and caring person, as 
evidenced by the numerous expressions of gratitude from those whom she has helped 
in her role as a personnel clerk. She has given money to her brother and daughter 
without regard for her own financial needs.  
 
 Applicant was candid and sincere at the hearing. Nevertheless, her financial 
track record leaves me with doubt whether she will exercise financial discipline once the 
pressure of obtaining a clearance is removed. The debt alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.r 
was resolved by garnishment, not any voluntary action by Applicant. She has neglected 
her delinquent debts for more than four years. She responded to the pressure of 
obtaining a clearance by borrowing money from her aunt, substituting a large new debt 
for numerous delinquent debts. Doubts about her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment will persist until she establishes a record of financial responsibility. 
Perhaps, in a year or so, she will establish such a record, if she timely repays the loan 
to her aunt and does not accumulate any more delinquent debts. See Directive ¶¶ 
E3.1.37 through E3.1.39 (reconsideration authorized after one year). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I conclude she has 
not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.k:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
