 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01260 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Thomas M. Abbott, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), on February 15, 2007. On April 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 24, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 20, 
2008. The case was assigned to me on May 27, 2008. On June 5, 2008, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for June 25, 2008. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 - 2, which were 
admitted without objection. The Government requested that administrative notice be 
taken of one document with 12 attachments. The document was marked as 
 
2 
 
 
Administrative Notice Document I (Admin Not I) without objection. Applicant testified 
and submitted 17 exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - Q without 
objection.  DOHA received the transcript of hearing on July 3, 2008. Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Iran is a theocratic Islamic republic. The United States has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since April 7, 1980. The U.S. Department of State has set forth 
concerns of the United States with Iran’s policies as: (1) Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear 
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction; (2) Iran’s support for and involvement 
in international terrorism; (3) Iran’s support for violent opposition to the Middle East 
peace process; and (4) Iran’s dismal human rights record. (Admin Not 1, Doc 1 at 9) 
The United States has designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism. (Admin Not 1, 
Doc 6 at 2.)  The government of Iran’s human rights abuses against the Iranian people 
include summary executions, lack of fair public trials, disappearances, torture, arbitrary 
arrest and detention, political prisoners and detainees, severe restrictions on freedom of 
religion, discrimination against women, and severe restrictions on civil liberties including 
speech, press, assembly, association, movement and privacy. (Admin Not 1, Doc 5 at 1; 
Doc 4 at 8.)  
 
 The U.S. State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens and U.S.–Iranian 
dual citizens to consider carefully the risks of travel to Iran. Some elements of the 
Iranian regime remain hostile to the U.S. and U.S. citizens. U.S.-Iranian dual citizens 
may be subject to harassment or arrest while residing in Iran. (Admin Not 1, Doc 3.) 
Iranian born, naturalized U.S. citizens, and the children of such persons, are considered 
solely Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. (Admin Not 1, Doc 2 at 1.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated January 14, 2008, Applicant admitted to all the 
SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old senior electronic engineer employed with a 
Department of Defense contractor. He has worked for the same employer since 1975. 
The company has changed names several times due to mergers and buyouts. He has a 
bachelor of science degree in electronic engineering. He has held a security clearance 
since 1975 with no security incidents.  He is divorced and has four adult sons. (Tr at 13-
18, 20-22; Gov 1.)   
 
Applicant was born and raised in Iran. He attended elementary and high school 
in Iran. His senior year he attended a boarding school in Tehran. He applied to attend 
the University of Tehran but was not accepted. In 1963, at the age of 18, Applicant 
immigrated to the U.S. He attended high school and night school in order to learn 
 
3 
 
 
English. He worked various jobs and attended college, eventually earning his college 
degree. (Tr at 13-15.) 
 
Applicant met and married his first wife in the U.S. She is an American citizen, 
born and raised in the U.S.  Two sons were born of the marriage. They are now 39 and 
40. The marriage ended in divorce. In September 1982, Applicant remarried. His 
second wife is an American citizen, born and raised in the U.S.  Two sons were born of 
the marriage. They are now 24 and 22.  His second marriage ended in divorce in 
October 2003. (Tr at 20-23; Gov 1, sections 13/15, 14/15; AE P.)  All of Applicant’s sons 
were born and raised in the U.S.  They have never traveled to Iran. None of his son’s 
speak Farsi. His two older sons live in another state and operate their own businesses.  
His oldest son has two children, ages five and three. His second youngest son serves 
on active duty in the U.S. Navy. His youngest son resides with Applicant and is a 
college student. (Tr at 23-25.)  
 
Applicant’s brother is a U.S. citizen and resides in another state. He is a medical 
doctor. Applicant and his brother speak over the telephone about once a month. He last 
saw his brother four years ago when his brother attended a conference nearby the city  
where Applicant resides. (Tr at 28, 50, 55.)  
 
His mother is 90-years-old and lives in the same city in Iran where Applicant 
grew up. His mother is a housewife. Applicant’s father was a doctor. He passed away in 
the 1970s. His mother is a housewife. His sister is 58-years-old and resides in Iran. She 
takes care of his mother. She was an urban planner but Applicant is not sure what she 
does now. She used to be married but he is not sure of the status of her marriage.  He 
no longer speaks to his mother on the telephone because she has difficulty hearing. 
The last time he spoke to his mother was about a year and half ago. He talks to his 
sister about two to three times a year to see how things are doing.  Her son is an Iranian 
citizen currently attending college in a European country. Applicant is not sure what his 
nephew intends to do after graduation but is pretty sure that his nephew does not want 
to return to Iran. He used to talk on the telephone with his nephew about once a month. 
He now talks to his nephew about four times a year. His nephew calls him. None of his 
family members know what Applicant does for a living. (Tr at 25-33, 50; Gov 2 at 19, 
29.)     
 
Since moving to the U.S. in 1963, Applicant has not traveled back to Iran. He did 
not attend his father’s funeral when he passed away in the 1970s because he did not 
think it was safe. He has no intention of traveling to Iran. His mother came to the U.S. to 
visit Applicant and his brother in the 1970s, and once again in 1985. His sister traveled 
to the U.S. with his mother in the 1970s. The last time Applicant physically saw his 
mother was in 1985. He has never traveled outside the U.S. after moving to the U.S. He 
does not send money to his mother, sister, or nephew. He does not intend to travel to 
Iran when his mother dies. He has no contact with any other Iranian citizens. He does 
not have Iranian friends. (Tr at 25-34.)  
 
 
4 
 
 
On March 30, 1973, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. He states that the U.S. is a 
land of opportunity.  If you work hard and go the school, you can improve your situation 
in life. Applicant started out mowing lawns on weekends for $2 and now earns 
$100,000/year. (Tr at 34-35; AE I; AE M.) Applicant does not own any property in Iran 
and has no assets in Iran. Applicant owns his home in the U.S. All of his investment and 
retirement benefits are located in the U.S. (Tr at 36-37; AE K; AE L.) 
 
In 2005, at the suggestion of his brother, Applicant obtained an Iranian passport. 
He obtained the passport in order to obtain a power of attorney for his sister to give her 
control over his mother’s possessions should something happen to his mother. He had 
to have a valid Iranian passport in order to obtain a power of attorney that was valid in 
Iran. His brother did this as well. Applicant never used his Iranian passport for travel. He 
surrendered his Iranian passport to his security official, who destroyed it. He does not 
intend to apply for another Iranian passport. (Tr at 42-45, 51; Gov 1, section 7; Gov 2 at 
2-4, 27-28, 33-54; AE O.)     
 
Applicant’s superiors, peers and subordinates all give Applicant stellar reviews of 
his work performance. (AE A-G.) They include a senior manager at Applicant’s 
company who has known Applicant professionally for over 20 years. He states Applicant 
has unique technical abilities. Applicant’s ability to work with others on a very diverse 
team has always impressed him. Applicant is a great mentor to younger, junior 
employees. He diligently follows company rules. (AE A.) The Security Manager at 
Applicant’s company states she has known and worked with Applicant for over 30 
years. She sees him on a weekly basis. She is not aware of any security violations by 
Applicant. She finds him trustworthy. (AE D.) The Vice President of Operations has 
known Applicant for 25 years. They started out in the same department when they 
began their careers. At present, Applicant works in the department that he leads. He 
states Applicant is an integral part of the organization’s success. Applicant is a person 
of high integrity. In the past 25 years, he has not seen anything in Applicant’s character, 
work ethic, or behavior that would cause him to question Applicant’s qualification to 
retain his clearance. (AE G.) All of the individuals who submitted references on 
Applicant’s behalf were aware of the security issues raised in the SOR.  
 
Applicant’s performance evaluations for 2005, 2006, and 2007 indicate that he 
meets or exceeds requirements. (AE H.) His work ethic has been recognized through 
numerous awards and decorations throughout this career. (AE N.) Applicant’s son who 
serves on active duty in the U.S. Navy wrote a letter on his father’s behalf.  He currently 
serves on an aircraft carrier. He states that his father’s love for America is one of the 
reasons why he enlisted in the Navy. His father is very proud that his son is serving in 
the U.S. Navy. Applicant is a great father who loves his family. He states that his father 
is always working and loves his work. He takes pride in being a mentor to the younger 
employees at work. (AE Q.)  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG &6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. Of the Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC), the following apply 
to Applicant’s case. 
 
Foreign Influence Disqualifying Condition (FI DC) ¶ 7(c) (contact with a family 
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of 
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) applies because 
Applicant’s mother and sister are citizens of and reside in Iran, a country that is clearly 
hostile to the U.S. An additional concern is raised because Applicant’s nephew is a 
citizen of Iran, residing in Europe. FI DC ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, 
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group or country by providing that information) may also 
raise security concerns. The Iranian government has committed serious human rights 
abuses against it people. Applicant’s immediate family in Iran creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also a creates 
a potential conflict of interest.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Foreign Influence. I find the following Foreign Influence Mitigating 
Conditions (FI MC) apply to Applicant’s case. 
 
Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition (FI MC) ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the 
relationship with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the 
position or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the 
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.) 
Family contacts and ties with persons in a foreign country are not automatically 
disqualifying but require the applicant to present evidence in mitigation and extenuation 
 
7 
 
 
that he qualifies for a security clearance. Iran’s hostile relationship with the United 
States and the country’s poor human rights record place “a heavy burden of persuasion 
on applicant to show his family members do not pose a security risk. (See, ISCR Case 
No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug 4, 2006).  Applicant has met that burden. While 
Applicant has family ties in Iran, the people he is closest to, his four sons and two 
grandchildren, are citizens of and reside in the U.S.  While Applicant has contact with 
his family members overseas, he does not travel to Iran to visit them. He does not call 
them on a regular basis. He has never sent them money.  It is unlikely that Applicant will 
be placed in a position to choose between his family members and the interests of the 
U.S.       
 
FI MC ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, or government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest) applies.  While Applicant’s mother and sister reside in Iran, he has 
lived in the U.S for most of his life. Applicant has lived in the U.S. since 1963 after 
moving here as an 18-year-old. He attended college in the U.S. He has been a U.S. 
citizen for 35 years. He has possessed a security clearance and worked in the defense 
industry for over 33 years. He has not traveled back to Iran since he immigrated to the 
United States 45 years ago. In fact, he has never traveled outside the U.S. He has not 
seen his mother since 1985. He did not travel to Iran to attend his father’s funeral. He 
has no intention of returning to Iran. All of his assets are in the U.S. The people he 
cares most about, his four sons, were born and raised in the U.S.  His sons have never 
traveled to Iran. Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
U.S. indicate Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
U.S. interests. FI MC ¶ 8(b) applies.  
    
Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. 
outweigh any potential for conflict because of Applicant’s relationship to his mother and 
sister who reside in Iran or his nephew, a citizen of Iran residing in Europe.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
 
8 
 
 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is hostile to the U.S., and the heavy burden 
an applicant carries when he has family members in a hostile country. I considered that 
Applicant is a highly regarded engineer who has lived in the U.S. for over 45 of his 62 
years. He became a U.S. citizen in 1973. He has never returned to Iran since moving to 
the U.S., even when his father passed away in the 1970s. Both of his wives were U.S. 
citizens. His children were born and raised in the U.S.  They have never been to Iran. 
All of his children reside in the U.S.  All of his assets are located in the U.S. His mother 
has visited him only twice during the 45 years he has lived in the U.S. He has not seen 
his mother in 23 years. He has worked with the defense industry since 1975. Over this 
33 year period, he held a security clearance with no security violations. His superiors, 
peers and co-workers comment favorably about his integrity, character, and work ethic. 
While Applicant’s family members living in Iran raise a potential security threat due to 
the very nature of familial relationships, Applicant’s significant ties to the U.S. mitigate 
the security threat. His deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. 
strongly support the premise that Applicant would resolve any attempt to exert pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the U.S.   
 
Guideline B is a security concern that affects applicants through no fault of their 
own. The current nature of the Iranian government and the hostile relationship between 
Iran and the U.S. make it a substantial burden to mitigate the concerns raised under 
foreign influence.  In Applicant’s case, his significant personal relationships and 
contacts within the U.S. outweigh the concerns raised by having relatives who are 
citizens and reside in Iran. Overall, the record evidence leaves no questions or doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Foreign Influence 
security concerns are mitigated. 
  
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                              
   
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
