 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 In the matter of: 
 ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 08-01131 
                                                            )                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.   His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on August 1, 
2007. On March 27, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On April 15, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested that his 
case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing.  The Government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 2, 2008. The FORM contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 7.  By letter dated June 3, 2008, a copy of the FORM was 
forwarded to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and/or 
objections within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the file on June 9, 2008.  His 
response was due on July 9, 2008. He submitted three additional documents within the 
required time period.  Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s submissions. 
On July 2, 2008, the case was assigned to me for a decision. After reviewing Applicant’s 
submissions, I marked them as Applicant’s exhibits (Ex.) A, B, and C and admitted them 
to the record in this case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He and his wife have been married since 1969.  Since 
1997, Applicant has been employed as a test technician by a defense contractor.  He 
has held a security clearance since 1997. (Item 5.) 
 
 The SOR contains 28 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.ab.) The 28 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR 
total $76,179. (Item 1.)  Of the 28 allegations of financial delinquency in the SOR, 23 
were identified and listed on Applicant’s credit bureau report of March 11, 2008, and five 
were identified and listed on his credit bureau report of August 23, 2007. (Item 6; Item 
7.) In his Answer to the SOR, dated April 15, 2008, Applicant admitted 27 of the 
allegations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.q. and ¶¶ 1.s. through 1.ab.) Applicant’s admissions are 
admitted herein as findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant denied the allegation at SOR ¶1.r. and presented a photocopy of the 
face of a personal check in the amount of $1,716.38, dated October 8, 2007, and made 
out to the alleged creditor. He also asserted that the allegation he admitted at ¶1.n. was 
a duplicate of the allegation he admitted at ¶ 1.e. Applicant’s credit bureau report of 
August 23, 2007, lists two accounts with the same creditor for SOR ¶1.e. and SOR ¶1.n. 
The account numbers for the two debts are not the same and do not match. The debt 
alleged at ¶1.e was referred for collection in June 2004; the debt identified at ¶ 1.n. was 
referred for collection in October 2006. (Item 3; Item 7.)  
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated he had contacted a representative 
of the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.l. and had made an offer to settle the account. He 
further stated that the creditor had responded with a counter offer.  He did not indicate 
whether he and the creditor had reached a settlement agreement. (Ex. A.) 
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant also provided a statement from the creditor 
identified at ¶1. z. showing he had paid the past due debt alleged in the SOR and, as of 
April 11, 2008, his account with that creditor was paid in full. (Ex. B.)  Also in response 
to the FORM, Applicant provided a document which purported to show that a debt of 
$50, alleged at SOR ¶1.m. as in collection status since July 2004, had been satisfied.  
 
3 
 
 
However, the document did not show the debt had been satisfied but, instead, showed 
a balance due of $30. (Ex. C.) 
 
 Thirteen of Applicant’s delinquent accounts were placed for collection in 2004, 
and three of his delinquent accounts were identified as bad debts in 2004. (Item 1, ¶¶ 
1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., 1.g., 1.h., 1.j., 1.k., 1.l., 1.m., 1.o., 1.p., 1.q., 1.v., 1.ab.)   
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he had applied for credit counseling 
with his credit union. He further stated that because the credit counselors at the credit 
union had a heavy work load, they were unable to schedule him for credit counseling 
until late in May 2008. Applicant stated that the credit union credit counselors had 
referred him to an alternative credit counseling service.  In his response to the FORM, 
Applicant reported he had completed one credit counseling session with the alternative 
credit counseling service.  (Item 4; Ex. A.)  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant provided credible documentation to corroborate his 
assertion that one of his debts had been satisfied. In his response to the FORM, 
Applicant asserted he had satisfied a debt for $56, alleged at ¶ 1.z., that was allegedly 
120 days past due. His Ex. B corroborated Appellant’s assertion that the account was 
satisfied. The SOR allegation at ¶ 1.z. is concluded for Applicant. 
 
However, as Applicant’s 27 remaining delinquencies demonstrate, he 
accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unwilling or unable to satisfy his 
creditors over a considerable period of time. This evidence is sufficient to raise security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).  
 
The financial considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that 
could mitigate security concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F 
 
5 
 
 
mitigating conditions could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial 
delinquencies. Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it happened so 
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. (AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be 
mitigated if the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control, such as loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances 
that might be applicable include evidence the person has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control (AG ¶ 20(c), or the individual has initiated a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. (AG ¶ 20 (d)) Finally, an 
applicant can offer in mitigation documentary evidence to establish that he or she has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of a past due debt and has taken action to 
resolve the issue. (AG ¶ 20(e).)   
 
Many of Applicant=s financial delinquencies arose in calendar year 2004 and 
have not been satisfied. He offered no explanation for the significant debt which 
continues to the present day, a situation that raises concerns about his judgment and 
reliability.   
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied responsibility for the debt alleged at 
¶1.r.  As evidence of payment, he offered a photocopy of the face of a personal check 
made out to the creditor.  He failed to provide evidence that the check was received and 
negotiated by the creditor. He also failed to provide evidence from the creditor that the 
debt was satisfied. 
 
Applicant asserted that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. duplicates and repeats the 
debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.n.  Applicant’s credit bureau report of August 23, 2007, lists two 
accounts with the same creditor for SOR ¶1.e. and SOR ¶1.n. The account numbers for 
the two debts are not the same and do not match. Applicant provided no documentation 
to corroborate his assertion that the debt alleged at ¶1.e. was a duplicate of the debt 
alleged at ¶1.n.  Additionally, Applicant, in his response to the FORM, asserted that Ex. 
C established satisfaction of the debt alleged at ¶ 1.m., a debt for $50 that had been 
placed for collection in 2004. However, Applicant’s Ex. C was a request for payment 
from the creditor for $30 and failed to establish that the debt of $50 had been satisfied. 
 
Applicant has been steadily employed with his current employer for 
approximately 11 years.  During that time, Applicant has not contacted the majority of 
his creditors to arrange payment plans or to initiate settlement.  He sought credit 
counseling only recently, and, in his response to the FORM, he noted he had attended 
one session of credit counseling. I conclude that that none of the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions fully apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Appellant is a mature person with a 
lifetime of financial experience. He accumulated over $70,000 in delinquent debt and 
failed to arrange payment or satisfaction of the majority of those debts over a period of 
years. He offered no information that his financial delinquencies resulted from 
circumstances beyond his control. Applicant’s unwillingness to address his financial 
delinquencies suggests that they will continue and likely recur.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.y.: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.z.:   For Applicant 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.aa. and 1.ab.: Against Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
