 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-01218 
 SSN: -----------  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on May 18, 2007. On 
March 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and E 
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 2, 2008; answered it on April 
15, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on April 17, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 21, 2008, 
and the case was assigned to me on May 8, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
May 12, 2008, scheduling the hearing for May 29, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) 
A through I, which were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to 
keep the record open until June 13, 2008 to enable him to submit additional 
documentary evidence. Applicant timely submitted AX J through O, and they were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s response to AX J through O is 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 
5, 2008. The record closed on June 13, 2008. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel offered GX 5, a personal subject interview extracted from a 
report of investigation, without calling an authenticating witness as required by the 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. I explained the authentication requirement to Applicant, and he 
waived it (Tr. 27-29).  Accordingly, I admitted GX 5.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 
1.f, and 2.a. At the hearing, he denied the allegation of falsifying his security clearance 
application alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a (Tr. 16). His admissions in his answer to the SOR and 
at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old configuration and data management analyst for a 
defense contractor. He served in the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) from July 1996 to July 
2001. He held a clearance while in the USMC, but he does not currently have a 
clearance (Tr. 9).  
 
Applicant was employed as a radar technician for a private company from July 
2001 to December 2002. He has been self-employed as a digital media developer from 
January 2003 to the present. He began working for his current employer in November 
2005. He had a brief period, from May to July 2007, when he had no income except for 
his USMC disability pay. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose while he was in college and working part time 
(Tr. 52; GX 5). He attended a community college from May 2003 to December 2004, 
and completed the requirements for a bachelor’s degree in business administration at a 
local university in May 2007 (AX H). He received certification from the Institute of 
Certified Professional Managers in February 2008 (AX I). Since July 2007, he has been 
enrolled in his employer’s leadership development program (Tr. 39). He intends to enroll 
 
3 
 
 
in graduate school in January 2009 to obtain a master’s degree in business 
administration (Tr. 8). 
 
Applicant purchased a new 2005 Nissan Altima while in school, despite his 
reduced income. The purchase was necessitated when his old 1999 Ford became 
inoperable and required expensive repairs. He was still making payments on the old car 
and could not afford a second car loan. After researching the market and consulting with 
knowledgeable family members, he concluded he could obtain a more favorable loan by 
trading in his old car and purchasing a new car (Tr. 80-83). His car payments are 
current, and this debt is not among the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant’s manager and mentor in the leadership development program 
describes him as mature, trustworthy, highly ethical, reliable, responsible, and a strong 
leader (AX G). His roommate and coworker for the past six months considers him 
trustworthy, responsible, very capable, and highly motivated. He also describes him as 
devoted to his family and attentive to his financial obligations (AX K). Two of his 
supervisors wrote letters of recommendation supporting his application for graduate 
school. One commented that Applicant was “the most promising individual [he has] 
worked with” in the leadership development program (AX M). The other commented on 
his maturity, poise, problem-solving skills, and leadership (AX N). 
 
 The debt for telephone service alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a arose while Applicant was 
on active duty in the USMC. When he was contacted by a collection agency, he did not 
remember the debt because it was so old, and he disputed it. Since the debt was so old 
and for such a small amount, the collection agency decided not to pursue its collection 
efforts any further (Tr. 41; AX A). 
 
 The delinquent telephone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b arose when Applicant moved 
out of an apartment because of roommate problems, but the telephone was not 
disconnected. Applicant has settled the debt (Tr. 42; AX B; AX L). 
 
 Applicant was married in February 1998, separated in 2002, and divorced in 
August 2005. They had two cars, both in Applicant’s name. When they separated, his 
ex-wife agreed to take possession of one car and make the payments. She was unable 
to make the payments and unable to refinance the car in her name. In 2003 Applicant 
and his ex-wife agreed to let the car be repossessed, resulting in the delinquent debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c (Tr. 43-46; AX C). Applicant contacted the creditor shortly after the 
repossession and was informed he could settle the debt for about $6,000. He was in 
school, had limited income, and could not afford to pay the entire debt (Tr. 67-68). In 
January 2008, Applicant contacted the creditor and requested that a monthly payment 
plan be established for the debt (GX 4). When he did not receive a response, he called 
the creditor, who told him that he could make voluntary partial payments if he wished, 
but they would not establish a formal payment plan (Tr. 63). Applicant had made no 
partial payments as of the date the record closed. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d arose when Applicant leased an apartment after 
his divorce and shared it with a friend. Applicant moved out before the end of the lease 
and agreed to allow his roommate to continue living in the apartment. The friend 
damaged the apartment and departed without cleaning it. The debt represents the cost 
of repairs and cleaning. Applicant has negotiated a payment plan for this debt and made 
two payments in May 2008, one for $200 and one for $253 (Tr. 46-48); AX E). The 
collection agency has informed Applicant that it will compromise the amount due and 
settle the debt for about $1,600, if he continues to make regular payments (Tr. 90).  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e arose from Applicant’s purchase of a vacuum 
cleaner from a door-to-door salesman while he was still in the USMC (GX 5). He 
testified he and his then-wife had “buyer’s regret” immediately after the purchase and 
returned it, relying on a 30-day money back guarantee. He testified he received a letter 
acknowledging return of the vacuum cleaner, but he no longer has a copy of it (Tr. 91). 
Applicant wrote two letters to the collection agency in May 2008, asking for verification 
of the debt and offering to make arrangements for payment of any outstanding balance 
(AX F). He has received no response to his letters (Tr. 50-52).  
 
 In a personal financial statement executed in February 2008, Applicant reported 
a gross monthly salary of $3,923.08, net monthly income (including USMC disability 
pay) of $3,684.64, expenses of $2,368.64, debt payments of $905, and a net monthly 
remainder of $411 (GX 4). As of June 1, 2008, his gross monthly salary had increased 
to about $4,300 (AX O). Applicant has not sought credit counseling (Tr. 92). 
 
 The evidence concerning the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is summarized 
in the table below. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status at Hearing Evidence 
1.a Telephone $75 Collection Abandoned AX A; Tr. 41 
1.b Telephone $288 Settled AX B; AX L 
1.c Auto repossession $7,506 Not resolved AX C; Tr. 63 
1.d Damage to apartment $3,237 Monthly payments AX E;  
Tr. 46-48, 90 
1.e Vacuum Cleaner $2,054 Not resolved; no response 
from collection agency 
AX F;  
Tr. 50-52, 91 
 
 On his security clearance application dated May 18, 2007, Applicant answered 
“yes” to question 27d, asking if he had any judgments against him in the last seven 
years that were unpaid, and he disclosed a small claims court judgment entered against 
him in May 2001. However, he answered “no” questions 27b, 28a, and 28b concerning 
delinquent debts. Question 27b asked if he had any property repossessed for any 
reason in the last seven years. Question 28a asked if he had been more than 180 days 
delinquent on any debt in the last seven years. Question 28b asked if he was currently 
more than 90 days delinquent on any debt. He did not disclose any of the delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant had obtained a copy of his credit report in the summer of 2006, and he 
was aware that several collection accounts were listed (GX 5; Tr. 69). In November 
2007, he told a security investigator that his omission of the delinquent debts from his 
security clearance application was an oversight (GX 5). At the hearing, he testified he 
answered “no” to questions 28a and 28b because he was not delinquent on any current 
accounts, and he did not think the questions applied to collection accounts (Tr. 52-54). 
He also testified he was taking final exams, working part time, under a lot of stress 
when he filled out the application (Tr. 54). On cross-examination he testified it took him 
“a few days” to complete the application (Tr. 71). He admitted he was aware of several 
delinquent debts when he completed it (Tr. 77). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e). It also alleges Applicant 
did not subtract payments for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e from the net monthly 
remainder reported on his personal financial statement executed on February 15, 2008 
(SOR ¶ 1.f). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f does not allege that the personal financial statement was intentionally 
falsified. At the time it was executed, the personal financial statement was accurate, 
because Applicant was not making payments on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e. I 
resolve this allegation in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
 
7 
 
 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@  
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e).  
 
Even though Applicant purchased a new car in 2005, when he was on a limited 
income, the purchase was not “frivolous or irresponsible” under the circumstances. His 
old vehicle was inoperable and required expensive repairs. After researching the market 
and consulting with family and friends, he determined it was more economically prudent 
to purchase a new car with more favorable loan terms. Accordingly, I conclude AG ¶ 
19(b) is not raised by this purchase. 
 
The purchase of a $2,000 vacuum cleaner was arguably “frivolous,” but Applicant 
and his then-wife quickly recognized their mistake and returned it. Even though 
Applicant no longer has any documentation of the return, I found his testimony on this 
point plausible and credible. He has tried in good faith to determine if there is any 
remaining balance on the ill-advised purchase. Since Applicant returned the frivolous 
purchase within days and in accordance with the purchase agreement, I conclude AG ¶ 
19(b) is not raised by this purchase. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
 The first two prongs (“so long ago” and “so infrequent”) are not established 
because Applicant incurred multiple delinquent debts, some of which remain 
unresolved. The third prong (“unlikely to recur”) is established for the auto repossession 
(SOR ¶ 1.c) because that debt resulted from the marital breakup and the consequent 
reduction in Applicant’s income, but it is not established for the other debts. The final 
prong is not established because Applicant has not yet established a track record of 
financial responsibility.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e. conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
Applicant’s separation and eventual divorce, the damage to an apartment by a 
former roommate, and his brief period without income from May to July 2005 were 
conditions beyond his control. His reduced income while attending college, while not 
imprudent, was a voluntary act on his part. The two delinquent telephone bills arose 
before the conditions beyond his control. Thus, I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable 
to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
 
Applicant attempted to verify the debt attributable to the vacuum cleaner 
purchase, and he has negotiated a payment plan for the apartment damage. However, 
he has made no partial payments on the repossession deficiency alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, 
even though the creditor is willing to accept partial payments and Applicant now has the 
apparent ability to make partial payments. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e, but not for ¶ 1.c. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not sought counseling. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@  ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance. Applicant has resolved the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a and 1.b and is making the agreed payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. However, 
as of the date the record closed, Applicant had finished school and had been working 
full time for nearly a year, but he had not made any payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c, 
even though the creditor informed him it would accept voluntary partial payments. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established for SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d, but not for 1.c. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
disputed the debt for the vacuum cleaner in SOR ¶ 1.e. He asked the collection agency 
to verify whether any balance is due, but has not received a response. I conclude AG ¶ 
20(e) is established for the vacuum cleaner debt. 
 
9 
 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant falsified his security clearance application by 
answering “no” to questions 28a and 28b and failing to disclose the delinquent debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e.  
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 At the time Applicant executed his security clearance application, he was a 
mature adult with a college degree in business administration. He had been through the 
security clearance process when he was in the USMC. He demonstrated at the hearing 
that he was intelligent and articulate. His mental acumen is verified by the glowing 
recommendations he has received from his supervisors. He had examined his credit 
report in 2006 and was aware of his delinquent debts. He knew delinquent debts raised 
a security concern. I found his explanations for his failure to disclose his delinquent 
debts implausible and not credible. I conclude AG ¶ 16(a) is raised, shifting the burden 
to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant made no effort to correct his omissions until he was 
confronted with the facts by a security investigator in November 2007. AG ¶ 17(a) is not 
established. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Intentional 
falsification is a felony under 10 U.S.C. § 1001, and not “minor.” Applicant’s conduct is 
recent because it occurred during his current application for a clearance. It is not 
“infrequent” because Applicant has persisted in offering implausible and inconsistent 
explanations for his failing to disclose his delinquent debts on his security clearance 
application. It did not happen under “unique circumstances,” but rather as part of a 
routine security clearance application. Finally, it casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. No other 
enumerated mitigating conditions are established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a talented and highly motivated employee. He served honorably in 
the USMC, and he has worked hard to continue his education and improve his 
professional qualifications. He held a security clearance for many years, apparently 
without incident. Even if Applicant had mitigated the security concern based on financial 
considerations, his lack of candor on his security clearance application would leave me 
with doubts about his reliability and trustworthiness. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns based on financial considerations and personal conduct. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
