                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX,XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-00015 
 SSN: XXXXXXXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 6, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 8, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and 
revised.1 The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
1On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a 
memorandum directing application of revised Adjudicative Guidelines to all adjudications and other 
determinations made under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, 
 2
                                                                                                                                                                              
Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for her, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On March 6, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 28, 2008, was 
provided to her, and she was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.2 Applicant did not submit any 
information within the 30-day time period after receiving a copy of the FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on June 24, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. I make the following additional findings of 
fact:  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old parts inspector, who has worked for her 
government contractor employer since July 2007. She is a first-time applicant for 
a security clearance. She attended an agricultural and technical state university 
from August 1981 to December 1986, and was awarded a diploma. Applicant has 
been married since June 1992, and has a 15-year-old daughter, and a 12-year-old 
son.3 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her e-QIP,4 her January 2008 credit bureau report,5 and 
her September 2007 credit bureau report.6 The government established by 
Applicant’s admissions and evidence presented that Applicant has six delinquent 
Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was 
issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s 
case. 
 
2 Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated Mar. 28, 
2008; and Applicant acknowledged receipt on Apr. 15, 2008, which DOHA received on Apr. 18, 
2008. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after Applicant’s 
receipt to submit information. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Id. 
 
5 Item 5. 
 
6 Item 6. 
 3
                                                          
debts totaling $25,876. These debts appear to be delinquent since 2005 - 2006. 
Applicant offered no documentation that any of her debts have been paid, that she 
has set up payment plans, nor has she submitted any evidence that she 
contacted any creditors. Furthermore, Applicant did not submit any evidence of 
extenuating circumstances or character evidence. The only input provided by 
Applicant was her handwritten admissions on the face of her SOR. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-
arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 
¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have 
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”7 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified 
information. Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a 
disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to 
7 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a 
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary 
evidence in the record.” ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ 
E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing 
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being 
supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 
(1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 4
                                                          
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case 
No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).8 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),9 the Government’s concern 
is that an Applicant’s 
 
 “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.” 
 
 Applicant acknowledged her indebtedness through her admissions. Her 
admissions are corroborated by government exhibits. In the absence of further 
 
8 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable 
and unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent 
provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion 
under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
9  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
 5
information, I am unable to glean any further information, favorable or 
unfavorable, with regard to identified financial concerns. 
 
¶ 19. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt 
or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt. 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account 
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial 
breaches of trust; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, 
high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; 
 
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, 
gambling problems, or other issues of security concern; 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
 
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of 
living, increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be 
explained by subject's known legal sources of income; and 
 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets 
or returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of 
gambling losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay 
gambling debts, family conflict or other problems caused by 
gambling. 
 
Of the nine Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) 
listed supra, two are applicable: ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
and FC DC ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
¶ 20. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,10 I conclude none of the six 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) are applicable or partially 
applicable. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented little or no evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”11 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has 
mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is 
not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
10  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.f.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
