 1
                      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
  
In the matter of:    ) 
    ) 
 -----------------------------                      )   
  SSN: --------------                              ) 
        )  
Applicant for Security Clearance    ) 
 
 
  
ISCR Case No. 08-00351 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel   
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). He mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline (Personal Conduct). 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on June 19, 2007. 
On March 27, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns for Applicant under Guidelines 
F (Financial) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
  
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 23, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 1, 
2008, and I received the case assignment on May 5, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on May 7, 2008, for a hearing on May 30, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the government offered five exhibits (Exh.) which were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant submitted 17 exhibits which were admitted without 
objection. He testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on June 11, 2008. I granted Applicant=s request to keep the record open until June 30, 
2008, to submit additional evidence. One  additional document was received and admitted 
without objection. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but one (SOR & 1.r) of the 22 
allegations in the SOR relating to approximately $60,000 in delinquent debts. He denied the 
one personal conduct allegation (SOR & 2.a.). 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a government contractor working as an 
avionics technician since May 2006. He did similar work while on active duty as an E 6 in 
the Air Force for 14 years and for other defense contractors. He is married with two 
children, a son who is 20 and enlisting in the Marines and a daughter who is 18 living at 
home. 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in November 2000 and it was discharged in 
February 2001 (SOR & 1.u. and v.). Most of the debts which were discharged arose from 
unsuccessful real estate investments.  
 
 The principal sources of the delinquent debts alleged were from three auto 
repossessions totaling $45,000 (SOR && 1.l., 1.m., 1.o., and 1.p.), and medical bills for his 
daughter totaling $7,000 (SOR && 1.a-i.). There was an additional $2,000 of medical bills 
not alleged in the SOR which were paid. The remaining debts in the SOR were from a 
variety of sources such as cell phones and other consumer services. Although Applicant 
admitted all but one of the debts in his answer, at the hearing he questioned the validity of 
some and believed that one for insurance (SOR & 1.s.) had been paid. He offered no 
supporting evidence.   
 
 Applicant believes that one of the four auto repossession allegations were subsumed 
in one of the others and that the total owed is approximately $35,000. He entered into an 
agreement with a law firm to pay $250 per month on the repossessions but failed to 
continue the payments after $600 was paid (Tr. 32).  Other than this effort very little contact 
has been made with the creditors after he determined that creditors were demanding large 
payments which he could not make (Tr. 51 and 52).  None of the alleged debts have been 
paid in full including several of the medical debts below $100.  
 
 3
 One allegation concerns a state tax lien for $629 (SOR & 1.t.). That debt is also the 
subject of the allegation under Guideline B relating to failure to reveal it on his SF 86 in 
answer to  Question 27. He denied knowing about the lien (Exh. Q) until he received the 
SOR. He has been in negotiation with the state tax authorities who have withheld payment 
of his tax refund for 2007 of $250 to apply against the lien.  The matter has not been fully 
resolved (Tr. 72).  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he and his wife were not living within their means when 
many of the debts occurred, and that they had acted irresponsibly (Tr. 56). However, their 
problems were compounded when their daughter was assaulted while a hospitalized 
medical patient. They reacted to this event by leaving their home and employment in the 
south and moving to the northwest for a year where he had no significant employment. Two 
auto repossessions occurred when they left for the northwest leaving the cars to be 
repossessed by the creditors. A third auto repossession occurred when they left the 
northwest a year later to return to the south because the death of his father-in-law and 
assistance required of them for his mother-in-law.  He was re-employed in his former job 
upon their return.  
 
 At the time of the hearing, Applicant had not sought credit counseling as he did not 
think they could help him. He had thought about filing a second Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
petition but was concerned that to do so would further jeopardize his security clearance (Tr. 
58). He had no plan to resolve his financial problems. After the hearing he did seek credit 
counseling and so advised me in his post-hearing submission.  The service declined to 
work with him as they did not feel they could help him. 
  
 Applicant=s annual salary from his employment is approximately $60,000. His wife is 
a nurse whose income last year was approximately $45,000 when she was working in 
another state. She is again employed in their home state.  They hope to begin paying their 
debts but recognize that it will take substantial time with the limited funds that they have 
after paying their expenses as revealed in their budget analysis. 
  
  Applicant lives within the family income. They have two smaller autos for which they 
pay a total of $650 per month in payments. They have no credit cards. When they left for 
the northwest, their home was foreclosed so they now rent a home  for $1,500 per month 
(Tr. 47-50).  
  
Applicant is well regarded in his work by his supervisors (Exhs. E - G, and  L - P) 
and has received several awards from his company (Exhs. H –J). He has shown steady 
growth in the company and is on a steady rise in his evaluations.  
 
      Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative 
judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 4
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities 
of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting Awitnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .@ The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites for access to 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
 5
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under AG 
& 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying. Similarly 
under AG & 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise security 
concerns. Applicant accumulated the delinquent debts cited in the SOR and was unable or 
unwilling to pay the obligations for several years. Thus, the evidence clearly raises these 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG & 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Most of Applicant=s 
financial problems arose in the past four years when he had medical expenses for his 
daughter and precipitously left his job and home to move to another state leaving property 
and debts.  
 
 Applicant and his wife are now employed with a combined income of over $100,000 
per annum the past year. Yet no action has been taken to resolve even the smallest of the 
delinquent debts.  While several of the alleged debts in the SOR appear to be duplicative or 
erroneous, even when those are mitigated, significant debts remain that are unresolved 
with no plan to pay them other than a hope to do so.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), the security concern also may be mitigating where Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control 
(e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a 
death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.@ As noted above, some of the financial problems arose from his medical 
problems and periods of reduced income. However, his actions since the debts arose 
cannot be deemed responsible as he has admitted. He has paid only two debts totaling less 
than $2,000 and these were not on the SOR.  
 
 AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows the individual initiated a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. Applicant’s contacts with 
creditors has been minimal. While it is not necessary for mitigation to apply that all of the 
delinquent debts be resolved, it is necessary that a significant portion of this many debts be 
settled or paid. I believe this test has not been met. He should have taken steps earlier to 
resolve some of the debts. He has only recently attempted to obtain credit counseling. 
While he was rejected for the credit counseling service, had he sought it earlier, a different 
result might have been obtained. Thus, the mitigating conditions do not apply. 
 
 6
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 
15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes the condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
Applicant is alleged to have failed to report the state tax lien for $629 (SOR& 1. t.). 
At the hearing he testified credibly that he was unaware of the lien until he received the 
SOR.   
 
The requirement in the guideline is that the omission be deliberate, I find that the 
omission alleged was not deliberate. Security concerns pertaining to personal conduct are 
mitigated. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant=s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual=s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
 7
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has incurred expenses growing 
out of the medical problems of his daughter but the actions he has taken in leaving his job 
and abandoning property to be repossessed seems somewhat irrational and not illustrative 
of the best judgment. Since his return to his old job and his place of residence, he has been 
well employed as was his wife. However, none of  the debts alleged in the SOR have been 
resolved. Even smaller ones which would seem to have been easily paid were not.  He has 
no real plan to resolve them that would lead me to conclude that such will be done. 
  
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from these financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.:For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.q.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.r.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.s.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.t.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.u.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.v.: Against Applicant 
 
                      Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a.:  For Applicant 
 8
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_____________________
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge 
