KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant requests that he be granted a security clearance for one year and, after that
year, his credit history be checked to see how he is doing. The Appeal Board, however, does not
have authority to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASE NO: 12-07700.a1
DATE: 09/21/2016
DATE: September 21, 2016   
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-07700
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 22, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 20, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Michael H. Leonard denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant on the Guideline E allegations
and against him on several Guideline F allegations.  The favorable findings were not raised as an
issue on appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s unfavorable clearance
decision.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant, who is 51 years old, has worked for his current employer since early 2015. 
Before that, he worked in the same job for a different company for about 16 years.  He has never
been married, but has a longtime fiancée.  They have lived together and shared expenses for many
years. 
Applicant testified about two periods of unemployment stemming from a kidney transplant
in 1994.  The first period occurred during 2002-2005 and the second during 2011-2013.  During
those periods, he received about 60% of his income though a combination of short-term and long-
term disability payments.
The SOR alleged 16 delinquent accounts totaling about $26,000.  In his Answer to the SOR,
Applicant admitted all of the delinquent accounts.  He entered into a debt-management program with
a credit counseling service in March-April 2015, but was unable to maintain the $322 monthly
payment for long.  He concluded that he had no other alternative than to seek bankruptcy relief.  He
retained the services of a bankruptcy attorney and filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition.  The
meeting of the creditors was held in May 2016, but no other information about the bankruptcy is
reflected in the documentary evidence.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found the evidence supported a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems as well as an inability to satisfy debts.  The Judge discussed the impact of
Applicant’s kidney transplant and gave little weight to nine medical collection accounts that totaled
about $1,300.  Applicant was also given credit under two mitigating conditions.1  In concluding that
Applicant had not meet his burden of persuasion, the Judge stated:
Moreover, the pending bankruptcy case serves as a clear warning or caution sign that
Applicant’s overall financial situation is unstable.  It’s true that once he obtains a
discharge he will be released from further liability on the dischargeable debts.  But
even so, it is too soon to tell if Applicant will be financially responsible after the
1 Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce,
or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;” and  ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control[.]” 
bankruptcy case is completed.2
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge should have found the security concerns mitigated.  He
argues the Judge should have based the decision on his character, his work history, and his exposure
to classified items in the past without any problems.  Applicant’s arguments, however, are neither
enough to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record nor are
they sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01284 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2015).   
Applicant also requests that he be granted a security clearance for one year and, after that
year,  his credit history be checked to see how he is doing.  He stated that, if he had a second chance,
he would not put his credit history in jeopardy.  The Appeal Board, however, does not have authority
to grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04289 at
2 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2015).
In the appeal brief, Applicant stated that the bankruptcy resulted in a discharge of his
delinquent debts in July 2016.  He also provided a credit report dated after the decision was issued. 
His statement about the discharge of his debt and the credit report constitute new evidence that the
Appeal Board can neither receive nor consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of the case. 
The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted
only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
2 Decision at 7. 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed:  James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
