 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09283 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John Mastriani, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has mitigated the 
personal conduct and the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is 
granted. 
  
History of the Case 
 
 On January 13, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD 
Directive,1 the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial 
considerations security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
On February 14, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
October 1, 2015, I was assigned the case. On October 30, 2015, the Defense Office of 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for a hearing to be convened 
on November 19, 2015. That notice was amended and the hearing was held on 
November 17, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified, but provided no documents. The record was kept open to 
allow Applicant to present additional documents. Additional documents were received 
and admitted without objection as Ex. A. On November 25, 2015, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old senior staff system engineer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since November 2005 and he seeks to retain a security clearance. 
His annual salary is $123,553. (Ex. 2) He has been married since January 1992 and 
has two children and one step-son, ages 22, 24, and 37. (Ex. 1)  
 
 In Applicant’s October 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he listed four delinquent credit card accounts and stated one of the 
accounts had been paid. In 2009, those accounts became delinquent when his wife lost 
her when the hospital closed. (Tr. 26, 27) Previously her annual salary was $64,000 a 
year. (Tr. 28)  
 
The SOR lists a single judgment as a debt of concern. On November 28, 2011, a 
$30,742 judgment was obtained by a credit card company, not one of the four listed on 
Applicant’s e-QIP. (Ex. A) Applicant had opened the account in 2001 and it became late 
in 2010. (Ex. 2) Applicant employed a financial company to negotiate settlement on the 
debt, which was a serious mistake. (Tr. 17) Between December 2009 and March 2014, 
he paid the company approximately $14,000. (Ex. 2) The company received $1,500 for 
their services. (Tr. 18) In October 2010, the finance company negotiated and paid one 
of the credit card obligations Applicant had listed in his e-QIP. (Ex. 2)  
 
The finance company negotiated with the holder of the judgment and the credit 
agree to settle the matter for $13,680. (Ex. 2) The arrangement required a $1,500 
payment on September 1, 2012, and monthly payments of $1,015 thereafter. However, 
the company wrongfully took Applicant’s money and failed to pay the judgment holder. 
The individual to whom the money was given absconded with the funds. (Tr. 12) When 
Applicant brought the matter to the attention of state authorities, he was told that the 
statute of limitation had passed and they could give him no assistance. (Tr. 20)  
 
Having failed to get satisfaction from the finance company, in February 2015, 
Applicant hired an attorney to help him address the judgment. (Tr. 13) On December 1, 
2015, Applicant and the judgment holder agreed to settle the matter for $15,371. (Ex. A) 
Applicant’s first payment of $628 was to be made on or before December 17, 2015, 
which he paid on December 4, 2015. (Ex. A) Beginning in January 2016, the monthly 
payments would increase to $641 until the settlement amount was paid in full. Applicant 
 
3 
 
began the increased payments early. He made payment on December 4, 2015, and 
also provided proof he made the January 2016 payment. (Ex. A)  
 
 In July 2012, Applicant discussed the judgment, actions taken concerning that 
judgment, and other delinquent accounts during a Personal Subject Interview (PSI). In 
July 2014, in response to financial written interrogatories, he again stated the financial 
company had wrongfully taken his money. As of July 2014, it was his plan to fix up his 
home and put it on the market. When the house sold, he would pay the judgment. (Ex. 
2) He no longer intends to sell his home, but intends to make monthly payments on the 
settlement agreement. As of July 2014, he had a net monthly remainder (gross monthly 
income less monthly expenses and monthly debt payments) that exceeded $2,000. (Ex. 
2) 
 
 Applicant’s March 2012 credit report lists the judgment that had previously been 
a collection account. (Ex. 3) The credit card account that was settled was listed as a 
collection account as was one additional collection account that Applicant had also 
listed on his e-QIP. That credit report lists 26 additional accounts that were paid as 
agreed. (Ex. 3) His August 2013 credit report lists the negotiated credit card payment as 
paid in full for less than the full balance, listed the judgment creditor, and lists 36 
additional accounts as either being paid as agreed or were in good standing. (Ex. 2) 
Applicant’s July 2014 credit report lists 26 accounts with a zero balance. (Ex. 4) He is 
current on his mortgage, vehicle payments, and credit card accounts. (Tr. 40) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
 
5 
 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 In November 2011, a $30,742 judgment was entered against Applicant. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG 
¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
In 2009, Applicant began to experience financial problems when his wife lost her 
job that had paid $64,000 annually. In 2009, he hired a financial company to assist him 
in negotiating with his creditors on his five delinquent accounts. Between December 
2009 and March 2011, he paid the company $14,000. The company negotiated and 
paid a delinquent credit card account. 
  
In November 2011, a judgment was obtained against Applicant, which is the only 
debt of concern listed in the SOR. The finance company was able to negotiate with the 
holder of the judgment wherein the holder agreed to accept settlement in the amount of 
$13,680. After negotiating the settlement agreement, the financial company absconded 
with more than $11,000 of the funds Applicant had to resolve the judgment.  
 
In February 2015, Applicant hired an attorney to assist him in obtaining a new 
settlement agreement. In December 2015, the holder of the judgment agreed to accept 
 
6 
 
a settlement amount of $15,371 to be paid in monthly amounts. Applicant is making his 
monthly payments.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), only one delinquent account is listed as being of concern, 
which indicates Applicant’s financial problems were limited in scope. The three credit 
reports all indicate between 26 and 36 of his accounts were paid satisfactorily or were in 
good standing. In addition to the judgment, there was one collection account he listed in 
his e-QIP and one collection account that was paid in full for less than the full balance. 
Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by the loss of his wife’s job and by 
the finance company absconding with more than $11,000 of the money he had paid the 
company. Those are factors beyond his control. He has entered into a new settlement 
agreement and is making his required payments, which shows good faith. AG ¶ 20(a) 
and AG & 20(b) apply. 
 
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), as previously stated, Applicant has reached a 
settlement agreement with the holder of the judgment and is making his required 
monthly payments. He is living within his means and meeting his current financial 
obligations. There is clear indication his financial problems have been resolved and his 
finances are under control. He has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the judgment. 
AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has held his current job for 
more than ten years. Applicant had a judgment and delinquent credit card debt. A 
settlement agreement was reached on the credit card debt and the obligation paid. He 
has reached a settlement on the judgment obligation and is making payments in accord 
 
7 
 
with that agreement. Other than the three delinquent accounts, two of which have been 
paid and one of which is being paid, all the other accounts listed in his credit reports 
indicate he pays his debts timely. But for the loss of his wife’s job and the absconding of 
his money by the financial company, it is likely that he would have reached a settlement 
agreement with the judgment holder years ago and paid the judgment.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. See AG & 
2(a)(1). Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
