      1The Government submitted eight items for the record.
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-08765
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On December 19, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material
(FORM), dated January 25, 2016.1 Applicant received the FORM on February 11, 2016.
Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on September 2,
2016. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the SOR allegations (1.a through
1.k), and stated that the listed debts are not recent. (Item 2)
Applicant is 58 years old. He graduated from high school in 1976 and served in
the Air Force reserve from 1976 to 1981, leaving with an honorable discharge. He is
married and has one child. He attended college but did not obtain a degree. He has
been employed with his current employer since 1983. (Item 3) Since 1983, Applicant
has held a security clearance. He completed an application for a security clearance on
March 28, 2012. (Item 3) 
Financial
The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling approximately $76,628, including a
mortgage foreclosure; state tax liens from 2007 to 2010; and various collection
accounts. (Item 8) In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that “he has battled
identity theft since 2000," but provided no details regarding the identity theft. He also
noted that the debts were “outdated.”
As to SOR allegation 1.a, the past-due mortgage account in the amount of
$59,670, Applicant disclosed on his 2012 security clearance application that he could
not afford the monthly payment. The home was foreclosed in 2008 and he stated that
the debt was cancelled in 2009. (Items 3, 4, and 5) The 2016 credit bureau report
confirms that the balance on the account is zero.
As to SOR allegation 1.b, a charged-off account in the amount of $199, Applicant
stated that the account was paid in full, but he did not provide any documentation to
support his claim.
As to SOR allegations 1.c, 1.d, 1.e. and 1.f for state tax liens from 2007 to 2010,
Applicant stated in 2014 interrogatories that he paid the tax, but he had no documentary
evidence to confirm this claim. In his 2012 investigative interview, he stated that he
never had any tax liens against him. (Item 4) The 2016 credit bureau report does not list
any tax liens but the earlier credit report does reflect tax liens. (Item 8)
As to SOR allegations 1.g through 1.k, for collection accounts, Applicant stated
that he knew nothing about these accounts and later that he had paid them, but
provided no documentary evidence to support payments. He noted that papers may
have been lost when he moved  from one state to another.
Applicant did not respond to the FORM and there is no information in the record
concerning unusual circumstances for any debts or whether he had obtained any
financial counseling. He did not provide details on possible identity theft. He did provide
a personal financial statement that shows a net monthly remainder of $3,169.
      2 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).
      3 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
      4 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      5 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”2 The burden of proof is something less than a
preponderance of evidence.3 The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.4 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”5 “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
      6 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      7 Id.
4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”6 Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.7 The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
 The Government produced credible evidence that Applicant incurred delinquent
debts and state tax liens. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security
concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulty
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant’s debts remain
unpaid with the exception of the past-due mortgage account. He noted in his 2012
interview that he would research the accounts that he did not recognize. He did not
provide any information that the accounts are resolved. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Applicant provided no
reasons that would qualify him for this mitigating condition. He has been gainfully
5
employed.  I cannot find that he acted responsibly in the absence of any supporting
documentation. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. There is no information in the
record that he has addressed any delinquent debts other than the past-due mortgage
account that was cancelled. There is no information to show that he has obtained recent
financial counseling.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications that the  problem is being
resolved, or is under control) does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee who has been employed with his employer since
1983 and has held a security clearance since 1983. He served in the U.S. Air Force
reserve for over four years. He is married and has one child. However, he provided
insufficient information to supplement the record to mitigate his case.
Applicant provided no explanation for the delinquent debts other than possible
identity theft, and that they are “outdated.”  He denies owing any currently delinquent
debts. He has not provided mitigation for the financial considerations security concerns.
6
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F  : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.k: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
