 
  1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 12-06995 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on February 17, 
2012. On May 2, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 13, 2015, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on November 3, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6, was sent to Applicant on 
November 5, 2015. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
 
  2
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on 
February 13, 2016, and did not respond.1 The case was assigned to me on June 2, 
2016.  
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes five delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $59,858. In his Answer, Applicant admitted four of the allegations. He 
stated that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e, totaling $12,235, were 
charged off. He admitted the $47,517 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, and denied the $106 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant’s admissions in his Answer are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor since April 2010. He 
graduated from high school in May 1980. He served honorably in the U.S. Navy from 
July 1980 until he retired in January 2006. He held a secret security clearance for an 
unspecified period of time while on active duty. He and his wife married in November 
1980. (GX 3.)    
  
The delinquent debts are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBRs) 
from October 2014 and February 2012. (GX 5; GX 6.) He discussed his financial status, 
including his then-existing debts during his verified personal subject interview (PSI) on 
April 19, 2012, and in his responses to interrogatories in October 2014. (GX 4.) 
 
The $72 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is for a delinquent cellular account that is in 
collection. It remains unpaid, and there is no indication that this account has been 
charged off, as Applicant stated in his Answer. (GX 5.) The $106 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b is a collection account. The original creditor was a county district court. (GX 6.) 
Applicant denied any knowledge of owing this debt to the collection agency during his 
PSI, but he was not asked about owing a debt to the original creditor. (GX 4.) He denies 
this debt in his Answer, and it does not appear on the 2014 CBR. However, there is no 
evidence that Applicant paid or otherwise resolved this debt. Applicant states that the 
$5,937 credit-card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was charged off. The 2012 CBR shows 
this debt as charged off and the 2014 CBR shows it as paid with a $0 balance. (GX 5; 
GX 6.) The $47,517 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is for the balance owed on a recreational 
vehicle that was voluntarily repossessed. In his 2012 PSI, Applicant stated that he had 
been making monthly payments of $180 for an unstated number of months. However, 
the balance at the time of the PSI, and on the 2012 and 2014 CBRs, is the same as the 
balance that was alleged in the SOR. The 2014 CBR shows this debt as charged off. 
Applicant did not provide any documentation that shows any payments. The $6,226 
credit-card debt alleged in SOR 1.e has been charged off. (GX 5.)   
 
                                                            
1 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated November 5, 2015, and 
Applicant’s receipt is dated February 16, 2016. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after receiving it to submit information.  The DOHA transmittal letter and receipt are 
appended to the record as Administrative Exhibit 1. 
 
 
  3
Applicant does not offer any explanation for his debts in his Answer. In his PSI, 
he explained that he returned the recreational vehicle to the dealer because he could 
not afford the monthly payments, but he does not explain his overall financial 
circumstances. In his responses to interrogatories, Applicant stated that he and his wife 
sold their house in a short sale in July 2013; that they were renting a house to save 
money and pay off their debts; that they had paid their smaller credit-card debts; and, 
that they were working on paying their car loans and debt consolidation loans. The 
delinquent debt for the recreational vehicle was incurred in 2005. The other debts 
alleged in the SOR were incurred between 2009 and 2010.   
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
 
  4
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by the record evidence, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”), and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 Applicant asserted that $12,235 of his delinquent debt was charged off. However, 
“reliance upon the non-collectibility of a debt does not constitute a good-faith effort to 
resolve that debt within the meaning of the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 07-06841 at 4 
 
  5
(App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2008). See also, ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 26, 
2016). 
 
 Applicant clearly experienced financial difficulties. However, there is no evidence 
that explains why he incurred delinquent debts. He stated that he has paid off some 
debts and is working on paying off others, but there is no record evidence that 
corroborates these assertions, nor is there any evidence about his current financial 
status is. While the debts alleged in the SOR were incurred between 2005 and 2010, 
there is no indication that he has resolved them, or that he intends to do so. Nor is there 
any record evidence that shows that Applicant acted responsibly in light of his financial 
circumstances.  None of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). I specifically considered 
Applicant’s 26-year record of honorable military service. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  6
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
