 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 12-12243 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John P. McDonnell, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient evidence to mitigate foreign influence and 
personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 28, 2011, Applicant completed and signed an Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) or security clearance 
application (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On May 20, 2015, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of 
reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence) 
and E (personal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.   
  
The SOR further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the 
Government, DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance, 
and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
determination whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
(HE 2) 
 
On June 11, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he requested a hearing. 
(HE 3) On October 26, 2015, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On 
January 14, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the 
case to another administrative judge, and on April 7, 2016, the case was transferred to 
me for administrative reasons. On June 20, 2016, DOHA issued a notice of the hearing, 
setting the hearing for July 13, 2016. The hearing was held as scheduled. On July 20 
and 22, 2016, Applicant and Department Counsel submitted additional documents and 
argument concerning the scope of administrative notice. (AE J-AE W; GE 5) I received 
the transcript of the hearing on July 21, 2016.     
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits, and Applicant offered 
nine exhibits. (Transcript (Tr.) 15-17, 24-26, 40; GE 1-4; AE A-AE I) Applicant objected 
to the admissibility of GE 3, information from the internet about Applicant’s company, 
based on lack of authenticity and reliability. (Tr. 16) I deferred the decision on the 
admissibility of GE 3 (Tr. 17) and subsequently sustained the objection to admissibility. 
Applicant objected to taking administrative notice of “secondary hearsay” and 
“speculation” in GE 4, the Government Administrative Notice request. (Tr. 17; AE J-AE 
W) Evidence that is secondary hearsay and speculation is not admitted. For example, 
speculation about India being ranked as a higher threat to commit industrial espionage 
than other countries is given no weight whatsoever. Applicant did not object to any other 
specific statements in Department Counsel’s administrative notice (AN) request. (AE J) 
There were no other objections, and I admitted all other proffered exhibits into evidence. 
(Tr. 23, 26-27, 40; GE 1-2, 5; AE A-AE W)  
 
Department Counsel requested AN of facts concerning India. (Tr. 15-23; GE 4) 
The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for those facts. 
Department Counsel’s AN request is quoted at pages 7-8 infra, with footnotes in the 
original omitted. Department Counsel and Applicant had no objection to consideration of 
information from State Department documents. (Tr. 23) The first two paragraphs were 
based primarily on administrative notice of State Department documents and one White 
House document admitted as HE 4, as well as the information Applicant submitted.1 (AE 
Q, R, S, U, V, W) AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides: 
 
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of 
the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is 
located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the 
                                            
1U.S. Department of State, U.S. Relations With India, Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, 
Fact Sheet (Oct. 9, 2015), http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/3454.htm. U.S. Department of State, 
Background Note, India (Apr. 17, 2012), http://www.state.gov/outofdate/bgn/india/200052.htm (HE 4). The 
White House website, Office of the Press Secretary, U.S.-India Joint Statement, “Shared Effort; Progress 
for All,” (Jan. 25, 2015), https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/25/us-india-joint-statement-
shared-effort-progress-all. (HE 4)  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain 
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
A risk assessment in this case necessitates administrative notice of facts concerning 
India.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).   
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
The SOR alleges: Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of India and a permanent 
resident of the United States (¶ 1.a); Applicant is the majority shareholder of Company 
A, which is the U.S.-based, parent company of Companies AB and AC,3 which are both 
based in India, and he is the managing director and chairman of the board of Company 
AB (¶ 1.b); His spouse is the resident director in India of Company AB (¶ 1.c); Company 
AB provides electronic components to Company A for use in DOD equipment (¶ 1.d); 
He has ongoing contacts with foreign government officials (¶ 1.e), foreign defense 
industry experts (¶ 1.f), and foreign business contacts (¶ 1.i); He receives income from 
Company AB (¶ 1.g); Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of India (¶ 1.h); and He 
failed to disclose his connections to India relating to Company AB in his December 28, 
2011 SCA (¶¶ 2.a-2.c). Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. (HE 3) He denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 
2.a, 2.b, and 2.c. He also admitted some of the underlying facts in the paragraphs in the 
SOR allegations he denied. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 68-year-old defense contractor, who is seeking to continue his 
access to classified information. (Tr. 26; GE 1) He was born in India. (GE 1) In 1969, he 
received a bachelor’s degree in engineering in India. (GE 1) In 1969, Applicant came to 
the United States when he was 22 years old on a student visa. (Tr. 26; GE 2) In 1971, 
he received a master’s degree in electrical engineering at a U.S. university. (Tr. 26; GE 
1) He has never served in the U.S. military. (GE 1) He has held a security clearance 
                                            
2To protect Applicant and his family’s privacy, the facts in this decision do not specifically 
describe employment, names of witnesses, and names of other groups or locations. The cited sources 
contain more specific information. 
 
3 Applicant said Company AC has not functioned for more than 15 years. (Tr. 31, 41, 56-58) Due 
to lack of activity for a prolonged period of time, Applicant’s involvement with Company AC does not raise 
a security concern. Any allegations of security concern related to Company AC are found for Applicant 
and will not be further discussed in this decision. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
since the mid-1970s. (Tr. 27) In 1974, he married, and in 1982, he divorced. (GE 1) In 
1982, he married his spouse. (Tr. 36) In 1982, he became a U.S. citizen. (GE 2) In 
1996, Applicant’s parents passed away, and his spouse’s parents have also passed 
away. (Tr. 35-36) In 1975, his child was born in India, and in 1984, his second child was 
born in the United States. (GE 1) His children live in the United States. (GE 1) His oldest 
child is employed by Company A. (GE 1) Applicant said his current net worth is about 
$10,000,000. (GE 2 at response to question 21)  
 
Applicant’s spouse was born in India. (GE 2) She is a permanent resident of the 
United States. (GE 2) “India law required that for an entity to operate within India, one of 
the Directors of said entity must be a citizen of India.” (SOR response at 2) She needed 
to retain her Indian citizenship and not become a U.S. citizen because Applicant wanted 
her to be the resident director of Company AB. (Tr. 59; SOR response at 2; GE 2) His 
spouse “does not actively participate in the operations” of Companies A and AB. (SOR 
response at 2) She has one sister living in India. (Tr. 36) In 2009, she had a heart 
attack, and she has a pacemaker. (Tr. 36-37) She requires dialysis three times a week, 
and she has not traveled to India for five years. (Tr. 36-37) In response to the question 
about why his spouse did not become a U.S. citizen, Applicant explained if she became 
a U.S. citizen, he would possibly have to sell Company AB. (Tr. 80)    
 
Four or five years ago, Applicant was traveling to India three or four times a year. 
(Tr. 35) In the last four years, Applicant traveled to India once a year. (Tr. 36, 75) He 
explained that he went to India among other reasons “to see either current or 
prospective customers, who naturally [are] foreign nationals.” (GE 2 at 11) He has not 
visited his sister for five years. (Tr. 36) He communicates with his sister once or twice 
every two or three months on the telephone. (Tr. 36; GE 2)   
 
In 1980, Applicant cofounded Company A. (Tr. 28, 46) In 1995, the cofounder of 
Company A retired, and Applicant became the president of Company A. (Tr. 46) About 
15 people currently own shares in Company A. (Tr. 46) Applicant owns more than 90 
percent of the shares of Company A. (Tr. 47) His company provides critical electronic 
components to the DOD and other agencies of the U.S. Government. (Tr. 27-28) 
Company A owns more than 90 percent of Company AB, and this ownership was 
disclosed in Company A’s Standard Form (SF) 328s. (Tr. 49; AE B) Applicant is the 
managing director and chairman of the board of Company AB. (SOR response at 2) 
 
Company AB is a functioning company based in India. (Tr. 31) Applicant said 
Company AB was not used to produce parts that go into any products that were sold to 
U.S. customers. (Tr. 43) Most of Company AB’s business from the mid-1990s came 
from India. (Tr. 43) Company AB’s work for the U.S. Government complied with United 
States and India’s export rules. (Tr. 43-44) His family members do not own stock in 
Company AB. (Tr. 31) Company AB’s manufacturing space is about 7,000 square feet, 
and four engineers some technicians and “diploma holders” are employed at AB. (Tr. 
43, 45) The total number of employees in Company AB is about 30. (Tr. 76) In the 
1980s, Applicant completed an SF 328 for Company A, which discloses ownership and 
involvement of foreign companies with Company A. (Tr. 32; AE C) Company A’s 1980 
and 2006 SF 328s disclosed ownership of Company A’s stock in Company AB and 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
indicated more than 30 percent of Company A’s income was from foreign sources. (Tr. 
32-33) Company A’s 2006 SF 328 states, “In all cases, [Company A] gets firm, fixed 
price and delivery sales orders from [Company AB and other foreign companies]. None 
of the products supplied are nuclear related. Also, none of these orders involve access 
to classified information.” (AE D) In his 2001 and 2006 SF 328s, Applicant disclosed 
that he spends 30 to 45 minutes per business day on the telephone conducting 
business with his Indian companies. (AE C; AE D)  
 
Applicant admitted that he meets with individuals who manage foreign defense 
companies; however, he denied he met with “foreign defense industry experts” because 
the term “expert” in his SCA is not defined. (SOR response ¶ 1.f)  
 
In 1997, Applicant hired a colleague he knew since college to be the general 
manager of Company AB, and his colleague has continued as general manager for 19 
years. (Tr. 50) The general manager of Company AB lives in India. Company A sends 
items to India; Company AB assembles the items into a product; and Company AB’s 
product is imported into the United States. (Tr. 51, 55) There is no tariff if the product is 
imported into India from the United States, assembled in India, and exported from India 
into the United States. (Tr. 65) Company A provides salaries to employees at Company 
AB. (Tr. 52) In Applicant’s 2006 SF 328, he said Company A’s total income in fiscal year 
2005 was about $10.24 million. (AE D) He said the current gross of Company AB is 
about $10 million, which is about half of its gross ten years ago. (Tr. 76) In 2009, 
Company AB began paying Applicant a monthly salary of $1,612; in 2011, his salary 
increased to $3,224; and in 2013, his monthly salary decreased to $322. (SOR 
response ¶ 1.g) Company AB performs contracts for the Indian military; however, 
Applicant “claimed he does “not have contact with foreign government officials.” (Tr. 78; 
SOR response ¶ 1.e) In another sentence in the same paragraph, he said, “I do not 
have ongoing contacts with foreign government officials.” (SOR response ¶ 1.e) The 
amount of salary Applicant received relating to Company AB’s foreign military contracts 
was not presented.    
 
Under Indian law, dual citizenship is not permitted.4 (Tr. 59) Applicant is a U.S. 
citizen, and he is not a citizen of India. (SOR response)   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s December 28, 2011 SCA asked in Section 19, Foreign Contacts: 
 
Do you have, or have you had, close and/or continuing contact with a 
foreign national within the last seven (7) years with whom you, or your 
spouse, or cohabitant are bound by affection, influence, common 
interests, and/or obligation? Include associates as well as relatives, not 
previously listed in section 18. 
 
                                            
4See Embassy of the United States, New Delhi, India, Dual Nationality: India and the United 
States, http://newdelhi.usembassy.gov/acsdualnation.html. (HE 5) 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(SOR ¶ 2.a; GE 1) His December 28, 2011 SCA asked in Section 20A, Foreign 
Activities: 
 
Have you, your spouse, cohabitant, or dependent children EVER had any 
foreign financial interests (such as stocks, property, investments, bank 
accounts, ownership of corporate entities, corporate interests or 
businesses) in which you or they have direct control or direct ownership? 
(Exclude financial interests in companies or diversified mutual funds that 
are publicly traded on a U.S. exchange.) 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.b; GE 1) His December 28, 2011 SCA asked in Section 20B, Foreign 
Business, Professional Activities, and Foreign Government Contacts: 
 
Have you in the past seven (7) years provided advice or support to any 
individual associated with a foreign business or other foreign organization 
that you have not previously listed as a foreign employer? 
 
(SOR ¶ 2.c; GE 1)  
 
On May 3, 2012, Applicant told an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator that Company A owns a subsidiary in India, and his spouse is the manager 
of the company in India. (GE 2) Company A “maintains all foreign affairs, but he 
personally does not have any foreign financial interests.” (GE 2) He did not disclose to 
the OPM investigator that he was the managing director and chairman of the board of 
Company AB, and he receives substantial income from Company AB. (GE 2) When he 
responded to DOHA interrogatories, he clarified that when he travels to India, he meets 
with foreign national customers or foreign customers. (GE 2)  
 
Applicant said that when he was completing his December 28, 2011 SCA, he 
was responding as an individual and not as an employee of Companies A and AB. (Tr. 
33, 49; GE 2) He separated his role as an employee of Companies A and AB from his 
role as a private person, and he interpreted the questions about foreign business 
interests to be whether he or his spouse have any interest in foreign companies 
unrelated to their Company A ownership. (Tr. 34, 49-50; GE 2; SOR response) He and 
his spouse do not own any stock in Company AB in their personal capacities. (Tr. 49-
50)   
 
In 2012, 2014, and 2016, the Defense Security Service (DSS) wrote that 
Company A “has an effective program for protecting classified information and [his] 
security program is in compliance with current directives.” (Tr. 35; AE F-AE H) His 
facility received a “SATISFACTORY” rating. (AE F-AE H)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
A high-level corporate official for a large defense contractor, who is now retired, 
has worked with Applicant for more than 35 years, provided a character reference letter 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
on Applicant’s behalf. (Tr. 39-40; AE I) He described Applicant as honest, reliable, 
capable, responsible, and trustworthy. (AE I)  
 
India 
 
India is a multiparty, parliamentary democracy with a population of approximately 
1.2 billion people. The U.S. and India share common values including the rule of law, 
respect for diversity, and democratic government. The U.S. Department of State 
reported in 2012 that bilateral defense and counterterrorism cooperation between the 
U.S. and India had grown to reach unprecedented levels. In 2009, the United States 
and India launched the U.S.-India Strategic Dialogue, which is a bilateral forum focused 
on strengthening cooperation between the two countries in several areas, including 
energy, climate change, trade, education, and counterterrorism. The U.S. supports a 
reformed United Nations Security Council that includes India as a permanent member. 
The United States is one of India’s largest trade and investment partners. The United 
States supports India’s emergence as a rising world power. Recently, India has taken 
actions to ease travel between the United States and India. 
 
On January 25, 2015, and June 7, 2016, President Obama and Indian Prime 
Minister Modi held joint press conferences. They lauded the close and growing ties 
between the United States and India. They emphasized the following elements of the 
United States—India relationship: (1) the natural partnership between two great 
democracies; (2) the new Declaration of Friendship formalizing that partnership; (3) 
increasing bilateral trade in goods and services between the two countries approaching 
$100 billion; (4) breakthroughs in nuclear cooperation; (5) additional export reforms; (6) 
pursuit of investment treaties; (7) launching joint projects to reduce pollution and slow 
climate change; (8) partnerships in security matters in Afghanistan and in preventing 
Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons; and (9) most importantly in the context of this 
case, deepening defense and security cooperation. This includes expansion of co-
production and co-development of technologies under the Defense Technology and 
Trade Initiative. On January 11, 2015, Secretary of State John Kerry underscored the 
positive aspects of the United States-India association, including the growing 
investments of Indian citizens in the United States (now 9 billion dollars), and U.S. 
citizens’ investments in India (now 28 billion dollars).  
 
U.S. economic information and technologies are targeted by the intelligence 
services, private sector, and citizens of dozens of . . . countries. There are U.S. allies 
and partners that use their broad access to U.S. institutions to acquire sensitive U.S. 
economic and technology information, primarily through aggressive elicitation and other 
human intelligence tactics. A foreign business competitor or foreign government intent 
on illegally acquiring a company’s proprietary information and trade secrets may wish to 
place a spy in a company or recruit an existing employee to gain access to non-public 
information. Allegiance to a country other than the United States may increase the 
likelihood that an employee will spy against his employer. At one point in time, India was 
specifically named as one of the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information in a National Counterintelligence Center survey of nearly one dozen 
Fortunate 500 companies.     
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
In recent years, there have been several criminal cases dealing [with] export 
enforcement, economic espionage, theft of trade secrets and embargo-related criminal 
prosecutions that involve the Indian government, as well as private companies and 
individuals associated with India . . . .5 
 
India is one of the most persistently targeted countries by insurgents and 
domestic and transnational terrorist groups. The Indian states of Jammu and Kashmir 
remain unstable and foreigners are particularly visible, vulnerable, and at risk of being 
the victims of violence in the area, which has been known to include killings of armed 
forces personnel, police, government officials, and civilians. A number of terrorist 
groups operate in the area particularly along the Line of Control separating Indian and 
Pakistani-controlled Kashmir. Anti-Western terrorist groups, including some on the U.S. 
Government's list of foreign terrorist organizations, are active in India, including Islamist 
extremist groups such as Harkat-ul-Jihad-i-Islami, Harakat ul-Mujahidin, India 
Mujahideen, Jaish-e-Mohammed, and Lashkar-e Tayyiba. 
 
According to the State Department, the most significant human rights problems in 
India as of 2015 involved police and security force abuses, including extrajudicial 
killings, torture, and rape; widespread corruption that contributed to ineffective 
responses to crime, including those against women and members of scheduled castes 
or tribes; and societal violence based on gender, religious affiliation, and caste or tribe. 
Other human rights problems included disappearances, hazardous prison conditions, 
arbitrary arrest and detention, and lengthy pretrial detention and denial of due process. 
Rape, domestic violence, dowry-related deaths, honor killings, sexual harassment, and 
discrimination against women also remain serious societal problems. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
                                            
5 Five cases involving guilty pleas to from 2008 to 2015 involving industrial espionage and India 
are not listed as they have low relevance here. There is no evidence that Applicant or his companies 
have engaged in industrial espionage.   
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant was born and educated through his bachelor’s degree in India. His 
spouse and sister are citizens of India, and his sister is a resident of India. He has 
infrequent6 contact with his sister. He is the majority shareholder of Company A, which 
is the U.S.-based, parent company of Company AB, which is based in India, and he is 
the managing director and chairman of the board of Company AB. His spouse is the 
resident director in India of Company AB. Company A receives electronic components 
from Company AB for use in DOD equipment. He has contacts with foreign government 
officials, and he has foreign business contacts. He receives income from Company AB.   
 
Applicant has substantial property interests in India which could subject him to a 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. See generally ISCR Case No. 12-
00120 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2014) (affirming denial of security clearance because of 
applicant’s connections to India and noting administrative judge’s findings of heightened 
risk in relation to family relationships and property interests of $340,000 in India). See 
also ISCR Case No. 09-05812 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (finding “presence in India 
of close family members, viewed in light of that country’s troubles with terrorism and its 
human rights abuses, and his sharing living quarters with a person (his wife) having 
foreign family contacts, establish the ‘heightened risk’” in AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e)).    
                                            
6See ISCR Case No. 09-03114 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2010) (contact once a month is 
considered to be “frequent” under AG ¶¶ 7 and 8). 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Applicant lives with and is close to his spouse. There is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their immediate family members. 
See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 
2002). “[A]s a matter of common sense and human experience, there is [also] a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the 
immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr. 2, 2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). 
This concept is the basis of AG ¶ 7(d). Indirect influence through Applicant’s spouse to 
Applicant could result in a security concern. In addition, Applicant has ties of affection to 
his sister even through his communications with her are infrequent. 
 
 Applicant’s relationships with residents of India create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to 
protect his financial interests in India. For example, if terrorists or government officials in 
India wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on his relatives 
living in India or threaten his property interests in India. Applicant would then be subject 
to coercion through his connections to India and classified information could potentially 
be compromised. 
 
Applicant and his spouse’s possessions of ties to India, are not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or their spouse has a 
close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, or a serious 
financial interest in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential 
for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case 
No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of India with the United States, places some, but not an 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his connections 
to India do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where 
he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
relatives or preserve or enhance property in India. 
  
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from India 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or 
utilized his connections to India to pressure him, nor is there evidence of threats against 
Company AB or its employees, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and India has a problem 
with terrorism. Applicant’s connections to India create a potential conflict of interest 
because these connections are significant enough to raise a security concern about his 
desire to preserve or enhance Company AB by providing sensitive or classified 
information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s 
connections to India and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. Further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating 
conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant is credited with mitigating SOR ¶ 1.d. Company AB assembles 
components for Company A, and then Company A provides the products to DOD. 
Applicant’s decisions to assemble equipment in India, which are destined to be provided 
to DOD, do not cause a security concern without evidence of an adverse effect on 
national security or the national interest. Other DOD contractors utilize foreign sources 
for DOD materials, and this fact alone is insufficient to establish a security concern.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges Applicant has contacts with foreign defense experts. Applicant 
did not elaborate on the degree of expertise required for his contacts in India to be a 
“foreign defense industry expert” and based on his denial of contacts with high-level 
experts, SOR ¶ 1.f is mitigated.  
 
Applicant is credited with mitigating SOR ¶ 1.h. Applicant has infrequent contacts 
with his sister living in India. He is not close to her. He has much stronger family 
connections to family living in the United States.  
 
Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” In 
1969, Applicant came to the United States when he was 22 years old on a student visa. 
In 1971, he received a master’s degree in electrical engineering at a U.S. university. He 
has held a security clearance since the mid-1970s. In 1982, he became a U.S. citizen. 
His two children live in the United States, and his second child was born in the United 
States. Applicant said his current net worth is about $10,000,000. When he took an oath 
and swore allegiance to the United States, as part of his naturalization as a U.S. citizen, 
and when he volunteered to assist the U.S. Government as a contractor, he manifested 
his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States over all other countries. When he 
became a U.S. citizen he lost his citizenship to India because India does not recognize 
dual citizenship.  
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by connections to India. There is no evidence, 
however, that terrorists, criminals, the Indian Government, or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, his spouse, or their relatives living 
in India to coerce Applicant for classified or sensitive information. As such, there is a 
reduced possibility that Applicant, his spouse, or their relatives living in India would be 
specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. Of course, the 
primary risk to their relatives living in India is from terrorists and other lawless elements 
and not the Indian Government. 
 
While the U.S. Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
such evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ sizable financial and diplomatic investment in India. 
Applicant and his spouse’s relatives living in India or employees of Company AB could 
become potential targets of terrorists because of Applicant’s support for the United 
States, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information could theoretically add 
some risk to them from lawless elements in India.  
 
AG ¶ 8(f) does not fully apply. Applicant did not provide a valuation of Company 
AB. Without more evidence, it is not possible to compare his investments in India with 
his investments in the United States. Applicant did not meet his burden of establishing 
application of AG ¶ 8(f).     
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.g, and 1.i are not mitigated. The amount of contacts 
Applicant has with foreign government officials and business contacts in India is 
unclear. His 2006 SF 328, the most recent one he provided, indicated he has daily 
contact with colleagues in India. Applicant has not met his burden of showing these 
contacts are minimal or that they have ended. Company AB sells to or assembles 
components for the Indian military. He has contacts with customers to maintain his 
business enterprise in India. Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is 
little likelihood that his connections in India could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. Foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B are not mitigated.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations    
. . . [or] determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness.7 
 
Applicant’s December 28, 2011 SCA in Section 19, Foreign Contacts asks, “Do 
you have, or have you had, close and/or continuing contact with a foreign national 
within the last seven (7) years with whom you, or your spouse . . . are bound by . . . 
common interests, and/or obligation?” (SOR ¶ 2.a; GE 1) His SCA in Section 20A, 
Foreign Activities asks, “Have you, your spouse . . . EVER had any foreign financial 
interests (such as stocks, property, investments, bank accounts, ownership of corporate 
entities, corporate interests or businesses) in which you or they have direct control or 
direct ownership?” (SOR ¶ 2.b; GE 1) His SCA in Section 20B, Foreign Business, 
Professional Activities, and Foreign Government Contacts asks, “Have you in the 
past seven (7) years provided advice or support to any individual associated with a 
foreign business or other foreign organization that you have not previously listed as a 
foreign employer?” (SOR ¶ 2.c; GE 1)  
 
Applicant was well aware that he had a substantial interest in Company AB 
located in India. He was the managing director and chairman of the board of Company 
AB. He controlled Company A, and Company A controlled Company AB. Applicant 
provided advice and support to the resident manager and employees of Company AB. I 
do not find his statement that he did not need to disclose his interest in Company AB on 
his SCA because his control of Company AB was as a professional and employee of 
Company A to be an honest, reasonable, or valid basis for not disclosing requested 
information. Applicant understood that the DOD was seeking specific information about 
his connections to business and government entities in India. He knowingly and 
intentionally chose not to disclose his connections to Company AB. AG ¶ 16(a) is 
established.     
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
                                            
7The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the  
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
16 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
In his December 28, 2011 SCA, Applicant deliberately and improperly denied that 
he had that he had the following connections in India in the previous seven years: (1) 
contacts with foreign nationals to whom he is bound by common interests or obligations;  
(2) direct ownership or control of foreign financial interests; and (3) provided advice or 
support to any individual associated with a foreign business. These false denials of 
connections to persons and entities in India raise a security concern. 
 
Applicant cannot receive mitigating credit under AG ¶ 17(a) because his May 3, 
2012, statement to an OPM investigator revealing some of his connections to Company 
AB was not sufficiently prompt (in sufficiently close temporal proximity to his December 
28, 2011 SCA) to mitigate security concerns.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s falsification of his SCA by intentionally failing to disclose his 
connections to Company AB and related information such as his connections to Indian 
customers of Company AB was improper and raised a security concern. No mitigating 
conditions apply. Guideline E concerns are not mitigated.   
    
 
17 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States. In 1969, Applicant came to the United States, and in 1971, he received a 
master’s degree in electrical engineering at a U.S. university. He has held a security 
clearance since the mid-1970s. There are no allegations of security violations. In 1982, 
he became a U.S. citizen. His two children live in the United States, and his second 
child was born in the United States. When he took an oath and swore allegiance to the 
United States, as part of his naturalization as a U.S. citizen, and when he volunteered to 
assist the U.S. Government as a contractor, he manifested his patriotism, loyalty, and 
fidelity to the United States over all other countries. When he became a U.S. citizen he 
lost his citizenship to India because India does not recognize dual citizenship. There is 
no evidence that terrorists or other foreign elements have specifically targeted Applicant 
or his family in India or his business in India. Applicant is exceptionally intelligent and 
very knowledgeable about business and engineering. He is a highly successful 
businessman, and he has earned millions of dollars. A high-level corporate official for a 
large defense contractor, who has worked with Applicant for more than 35 years, 
described Applicant as honest, reliable, capable, responsible, and trustworthy.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning India must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.8 India is a dangerous place because of 
violence from terrorists and other lawless elements, but India is not as dangerous as 
many other countries. Terrorists continue to threaten the Indian Government, the 
interests of the United States, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. 
India and the United States have sometimes had profound policy disputes. The Indian 
                                            
8 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion).  
 
18 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Government does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in some 
instances. The United States and Indian Governments are allies in the war on terrorism. 
India and the United States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade. The 
positive connections between India and the United States have increased dramatically 
in the last ten years.  
 
Applicant is the majority shareholder of Company A, which is the U.S.-based, 
parent company of Company AB, which is based in India, and he is the managing 
director and chairman of the board of Company AB. His spouse is the resident director 
in India of Company AB. She did not become a U.S. citizen because she did not want to 
lose her Indian citizenship because it might jeopardize Applicant and his spouse’s 
control of Company AB. He has contacts with Indian government officials and Indian 
businesses. He receives income from Company AB, and Company AB sells products to 
the Indian military. In his December 28, 2011 SCA, Applicant denied that he had a direct 
ownership or control in a foreign company or business, when he knew he had such 
control over Company AB. He denied that he provided advice and support to persons in 
India, when he knew he provided advice and support to employees of Company AB. 
Applicant understood that the DOD was seeking specific information about his 
connections to business and government entities in India. He knowingly and 
intentionally chose not to disclose his connections to Company AB.  
 
The protection of national security requires that those entrusted with access to 
classified information self-report information. Should a security violation occur, security 
clearance holders with knowledge of the facts must be sufficiently reliable and 
responsible to disclose the security violation, even if it reflects poorly on the security 
clearance holder. Applicant’s failure to disclose facts about his business connections in 
India raises unresolved questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information.   
   
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, supra, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Applicant has failed to carry his burden and foreign influence and personal 
conduct security concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
19 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
