                                                             
                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
               DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-01915
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
September 19, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on October 31, 2013.  On October 15, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F and E for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006.
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 24, 2014.  He answered
the SOR in writing on February 28, 2015, and requested an Administrative
Determination by an administrative judge.  Department Counsel issued a File of
Relevant Material (FORM) on April 28, 2015.  Applicant did not respond to the FORM.
The case was assigned to me on April 26, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Paragraphs 1.a.~1.d., 1.f.~1.i., 1.k., 1.l., and 2.a.~2.e. of the SOR, with explanations.
He denied the factual allegations in Paragraphs 1.e. and 1.j. of the SOR.
Applicant is a 32-year-old “Marine technician,” who works for a “sailing center.”
(Item 5 at pages 5 and 11.)
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
1.a. and 1.c.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor A for two past-due
debts totaling about $15,347.  He avers that he is “in the process of settling these
debts,” but has offered nothing further in this regard.  These allegations are found
against Applicant.
1.b. and 1.f.  Applicant avers that these are one and the same debt, and admits
that he is indebted to Creditor B for a past-due debt totaling from about $765 to about
$2,184.  He further avers that he “called and set up a payment plan,” but has offered
nothing further in this regard.  These allegations are found against Applicant.
1.d.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor D for a past-due debt of
about $2,504.  He avers that he is “in the process of settling this debt,” but has offered
nothing further in this regard.  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.e.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor E for a past-due debt of
about $1,557.  He avers that he “had an allotment setup . . . [and it] should have been
paid off.”  As this alleged debt does not appear on the Government’s most recent, April
2015, credit report, this allegation is found for Applicant.
1.g.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor G for a past-due debt of
about $722.  He avers that he “lost” his employment, “called them and had set
something back up with them,” but has offered nothing further in this regard.  This
allegation is found against Applicant.
1.h. and 1.i.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor H for two past-due
debts totaling about $871.  He avers that he “called and reset up payments,” but has
offered nothing further in this regard.  These allegations are found against Applicant.
1.j.  Applicant denies that he is indebted to Creditor J for a past-due debt of about
$300.  He denies any knowledge of this debt.  As this alleged debt does not appear on
the Government’s most recent, April 2015, credit report, this allegation is found for
Applicant.
1.k.  Applicant admits that he is indebted to Creditor K for a past-due debt of
about $271.  He avers that he “set something up through the Collection Agency,” but
has offered nothing further in this regard.  This allegation is found against Applicant.
3
1.l.  Applicant admits that he is indebted on delinquent fines and court costs as
the result of convictions in about August of 2012, and in about July of 2013.  This
allegation is found against Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
2.a.  Applicant admits that in answer to “Section 26 - Financial Record
Delinquency Involving Enforcement,” he was less than candid with the Government as
to judgments in favor of Creditors A and B.  I find this to be a wilful falsification.
2.b.  Applicant admits that in answer to “Section 26 - Financial Record
Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts,” he was less than candid with the Government
as to any outstanding debts.  I also find this to be a wilful falsification.
2.c.  Applicant admits that in November of 2011, he was fired from his job for
safety violations.
2.d.  Applicant admits that in June of 2008, he received non-judicial punishment
for “fighting.”
2.e.  Applicant admits to a pattern of law and rule violations from about May of
2005 to about March of 2014, as evidenced by 11 motor vehicle code related
convictions.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has significant past due debts that
he has yet to address.  The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying
conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties.  Subparagraph 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@  Applicant has failed to submit any documentation showing
that he has made a good-faith effort to address the vast majority of his significant past-
5
due debts.  I can find no countervailing Mitigating Condition that is applicable here.
Financial Considerations are found against the Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
Paragraph 15: “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”
The following Disqualifying Condition under Subparagraph 16(a) applies.  It
provides that the “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . or similar form used to conduct
investigations . . .” may be disqualifying.  I can find no countervailing Mitigating
Condition here, as the Applicant could have easily answered his e-QIP honestly, which
he certified as “true, complete, and correct.”  Under Subparagraph 16(d)(3) there is also
“a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations,” as evidenced by 11 motor vehicle code
related convictions, his being fired from his job, and by non-judicial punishment.
Personal Conduct is found against the Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The record evidence leaves me with
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
For these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising
from his Financial Considerations, and Personal Conduct.
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.f.~1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.k. and 1.l. Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a.~2.e. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
