                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )       ISCR Case No. 14-04926
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On April 20, 2015, Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865 (Exec. Or. 10865),
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 12, 2015, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s File of
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 29, 2015, and responded  to the FORM within
the time permitted with documented explanations of his tax payments for 2004 and
current IRS account status of his 2008-2011 federal taxes. Applicant’s submission was
admitted as Item 9. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2016.  
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) accrued approximately $30,000 in
delinquent federal taxes for the tax years 2004, 2008, 2009, and 2011; (b) incurred
three adverse judgments: one in May 2014 for $7,351, another in 2008 for $1,206, and
another in 2009 for $1,717; and (c) accumulated five delinquent debts (including $3,030
in child support payments) exceeding $7,000. Allegedly, each of the listed delinquent
debts remain outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted some of the allegations, but
denied others. He claimed several of the listed debts were paid: debts covered by
subparagraphs 1.c and 1.e. He claimed to be attempting settlement arrangements with
creditors covered by subparagraphs 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. And he claimed the debts
covered by subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b are being paid involuntarily through
garnishment.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 51-year-old aircraft helper for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in May 1993 and divorced in October 2003. (Item 1) He
reported no children from this marriage, but claimed he was indebted for past child
support. 
Applicant claimed no post-high school education credits and no military service.
(Item 1) He has worked for his current employer as an aircraft helper since April 2012.
(Item 1) Between July 2011 and April 2012 he was unemployed. Previously, he worked
for a defense contractor as a supply technician (March 2008 through July 2011) and for
a warehouse supply firm (January 2007 through March 2008) as a warehouse
distribution manager. (Item 1)
Finances
Applicant accumulated delinquent federal taxes for tax years 2004 and 2008-
2011 in excess of $30,000. He attributed his 2004 delinquent tax accruals to his divorce
and his ex-spouse’s unwillingness to share their 2004 joint tax obligations, which were
3
relatively high for that year (around $25,000). (Item 8) With his limited income during
the 2008-2011 time frame, he was unable to follow through with his satisfaction of the
taxes jointly owed for the 2004 tax year. (Item 8) 
Applicant made payment arrangements with the IRS in 2012 to meet his
outstanding tax obligations, but failed to follow through by any identified means, once
again for lack of funds. (Item 8) He estimated he owed back federal taxes as follows: for
2008 ($3,000), for 2009 ($2,000), for 2010 ($5,000), and for  2011 ($2,000). (Item 8)
In July 2012, Applicant set up a payment plan with the IRS and commenced
making monthly payments of $300 a month. (Item 8) He could not document the
payments he has made to the IRS for the tax years in issue. Beginning in 2013, the IRS
initiated garnishment of Applicant’s wages in the amount of $1,000 bi-weekly. (Items 2
and 8) It remains unclear how much he has paid to date in back federal taxes. His
payment credits to date reveal no more than $2,000 paid to the IRS, enough to cover
only his 2004 tax obligations. (Item 8) His installment agreement with the IRS reveals
that $1,846 was paid, leaving a remaining balance of $11,959 owing for tax years 2008-
2011. (Item 9)
Besides his tax debts to the IRS, Applicant accrued several adverse judgments
between 2008 and 2014. (Items 1-3 and 4-5) Records document that he incurred a
judgment from creditor 1.b in the amount of $7,351 in May 2014 that has been satisfied
in part ($2,055) through involuntary garnishment. (Item 2) How much is still owing on
this judgment is unclear. Applicant incurred an adverse judgment from creditor 1.h in
2008 in the amount of $1,206 and an adverse judgment from creditor 1.i in 2009 in the
amount of $1,717. (Items 4-5) Neither of these judgments have been addressed to
date. 
Other debts accumulated by Applicant include three medical debts totaling $345
(creditors 1.c-1.e) and a utility debt with creditor 1.f in the reported amount of $751
(creditor 1.f) These debts have not been addressed by Applicant and remain
outstanding. (Items 2-4)  
Applicant also accumulated child support arrearage with his state’s responsible
child support agency in the approximate amount of $3,030. Records document that this
arrearage has been satisfied in part through bi-weekly garnishment levies. (Item 2)
Applicant did not provide documentation of how much of his child support arrearage
has been collected through involuntary garnishment proceedings, or paid by voluntary
means, if any. 
Endorsements
Applicant provided no character references on his behalf, either with his answer
or with his response to the FORM.  Nor did he furnish any evidence of counseling and
budgeting, performance evaluations or evidence of community and civic contributions. 
4
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
5
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully employed aircraft helper for a defense contractor who
accumulated delinquent debts exceeding $43,000. One of the listed  debts covers
delinquent federal taxes in excess of $30,000 for tax years 2004 and 2008 through
2011, of which only his 2004 tax delinquencies have been satisfied to date.
Applicant’s listed debts include one outstanding judgment with creditor 1.b which
currently is being addressed through involuntary garnishment. His remaining debts
consist of two outstanding judgments, three medical debts, a utility debt, and child
support arrearage. Little voluntary progress has been made on these debts.
Garnishment levies have resulted in some reduction of his tax debts (including the
elimination of his 2004 tax year delinquency, creditor 1.b judgment debt in part
through garnishment, and his child support arrearage in part through garnishment). 
6
Applicant’s collective accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application
of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligation,”  apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his accumulation of
unaddressed delinquent debts covered in the SOR negate the need for any
independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of
Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his credit reports.                                 
     
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Inferentially, Applicant’s delinquent debts are attributable for the most part to
financial complications from his divorce. Without more information from Applicant
about his debt delinquencies and the status of his remaining debts, more detailed
assessments cannot be made. Based on the documented materials in the FORM,
some extenuating circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay or
otherwise resolve his debts. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a
death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly.” 
What is not clear from this developed record are the specifics of Applicant’s
circumstances preceding his accrued tax and medical debts, adverse judgments,
other accrued debts, and accumulated child support arrearage. Without
documentation of the circumstances that gave rise to his falling behind with his debts
and his multiple failures to address his debts and avoid garnishment, mitigation credit
is not available to Applicant based on the evidence developed in the record. To date,
he has taken insufficient corrective steps to resolve his delinquencies and
demonstrate he acted responsibly in addressing his listed debts. See ISCR Case 03-
01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
 
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent federal taxes, adverse
judgments, and other debts and failure to resolve them. Resolution of his listed
delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to his regaining control of his finances
and are not demonstrated sufficiently to meet minimum eligibility criteria for holding a
security clearance. 
Character references, performance evaluations, and evidence of community
contributions are not available to more evaluate Applicant’s overall trustworthiness,
7
reliability, and judgment. While unanticipated financial burdens might have played a
considerable role in his failures to address his delinquent debts, Applicant failed to
provide more specific explanatory material for consideration.  
Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited
amount of information available for consideration in this record does not enable him to
establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising
out of his lapses in judgment associated with his accumulation of delinquent tax,
judgment, and other debts
More time is needed to facilitate Applicant’s making the necessary progress
with his creditors to facilitate conclusions that his finances are sufficiently stabilized to
permit him access to classified information. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.i:                Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
