1 
            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 14-05082 
)
 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Although Applicant 
has demonstrated a desire and willingness to repair his finances, he has not 
demonstrated a sufficient track record of rehabilitation or debt repayment to mitigate the 
financial considerations concerns. Clearance is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On December 5, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
    09/23/2016
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On April 4, 2016, I 
issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2 Department 
Counsel submitted documents by the April 15, 2016 deadline. At the hearing, which 
proceeded as scheduled on April 27, 2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, and Hearing Exhibits I – III, without 
objection. The record remained open until June 15, 2016 to allow Applicant to submit 
additional information about his finances. The Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals 
(DOHA) received the transcript (Tr.) on May 10, 2016. Applicant submitted AE F 
through L, which are also admitted without objection.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 48, works as an information technology professional for a federal 
contractor. He began working for his employer in May 1989 in the mail room. Over the 
years, Applicant worked his way up the ranks. In 2000, he transitioned into a low-level 
management position, supervising several employees. In 2006, Applicant earned an 
associate’s degree in computer science. He financed his education with $23,000 in 
student loans. In September 2013, Applicant completed a security clearance 
application. The ensuing investigation revealed Applicant’s history of financial problems. 
The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to five creditors for approximately $25,800.4 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began in 2000. His then wife, whom he married in 
2000, helped him rehabilitate his finances. They were able to buy a home and Applicant 
obtained a personal loan to improve the property. Applicant’s marriage ended in divorce 
in 2002. To expedite divorce, the couple agreed to leave the marriage with the debts 
each held in their names. They sold the marital home by short sale. Although, Applicant 
carried the majority of the marital debt in his name, he was able to manage his finances 
until 2006. Applicant’s roommate became engaged and moved out, leaving Applicant to 
cover the rent on his own. Applicant could not afford to do so. He allowed his student 
loans and other credit obligations to become delinquent in an effort to focus on his living 
expenses.5  
 
In November 2015, Applicant contacted the company’s Employee Assistance 
Program (EAP) for help resolving his delinquent accounts. The EAP referred Applicant 
to a debt consolidation service. He enrolled in a debt consolidation plan in April 2016. 
The service helped Applicant develop a budget and helped him arrange payment plans 
for the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b ($436) and 1.d ($387). Payments under the plan 
were scheduled to begin in May 2016. The service advised Applicant to address the 
accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($169) and 1.e ($2,145) outside of the plan. At hearing, 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 HE IV. 
 
4 Tr. 22-24, 33; GE 1-3.  
 
5 Tr. 24, 27-33.  
 
3 
 
Applicant testified that he planned to pay off SOR ¶ 1.c and that he is in the process of 
negotiating a payment plan for SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant has also been in contact with his 
student loan provider. After requesting repayment options on an income-based plan, the 
student loan provider reviewed Applicant’s finances and determined that Applicant could 
not afford to make payments. The provider placed the loans in forbearance status from 
April 2016 until September 2016. When the forbearance period ends, the student loan 
provider will reevaluate Applicant’s finances to determine his new payments. However, 
his loan is currently considered to be in good standing. According to the budget 
Applicant developed with the help of the debt consolidation service, Applicant has less 
than $200 in disposable income. He believes that he will be able to afford any future 
student loan payment.6  
 
In addition to the debts alleged in the SOR, the most recent credit report in the 
record, dated February 2016, shows that Applicant owes $30,449 in federal taxes and 
$10,148 in state taxes. These amounts include penalties and interest. Liens were filed 
against Applicant in January 2014 and November 2015, respectively. Applicant 
explained that for a number of years he was not having enough federal tax withheld 
from his pay. In October 2014, the IRS sent a “lock-in” letter to Applicant’s employer, 
ordering them to adjust Applicant’s filing status to single and his exemptions to zero. In 
March 2016, the IRS contacted Applicant directly about his outstanding tax liability. After 
reviewing Applicant’s financial information, the IRS determined that Applicant could not 
afford to make any additional payments toward his tax debts, which are from the years 
2008 through 2014. Applicant, who earns $52,000 annually, plans to reduce his tax debt 
by relying on his federal tax withholdings from his pay. At the current rate of 
withholdings, Applicant believes he will be entitled to a refund each year, which will be 
captured by the IRS and applied to his outstanding tax balance. Applicant has not 
incurred any additional tax debt since the receiving the lock-in letter in 2014. He is 
reducing his state tax liability through a $190 bi-weekly garnishment.7  
 
Applicant admits that he has struggled to manage his finances in the past. 
However, he believes that through the counseling he has received through the credit 
consolidation company that he is learning to develop better money management skills. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
6 Tr. 25-27, 34-37; AE A-E; I, L. 
 
7Tr. 38-44; GE 3; AE H, J-K.  
 
4 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”8 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he owes approximately $25,800 in 
delinquent debts. Applicant admits that he has a history of not paying his financial 
                                                          
8  AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
obligations and that for many years he has had an inability to do so.9 While a large 
portion of Applicant’s financial problems were caused by his poor financial management 
habits, his finances were also impacted by events beyond his control, his 2002 divorce, 
and a change in living situation in 2006 that left him unable to maintain his living 
expenses and his debt obligations. Applicant has acted responsibly by seeking help to 
address his financial issues.10 
 
Through the debt consolidation service, Applicant is being counseled on 
rehabilitating his poor financial habits. With the help of the service, Applicant has 
developed a working budget and received advice on how to resolve his delinquent 
accounts. Although he presented evidence of repayment plans for SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d, 
Applicant has not presented an actual record of repayment. Even though Applicant’s 
student loan is in good standing, it is unclear if he has the ability to make the student 
loan payments once the loan is returned to active status.  
 
Though not alleged, the status of Applicant’s 2014 federal and  2015 state tax 
liens are also relevant to a determination of his security worthiness. While the existence 
of the tax liens may not be used as an independent basis for denying Applicant’s 
application for a security clearance, they can be considered for the limited purpose of 
assessing an applicant’s credibility; to evaluating evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or 
changed circumstances; to considering whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis.11 While the tax liens are 
further evidence of Applicant’s long history of financial problems, it is worth noting that 
he is not ignoring the issue. The state tax lien is being addressed through a 
garnishment. Applicant has been in contact with the IRS about his federal tax lien.  
Because he cannot afford to make payments on the federal tax debt, the outstanding 
balance will be resolved through the capture of any future refunds to which Applicant 
may be entitled.  However, the existence of the liens undercuts total mitigation of the 
financial considerations concerns.  At this time, the record does not support a finding 
that Applicant’s finances are under control.  
 
  After reviewing the record, doubts remain about Applicant’s suitability for access 
to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has a long history of financial problems, dating 
back to at least 2000. While Applicant has a demonstrated a strong desire to repair his 
credit and is taking steps to do so, he has not demonstrated a sufficient period of 
financial reform and rehabilitation, nor has he established a track record of debt 
repayment sufficient to mitigate the overall financial concern. This decision should not 
be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the type of 
financial stability necessary to justify the granting of a security clearance. The award of 
a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the 
factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. A clearance is not 
                                                          
9 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
10 AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
11 ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). 
 
6 
 
granted due to Applicant’s current circumstances. However, in the future, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
