 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06797 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concern, but not the 
alcohol consumption concern. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 23, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 27, 2015. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 27, 2016. The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant who received it on February 5, 2016. As evidence, the Government 
offered Items 2 through 7, which were admitted without objection (Item 1 was the SOR 
and Applicant’s answer). Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit any additional 
evidence or enter any objections. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer (Answer) to the SOR, he denied all the Guideline F 
allegations, but admitted all the Guideline G allegations. His admissions are adopted as 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and evidence 
submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He is single, never married and he has no children. He 
has worked for his current employer since June 2010. He is a high school graduate and 
has taken several courses working towards a bachelor’s degree.1  
  
Financial Considerations: 
 
 The SOR lists two collection debts and a charged-off debt. They are all consumer 
debts in the amounts of $6,200; $15,453; and $51 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c). These 
debts are supported by credit reports from March 2013 and July 2015. In his Answer, 
Applicant provided documentation showing that all three debts were paid or settled in 
2013. These debts are resolved and there is no evidence of continuing financial 
problems.2  
 
Alcohol Consumption: 
 
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR included: a history of consuming alcohol, 
at times to excess, from 2008 to at least 2013; being arrested for driving while impaired 
by alcohol (DWI) in April 2008 and pleading guilty to the charge in April 2010; being 
arrested and charged for DWI in July 2010; and being arrested for DWI in December 
2012 and pleading guilty to the charge in October 2013 (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.d).3 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol when he was approximately 19 years old in 
2008. He began drinking twice a week consuming three to four beers on most 
occasions. He would drink to the point of intoxication once a week. He claims he has 
stopped drinking alcohol since his last DWI arrest in December 2012.4 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 1, 3-4. 
 
3 Items 1, 5-7. 
 
4 Item 7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Court documents establish that Applicant was found guilty of two DWI offenses, 
in 2010 (2008 arrest) and 2013 (2012 arrest). His 2010 DWI arrest was not resolved 
until June 2015, as reflected in a letter from his attorney who handled his case.5 
 
 In October 2008, Applicant was driving home from a bar where he consumed an 
unknown quantity of beer. He was stopped by a police officer, given a field sobriety test, 
a breathalyzer test, and based upon the results, was arrested. He was found guilty and 
his sentence included alcohol counseling and loss of his driver’s license for three 
months.6   
 
 In July 2010, Applicant was going home from a restaurant when he was stopped 
at a police check point. He was given a breathalyzer test that registered at .09% blood-
alcohol content (BAC), which is over the legal limit. He was found guilty of driving while 
impaired in June 2015. His sentence included a fine, suspension of driving privileges for 
90 days, successful completion of motor vehicles drinking driver program (consisting of 
seven weekly classes lasting two to three hours each), successful completion of a victim 
impact class, and no arrests for one year. The record is unclear whether these 
sentencing requirements were fulfilled.7 
 
 In December 2012, Applicant was stopped for a traffic violation. He passed the 
field sobriety test he was given, but refused to take a breathalyzer test. He claims he 
only drank one beer before driving. He pleaded guilty to DWI in October 2013 and was 
sentenced to supervised probation. He provided documentation showing he attended 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) classes in July 2013 (three classes), November 2013 (four 
classes), December 2013 (three classes), and January 2014 (three classes). He also 
provided evidence that he attended a two-day intervention course (Impact DUI) in July 
2013. There is no evidence that he followed-up the two-day course with the 26-week or 
48-week aftercare plan referred to in the Impact DUI letter. He completed the required 
monitoring period to have the state’s ignition interlock removed from his vehicle in 
February 2015. No further information concerning alcohol treatment programs was 
provided.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
5 Item 1, 5-6. 
 
6 Items 1, 7. 
 
7 Items 1, 7. 
 
8 Items 1, 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant accumulated delinquent debts over an extended period of time. I find 
both disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20, and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has resolved all his delinquent debts. His efforts to repair his financial 
position make it reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do 
they cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
applies. There are clear indications that Applicant’s debts are resolved and under 
control. Applicant made good-faith efforts to resolve the debts listed on the SOR. He 
supplied documentary evidence showing the payments were made and the debts were 
paid. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
 (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 Applicant’s three DWI convictions and his alcohol consumption history support 
the application of both disqualifying conditions.  
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for alcohol consumption 
under AG ¶ 23 and found the following relevant: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 Applicant’s last adverse alcohol incident occurred in December 2012 and he 
completed his interlock monitoring in February 2015. His three DWI convictions are not 
infrequent under these circumstances. Insufficient attenuation exists to conclude 
enough time has passed since his last alcohol-related incident. His history of DWI 
arrests and convictions under similar circumstances suggest that recurrence is a 
possibility. His current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment are in doubt. AG ¶ 
23(a) does not apply. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant produced evidence that he attended some AA classes in late 2013 and 
early 2014. There is no evidence he is still attending these meetings. Applicant claims 
he stopped consuming alcohol in 2012. Applicant’s two-day intervention course was not 
followed by the multi-week aftercare counseling. There was no diagnosis information 
provided. AG ¶¶ 23(b) and 23(d) partially apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s personal 
circumstances. The evidence supports that he is again financially stable and that he 
resolved the debts. The record contains sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial 
security concerns, but there is insufficient evidence to mitigate the alcohol consumption 
concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline G, 
alcohol consumption. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   For Applicant 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
