 
1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04975 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to file his 
federal income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 2013. The returns were filed 18 
months before his hearing. He has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 On May 19, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial considerations 
security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On June 12, 2015, 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On September 30, 2015, I was 
assigned the case. On October 29, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for a hearing to be convened on November 16, 
2015.  
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2 were admitted without 
objection The record was left open to allow Applicant to submit documents, which he did 
and which were admitted as Ex. A – M. Applicant testified at the hearing. On November 
15, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he stated that after tax year 2007 he filed 
federal income tax extension requests2 as to the filings his federal income tax returns. 
He stated he had sufficient income tax withheld for each tax year in question. His 
admissions are incorporated as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old assistant software engineer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since July 2002, and he seeks to obtain a security clearance. His 
gross annual salary is approximately $136,000 and his wife’s annual income is $20,000 
to $25,000. He has two retirement accounts that total $443,528 and $278,393. (Ex. H, I, 
K) 
 
In March 2014, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on which he indicated he had not filed his federal 
income tax returns as required. His state of residence does not have a state income tax. 
He indicated he was working with a certified public account (CPA) to file his returns. 
(Ex. 1) A month later, in April 2014, during a personal subject interview (PSI), he 
admitted failing to file his 2008 through 2013 income tax returns. (Ex. 3) The following 
month, in May 2014, he filed his federal income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 
2013. (Ex. A – F) 
 
 Until 2008, Applicant timely filed his federal income tax returns. In 2008, his 
father died and he became executor of his father’s estate. The administration of his 
father’s estate was complicated because of a trust and because his father’s residence 
had been miles away in a different state. Applicant incorrectly assumed the filing of his 
personal income tax returns was somehow related to the filing of his father’s estate 
return. He incorrectly assumed that he could not file his personal returns until the estate 
returns were filed. 
 
                                                          
2 The IRs Form 4868, for Automatic Extension of Time to File U.S. Individual Income Tax Returns, allows 
a six month extension to file returns. There is no extension for the payment of income tax due. The time 
cannot be extended for more than six months.  
 
 
3 
 
 In 2014, Applicant’s accountant informed him that his father’s estate and tax 
returns were completely independent of his personal income tax returns. In May 2014, 
after being so informed, he immediately filed his personal returns for tax years 2008 
through 2013. He had tax withheld each year sufficient to cover the amount of federal 
income tax owed. A summary of his income, tax withheld, and overpayment of taxes 
follows.  
 
Tax Year Taxable 
Income 
Income Tax 
Owed 
Income Tax 
Withheld 
Amount of 
Overpayment 
Amount to 
be 
refunded3 
2008 
(Ex. A) 
$88,451 $10,656 $17,221 $6,565 No refund 
allowed. 
2009 
(Ex. B) 
$81,773 $8,419 $12,899 $4,480 No refund 
allowed 
2010 
(Ex. C) 
$75,862 $6,631 $11,438 $4,805  
2011 
(Ex. D) 
$87,306 $9,931 $14,218 $4,287  
2012 
(Ex. E) 
$75,326 $6,141 $10,728 $4,587  
2013 
(Ex. F) 
$70,206 $4,691 $9,482 $4,791  
 
 Claims for income tax refunds must be made within three years of the due date 
of the return. For tax returns filed in May 2014, only tax years of 2010 or more recent 
would be allowed a refund. The filing deadline for filing a return for tax year 2010 was 
April 2011. The filing deadline for filing a tax refund claim for tax year 2010 was April 15, 
2014. However, Applicant filed an extension, which would allow for an additional period 
to claim a refund.  
 
Although Applicant was over withheld for tax years 2008 and 2009 (according to 
the table he over withheld for 2008, but not 2009), he will not receive a refund for those 
years because he failed to claim the refund in a timely manner. The amount over 
withheld for those years was approximately $11,000. The IRS informed Applicant by 
letter dated May 22, 2015, that he would not receive an income tax refund for tax year 
2009. (Ex. H, J) Applicant received a $19,029 federal income tax refund. (Ex. H, L) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
3 The amounts of refunds for tax year 2011, 2012, and 2013 may be less than shown on the chart 
because those returns might be subject to a penalty for not filing in a timely manner. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for tax years 2008 through 
2013 in a timely manner. Although he over withheld for those tax years, he still failed to 
file in a timely manner. AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same” apply.  
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
6 
 
 
 Until tax year 2008, Applicant filed his federal income tax returns in a timely 
manner. He became the executor of his father’s estate when his father died in 2008. 
The administration of his father’s estate was complicated because of a trust and the 
distance Applicant lived from his father’s location. Applicant incorrectly assumed the 
filing of his personal income tax returns was somehow related to his father’s estate. He 
incorrectly assumed that he could not file his personal returns until the estate returns 
were filed. 
 
 In 2014, Applicant learned his father’s estate and tax returns were completely 
independent of his personal income tax returns. When so informed in May 2014, he 
immediately filed his personal returns for tax years 2008 through 2013. He had tax 
withheld each year sufficient to cover the amount of federal income tax owed. Because 
his claim for income tax refunds for tax years 2008 and 2009 were beyond the period to 
claim a refund. Had he timely requested a refund, he would have received 
approximately $11,000 due to the overpayment of his taxes. 
 
 In 2014, Applicant filed his e-QIP on which he indicated he had not timely filed 
his tax returns. A month later, he stated the same during a PSI, and a month after the 
interview. He filed his tax returns, and received refunds totaling more than $19,000. 
 
 Under AG ¶20(a), the behavior was not infrequent for his failure to file involved 
six tax years, but Applicant’s failure to file was due to a misconception that he could not 
file his personal income tax returns until he filed is father’s estate returns. As such this 
failure to file was the result of circumstances that are unlikely to recur. Because he  over 
withheld and was due a refund, his actions do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 20(c), Applicant has not received counseling for the problem, but did 
receive proper income tax advice from his CPA. He followed that advice, filed his 
returns, and there is a clear indication that the problem is resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. 
Since he has now filed his returns and received refunds of his overpaid taxes. AG ¶ 
20(d) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant should have filed his 
income tax returns in a more timely manner. He was over withheld on his taxes and his 
failure to file resulted in the loss of more than $11,000 in refunds for tax years 2008 and 
2009. In 2014, when he filed his e-QIP, he was completely honest and indicated he had 
not timely filed his tax returns. A month later he stated the same in his PSI. Shortly after 
the interview, he filed his income tax returns and received refunds totaling more than 
$19,000. All of his tax returns were filed more than 18 months before the hearing. 
Additionally, he has retirement accounts that total more than $700,000. 
  
The issue is not simply whether all his tax returns have been filed — which they 
have — it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold 
a security clearance. See AG & 2(a)(1). Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising 
from his delinquent financial obligations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
