KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Department Counsel did not rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence.  Not all contacts between persons with clearance and foreign officials are
disqualifying.  Favorable decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 14-05013.a1
DATE: 09/27/2016
DATE: September 27, 2016
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05013
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 10, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of DoD Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On
June 1, 2016, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul granted
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive
¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to
consider important aspects of the case and whether the Judge’s application of the pertinent
mitigating condition was erroneous.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 74-year-old retired professor from a U.S. university who has emeritus status
and still maintains an campus office.  He was born in the United States.  His wife, child, and sister
are U.S. citizens.  He received his bachelor’s, master’s, and doctorate degrees from a U.S. university. 
  
Applicant admitted both of the SOR allegations.  The first alleged that Applicant maintains
contact with an associate who is a citizen and resident of Taiwan, who is the director of a scientific
institute in Taiwan, and who previously served for years as a senior official of the Taiwanese
Government.  Applicant wrote that he and the associate have had a purely scientific interaction.  For
several years at the U.S. university, they worked together on research and teaching programs.  After
the associate left the university, they did not have contact for years until the associate proposed that
Applicant serve on a review board at the Taiwanese scientific institute.  Applicant asserted, “At no
time in our entire history have [the associate] and I discussed any political or social issues; nor did
we discuss any of my government . . . industrial research efforts.”  Decision at 3.1
The second SOR allegation asserted that Applicant agreed to serve as an advisory committee
member of the Taiwanese scientific institute and traveled to Taiwan in 2013.  Applicant stated that
he was encouraged by his university to serve on the review board to promote cooperation and
collaboration.  During his visit to Taiwan of less than one week, he met with faculty and students
to hear descriptions of their research and to discuss their goals and progress.  He reiterated that all
of his discussions were of a scientific nature.  
  
In his Response to the FORM, Applicant noted the recitation of the facts made no mention
of his assertion that, during his trip to Taiwan, he had no discussion of his Government or industry
research with foreign scientists.  He also provided a letter from the director of a U.S. scientific
institute that stated Applicant was one of the most accomplished faculty members, has made
significant contributions to national security, and it is inconceivable that he would ever do anything
to jeopardize U.S. security.  The director also described the Taiwanese associate as a friend of the
U.S. and distinguished professor who has two children who are citizens and residents of the United
States. 
Taiwan has an elected democratic government.  It is a leading producer of high-technology
goods and engages in industrial and economic espionage.  Proprietary information technology is
high on the Taiwanese list of targeted information to be acquired by their agents from foreign
governments and businesses. 
1 In the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Department Counsel noted that it is not the discussion of social and
political issues that are the security concern in this case, but the scientific matter associated with the classified DoD
projects.
2
Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found that disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 7(a)2 and 7(b)3 applied, but ¶ 8(b)4
mitigated those security concerns.  After reiterating facts about Applicant and the Taiwanese
associate, the Judge noted Applicant clearly asserted that, during his entire history with the associate
and during his trip to Taiwan, no discussion was ever held about his research for Government or
industry.  
Discussion
 A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  The Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s
decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After
the Government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to
rebut or mitigate those concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at
3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
2 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(a) states, “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion[.]” 
3 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 7(b) states, “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligations to protect sensitive information or technology
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information[.]” 
4 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(b) states, “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country was so minimal, or the individual has such
a deep and longstanding relationship and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict
of interest in favor of the U.S. interest[.]”
3
In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
Judge’s decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate
a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts
found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment;
it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s decision was flawed because it failed to consider
important aspects of the case.  His arguments focus on the high-level of the associate’s governmental
position, the relationship between the Taiwanese governmental agency involved and the scientific
institute, and the timing of the associate’s request to Applicant. Specifically, he noted that the
associate left a high-level position in the Taiwanese government shortly before approaching
Applicant about serving on the review board for the Taiwanese scientific institute.  However, the
Judge made findings about most of those matters.  Department Counsel’s arguments are not
sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04959 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016). 
Noting the spare record, Department Counsel further contends that the Judge’s mitigation
analysis is flawed.  Specifically, Department Counsel argues that the Judge neither addressed that
Taiwan is an active collector of industrial information nor discussed the associate’s former high-
level governmental position in Taiwan in the decision’s analysis section, but merely commented that
the associate had ties to the U.S. as a respected scientist.  As noted above, the Judge made findings
of fact about those matters, which establishes that he was cognizant of them when he conducted his
mitigation analysis.  In assessing Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the U.S., the Judge noted that Applicant is a U.S.-born citizen; his wife, child, and sister are U.S.
citizens; his education was entirely in the U.S., and he was employed at a U.S. university for about
35 years before retiring.  The university developed a memorandum of understanding (MOU)  with
the Taiwanese scientific institute to promote cooperation and collaboration and, as part of that MOU,
encouraged Applicant to serve on the review board of the foreign scientific institute.  FORM Item
1 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR).  The record is void of any evidence that Applicant received any
compensation for his service on the review board.  His trip to Taiwan was less than a week in
November 2013 and his involvement with the foreign scientific institute was apparently for about
one month.  FORM Item 2 (Applicant’s security clearance application).  Applicant stated that,
during his trip to Taiwan, he had no discussion with foreign scientists about his research for the U.S.
government or industry.  In his April 2014 background interview, Applicant stated that he received
one email from the foreign associate since November 2013, and he does not have any lasting
contacts with any foreign nationals.  FORM Item  4 (summary of Applicant’s background
interview). While contacts between individuals who hold security clearances and current and former
high-level foreign officials often warrant scrutiny, not all of those contacts are disqualifying.  
Given the record before him, the Judge articulated a rational explanation for his favorable
decision.  An appealing party’s disagreement with a Judge’s decision is not a sufficient basis to
establish that he erred.  ISCR Case No. 03-21190 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 12, 2007).  The Board
4
concludes that the Judge’s favorable security decision is not arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law,
given the totality of the facts and circumstances of this case.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3. 
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy              
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
SEPARATE OPINION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE MICHAEL Y. RA’ANAN
Department Counsel raises the issue of whether the Judge’s analysis adequately considered
and addressed the role of Applicant’s foreign contact: a man with a history as a high level official
in a country that engages in espionage against the United Sates.   I favor remanding the case for the
issuance of a new decision.  Such a remand would include instructions for the Judge to discuss in
detail how Applicant’s contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure or coercion. The Judge could then address in detail to what extent and how
the risk presented is mitigated by record evidence.  Compare, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03112 at 3-4
(App. Bd.  Nov. 3, 2015) ,  ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015), and ISCR Case
No. 13-01341 at 5 (App. Bd.  Nov. 10, 2016).  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan          
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
5
