KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Given that Applicant’s delinquent debts have been in existence since at least 2006 and
that most of them were unresolved as of the close of the record, a reasonable person could
conclude that Applicant has exhibited a history of debt problems.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 14-01771.a1
DATE: 09/21/2016
DATE: September 21, 2016
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01771
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
William Ferris, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
20, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On June 29, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Michael H. Leonard denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that
Applicant’s case raised security concerns; whether the Judge failed to consider all of the evidence
in the record; whether the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law; whether the Judge erred in his application of the mitigating conditions, and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is employed in the Defense industry.  Since early 2010, he has worked in support
of U.S. objectives overseas.  He previously served in the military, retiring as an E-9.  
Applicant has a history of financial problems.  He admitted to owing all of the nearly
$50,000 worth of delinquent debt alleged in the SOR.  In addition, documentary evidence
substantiates the debts.  Applicant had a period of unemployment and underemployment from 2005
to 2010.  In 2005, he retired from a Government job but realized that he needed more income.  He
accepted a job as a salesman, but he did not earn any commissions, so he quit.  During this time he
incurred indebtedness for business-related expenses, as well as for personal expenses.
He also worked for about five months as a Defense contractor overseas and then as a
substitute teacher.  Throughout this period he performed duties in the Reserves.  After quitting his
sales position, Applicant consulted with an attorney who advised him to file for bankruptcy.  The
attorney also advised him to stop paying bills in advance of a bankruptcy filing.  However,
Applicant’s contractor job gave him enough income so that he could no longer qualify for
bankruptcy.  
After returning stateside, Applicant discussed his options with his attorney.  They waited for
creditors to file collection lawsuits and then attempted to settle.  Applicant has also used his current
attorney in an effort to resolve debts.  In all, Applicant resolved five of the thirteen debts alleged in
the SOR.  However, Applicant presented no evidence that he had resolved the remaining debts.  
Since 2010, Applicant has consistently earned over $100,000 annually.  He has about $7,000
in a savings account and about $15,000 in an investment account.  He stated that he has spent money
on various family members over the years.
The Judge’s Analysis
Noting that Guideline F includes within its scope the possible connection between an
applicant’s financial problems and his or her ability to protect classified information, the Judge
concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised two disqualifying conditions: 19(a) and (c).1 In
addressing Applicant’s case for mitigation, the Judge noted evidence of Applicant’s unemployment
and business-related expenses, which were circumstances not within his control.  However, he also
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(c): 
“a history of not meeting financial obligations[.]”  
noted that these difficulties occurred several years ago and that Applicant has been fully employed
for a number of years as well.  The Judge stated that Applicant, despite his income, has done little
to show that his financial difficulties are under control.  He concluded that Applicant’s problems
continue to cast doubt upon his ability to protect classified information.  
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge erred in concluding that his case raised concerns under
Guideline F.  He states that his period of unemployment was not lengthy and did not qualify as a
history of failing to pay his debts.  He also denied that he had demonstrated an inability to pay his
debts.
The Directive presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between admitted or proven
circumstances under any of its guidelines and an applicant’s security eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 15-01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016).  In this case, Applicant admitted most of the SOR
allegations, and the Judge found that the evidence presented by the Government was sufficient to
constitute substantial evidence of the allegations as well.2  Given that Applicant’s delinquent debts
have been in existence since at least 2006 and that most of them were unresolved as of the close of
the record, a reasonable person could conclude that Applicant has exhibited a history of debt
problems.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03984 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 10, 2014) for the proposition that
unresolved debts are a continuing course of conduct for purposes of Guideline F analysis. 
Applicant’s brief has not provided a reason to rebut the presumption of nexus.
Applicant does not specifically challenge the Judge’s findings of fact but provides a narrative
description supplementing those findings.  Applicant cites to his reliance upon the advice of the
bankruptcy attorney, his military service, and the circumstances underlying his financial
delinquencies.  He argues, among other things, that the Judge did not extend sufficient weight to
evidence concerning the bankruptcy attorney’s advice.  The Judge made findings about these things,
discussing much of it in the analysis.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record.  Neither has he shown that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-05795 at 2, 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016).
Applicant challenges the Judge’s treatment of the mitigating conditions and the whole-person
factors.  Among other things, he cites to evidence that some of Applicant’s debts that had been
cancelled, resulting in additional tax liability.  He argues that, under the circumstances, it was an
error for the Judge to have expected Applicant to pay debts that have been cancelled.  However, a
DOHA proceeding it not an exercise in debt collection.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3
(App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016).  Even if an applicant’s debts have been paid, or the creditor is no longer
seeking payment, the Judge can still consider the underlying circumstances in order to evaluate the
applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02394 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug.
17, 2015).  Given the totality of the evidence, we find no reason to disturb the Judge’s treatment of
2Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. See also ISCR Case No. 13-
01281 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2014).  
the mitigating conditions or his whole-person analysis.  In making his arguments, Applicant cites
to matters not contained within the record, including assertions about events that occurred after the
Decision was issued.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Decision ¶ E3.1.29.3   
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Egan, supra,
at 528.  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.     
      
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3Applicant challenges the Judge’s interpretation of Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988) and
Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988 (10th Cir. 2002).  He appears to understand the Judge to have cited these
cases in support of the proposition that the Appeal Board’s scope of review is limited in the same manner as that of the
Merit System Protection Board, which has no authority to address the substance of clearance adjudications.  In fact, the
Judge cited these cases in the Law and Policies section of the decision for the well-settled principle that no one has a due
process right to a security clearance.  Decision at 5.  The Judge neither stated nor intimated anything about the authority
of the Appeal Board, whose responsibilities are set forth in Directive ¶ E3.1.32.    
