 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04319 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 25, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On October 29, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and 
it was received on October 30, 2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days 
from receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government evidence and did 
not provide any material within the required timeframe. The Government’s documents 
identified as Items 1 through 6 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to 
me on September 20, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the sole allegation in the SOR with an explanation. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He is married and has three adult children. He earned 
a bachelor’s degree in 1992. He was unemployed for approximately three months in 
2009, but otherwise has been consistently employed since 1994.1 
 
 Credit reports from March 2013, April 2014, and February 2015 report that 
Applicant has a Federal tax lien in the amount of approximately $104,000 that was filed 
in 2010 and remains unpaid (SOR ¶ 1.a).2  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in March 2013. He did 
not disclose on his security clearance application (SCA) that he had a 2010 Federal tax 
lien. He also did not disclose he had several state tax liens from 2009 and 2010 that 
had been released. He indicated to the investigator that the state tax liens were due to 
discrepancies in his tax returns that were filed between 2001 and 2005. When 
confronted by the investigator with the Federal tax lien, Applicant indicated that the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) had contacted him between 2005 and 2007 and placed 
tax liens on him for discrepancies on his Federal tax returns for previous tax years or 
the IRS claimed he had not filed his Federal income tax returns. Applicant indicated to 
the investigator that he then re-submitted his Federal income tax returns for 2001 
through 2008. He did not disclose this information on his SCA because he believed 
these issues were outside of seven years and had been resolved. He advised the 
investigator that he was unsure if he owed anything for a Federal tax lien, because he 
never heard from the IRS again regarding his resubmission of his Federal income tax 
returns. He further advised the investigator that he would follow up with the IRS and 
make sure all of his tax liens were clear, and if he owed money he would pay it.3 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he explained there is a Federal tax lien against 
him. He stated that he attempted to reconcile the matter before the lien was entered in 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 3, 5, and 6. 
 
3 Items 2 and 4. I have not considered for disqualifying purposes that Applicant had state tax liens that 
were released. I have also not considered for disqualifying purposes that Applicant failed to disclose on 
his SCA the state tax liens or that he had an unpaid Federal tax lien. I may consider this information in my 
analysis of Applicant’s credibility, in mitigation, and the whole person. 
 
3 
 
 
2010. He stated he made numerous attempts to have the Federal “tax lien removed and 
the original cause rectified.”4 He further stated:  
 
The original cause is that the IRS claims that I did not file tax returns for 
the years 2000, 2001, 2003, and 2004, and the IRS did their own 
calculations of what taxes I owe plus penalties. I not only did file my tax 
returns on time, but I have also by the direction of representatives of the 
IRS re-filed them and marked them as “Substitute’ and “Duplicate” neither 
of which were ever acknowledged or entered. When I was notified of the 
tax lien in 2010, I contacted several tax attorneys in the [city] and all stated 
that they could assist me in resolving this matter. They also stated that I 
could also try again myself with the IRS, and I chose to do so and 
obtained the same results.5  
 
 Applicant further stated in his answer that in November 2014 he hired a law firm 
to assist him in resolving the matter. He stated that a tax lawyer and his team were 
actively working to resolve the matter. Applicant did not provide any documentary 
evidence of his efforts to resolve the matter. He did not provide any documents from the 
IRS or from his lawyer to substantiate that he has made attempts to resolve or pay the 
2010 Federal tax lien.6 He did not provide a response to the FORM.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
4 Item 1. 
 
5 Item 1. 
 
6 Item 1. 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 
5 
 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.7 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
  
Applicant has a 2010 Federal tax lien in the amount of $104,000 that remains 
unpaid and unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has a 2010 Federal income tax lien that is unpaid and unresolved. He 
indicated he has been dealing with the IRS on the matter since before the lien was 
entered, but he failed to provide documentary evidence of his actions. He indicated he 
attempted to resolve the matter by himself after he re-submitted Federal income tax 
returns, but did not provide documentary evidence to support his actions. He indicated 
that in 2014 he hired a tax attorney to resolve the matter, but failed to provide evidence 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
from the IRS or the attorney to substantiate his assertions that the matter is being 
resolved or under control. None of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 57 years old. A Federal tax lien was entered against him in 2010. He 
was confronted with the debt during his 2013 background interview. He has not 
provided evidence to show what action he has taken to resolve the debt. He has failed 
to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
     
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
