 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-053001 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He was delinquent on three 
student loans and on two collection accounts. His financial problems were contributed to 
by the condemnation of his condominium due to mold and a substantial reduction in 
pay, when his prior employer lost a contract. He filed for Chapter 13, Wage Earners 
Plan, bankruptcy protection to address his debts. Applicant has mitigated the financial 
considerations security concerns. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,2 on April 24, 2015, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. On May 24, 
                                                          
11 The Statement of Reasons list the case number as 14-04457 and the File of Relevant Material list the  
case number as 14-05300. 
 
2 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a 
hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
September 18, 2015. The FORM contained five attachments (Items). On September 29, 
2015, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially 
disqualifying conditions. On October 17, 2015, Applicant responded to the FORM. DC 
had no objection to the material submitted, and it was admitted as Item A. On 
December 1, 2015, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted owing three student loan 
obligations totaling approximately $37,700. (Item 1) He asserted he had been making 
payments3 on these loans the past few years. (Item 1) He denies owing the credit union 
on two collection accounts totaling $7,646 and admitted owing the same credit union on 
two accounts totaling $5,280, which had been charged off. (Item 1) He denies owing the 
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) $1,256.4 He admitted an $81 cable bill. I 
incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and submissions, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old labor supervisor who worked for a defense contractor 
with an annual salary of $96,000 until the contractor lost the contract in the fall of 2014.5 
At that time, he was hired by another defense contractor making $70,000 annually. His 
reduction in annual pay was approximately 27 percent. From December 1999 through 
December 2007, Applicant served in the U.S. Army National Guard. From August 2005 
through August 2006, he served in Iraq. (Item 2) In December 2007, he was honorably 
discharged. He has never married, and has no children. 
  
On Applicant’s January 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he listed a $110,000 mortgage on his condo, which had water 
leaks, mold, and the ceiling collapsed in various places. (Item 2) He stated he had hired 
an attorney to assist him with the mortgage. He also listed owing $6,500 on a credit 
card and line of credit (SOR 1.f and 1.g) and owing $14,000 to another creditor. (Item 2) 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
3 Applicant’s required monthly payments on these three student loans totaled $381. (Item 4) His April 
2015 credit report indicates he was making monthly payments of $201 on these three loans. (Item 4) 
 
4 Applicant’s January 2014 credit report lists this debt as a government overpayment. (Item 3) His April 
2015 credit report shows a zero amount past due on this account. (Item 4)  
 
5 Applicant’s Notice of Layoff, as of October 10, 2014, is part of Applicant’s Answer as is an employment 
offer from the job paying $70,000 annually obtained in November 2014. (Item 1) 
 
3 
In Applicant’s March 2014 Personal Subject Interview (PSI), his delinquent 
accounts were discussed. He stated he had been working with an attorney since 2012 
to address his debts; he would be working closely with an attorney through 2014 to 
repair his credit; and he would be filing for bankruptcy protection. (Item 5) 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties were compounded by his September 2007 
purchase of a condominium for $115,000 with a 30-year mortgage.6 (Item 1) The 
purchase itself did not cause his financial problems, but the physical state of the 
condominium caused him numerous and continuous problems.  
 
In November 2010, Applicant noticed problems with water leaks, mold, and later 
with the ceiling collapsing in various places. His attempts to rectify the problem are 
extremely well documented in the case file. (Item 1) However, his attempts to correct 
the problems were unsuccessful, and in February 2012, the condo was condemned. 
The county health department7 condemned not only his unit, but the entire building. 
(Item 1) Due to the condemnation, Applicant was required to leave the condo. (Item 5) 
His January 2014 credit report lists his mortgage both as being “Pays as Agreed”8 and 
as a foreclosure. (Item 3) 
 
Applicant rented a room from his sister and moved into her basement. (Item 1) 
Until May 2013, he continued making timely payments on his mortgage for the condo 
that was no longer habitable. (Item 3) He was advised by his bankruptcy attorney to 
stop paying some of his accounts.  
 
Applicant has received numerous student loans. Although he was making 
payments on his student loans he became delinquent on them. In August 1999, he 
obtained a $17,923 loan on which he was $5,300 delinquent. In November 1998, he 
obtained a $13,503 loan on which he was $4,168 delinquent, and in August 1997, he 
obtained a $6,327 loan on which he was $1,909 delinquent. The three loans combined 
totaled $37,753, on which he was more than $11,000 delinquent. As previously stated, 
the three loans are included in Applicant’s bankruptcy, which will allow him to bring 
them to current status under the supervision of the bankruptcy trustee. (Item A) Student 
loans are not dischargeable in bankruptcy. 
 
In the late 1990’s and early 2000’s, Applicant obtained student loans from 
additional lenders. He obtained $11,600 in loans from Sallie Mae, $15,600 from another 
lender, and $13,000 from a third lender. (Item 3, 4) These student loans have all been 
paid either by an automatic deduction from Applicant’s bank account or through 
insurance. (Item 3, 4, 5) All together more than $40,000 in other student loans were 
paid.  
                                                          
6 The mortgage was held by the same credit union listing the two charged-off accounts (SOR 1.f and 1.g) 
and the two collection accounts (SOR 1.d and 1e). (Item 2) 
 
7 The county’s Department of Environmental Resources documents are included in the record. (Item 1)  
 
8 Applicant’s January 2014 credit report lists six other accounts, all with zero balances, as having been 
paid as agreed. (Item 3)  
 
4 
 
Applicant’s January 2014 credit report lists two charged-off accounts (SOR 1.f, 
$2,661 and SOR 1.g, $2,619) and two collection accounts ($3,720 and $3,391), all with 
the same credit union. (Item 3) His April 2015 credit report only lists two collection 
accounts ($3,935 and $3,711). (Item 4) No charged-off accounts were listed in the more 
current credit report. The accounts had increased by $215 and $320. Applicant’s 
bankruptcy filing lists the mortgage and only two accounts owed to the credit union. 
(Item A)  
 
On August 23, 2015, Applicant filed for Chapter 13, Wage Earners Plan, 
bankruptcy protection, which will require him to make $367 monthly payments for 60 
months. (Item A) On October 15, 2015, the bankruptcy documents were reviewed by 
Applicant’s attorney and the bankruptcy trustee. (Item A) There is no signed order by 
the bankruptcy court. The filing listed assets of more than $14,000 and more than 
$155,000 in liabilities, which included the $110,000 mortgage, the three student loans 
(SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.c) totaling almost $38,000, and two additional credit union accounts 
($2,619 and $3,000). (Item A) His total liability excluding student loans and the 
mortgage is less than $8,000. The filing lists his car as a 2007model. (Item a) 
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy filing lists a monthly gross income of $6,042, payroll 
deductions of $1,837, and monthly expenses of $3,829. (Item A) This leaves a net 
monthly income of $376, which is the amount of his monthly payments to the 
bankruptcy trustee. (Item A) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
5 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
 
6 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was $14,597 past due on three student loans and had two collection 
accounts totaling $7,646. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s April 2015 credit report indicates the VA debt ($1,256) has zero 
amount past due. His latest credit report lists two credit union collection accounts, but 
does not list any charged-off credit union accounts. Applicant’s bankruptcy filing lists 
only the mortgage and two additional accounts owed the credit union. I find the two 
charged-off credit union accounts and the two collection credit union accounts are the 
same obligations.   
 
In February 2012, Applicant’s condo, along with the entire building, was 
condemned by the county health department due to mold and water damage. Even after 
being forced to leave his condo in February 2012, he continued making his mortgage 
payments in a timely manner until May 2013. He was paying even though he could not 
live there. In October 2014, Applicant’s annual income decreased by more than 27 per 
cent, when his then-employer lost a contract.  
 
 
7 
 AG ¶ 20(a) applies. His credit report shows numerous accounts that were paid as 
agreed. It is the condemnation of the condo and the large reduction in his annual 
income that led to his financial problems. These are unusual circumstances that were 
beyond his control. For the same reasons, AG & 20(b) applies. Based on the events in 
his life, he has acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies since it appears his 
financial problems are being resolved and are under control. There has been no 
evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. The mitigating condition listed in 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the debt in SOR 1.h ($1,256) because there is no past-due 
amount owed on that debt. There is no indication the $81 cable bill has been paid, but 
that amount is sufficiently small as not to be of security concern. 
 
Applicant’s three delinquent student loans are being paid though his Chapter 13 
wage earner’s plan. Often payment of a debt through bankruptcy proceeds is seen as 
not being a “good-faith effort” to repay creditors. However, the original required monthly 
payments on his three student loans totaled $381. He is paying $367 monthly to the 
bankruptcy trustee. Since bankruptcy does not discharge student loans, the bankruptcy 
is an appropriate mechanism, in this particular case, to address his debts. 
 
It is arguable that Applicant may not honor his monthly payments to the trustee 
because the plan only recently started. I look to Applicant’s payment on his other 
student loans and see that he had earlier obtained a Sallie Mae loan of $11,600, 
$15,600 from another lender, and $13,000 from another lender. All three of these 
student loans were paid. Having paid other student loans, I believe he will comply with 
the wage earners plan.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
8 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served in the 
U.S. Army National Guard. From August 2005 through August 2006, he served in Iraq. I 
do not take lightly that he has gone into harm’s way for his country. The debts incurred 
were not the type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously nor spent on luxuries. 
He is not living beyond his means. He drives a 2007 car. His three student loans and 
two credit union accounts are included in his bankruptcy repayment plan.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by circumstances beyond his control. 
In 2012, his condo was condemned due to mold, and in 2014, he had a sizable 
reduction in pay. Both events were through no fault of Applicant. Even after he was no 
longer allowed to live in his condo due to the condemnation, he continued to make his 
monthly mortgage payments from when he left in February 2012 through May 2013. 
This shows good faith on his part. His credit report shows numerous additional accounts 
on which he paid as agreed. More than $39,000 in other student loans not listed in the 
SOR were satisfied. Paying these student loans gives me confidence he will make his 
monthly payments to the bankruptcy trustee in a timely manner.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:  For Applicant   
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
9 
 
 
