 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-06923 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by his dishonest conduct. 
Specifically, he was able to obtain employment with a federal contractor by deliberately 
providing false and misleading information about his educational qualifications. His false 
representations allowed him to obtain and retain an industrial security clearance. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On June 4, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under the personal conduct guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing to establish his eligibility for continued access to classified information.2 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 Applicant was previously represented by counsel (Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.) who withdrew from the case 
before the hearing was scheduled. See Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I. See also, Transcript (Tr.) 26-27. 
 
2 
 
 
 On January 11, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed and requested 
that an administrative judge be assigned to hear the case. On March 3, 2016, I was 
assigned the case and, after coordinating with the parties, scheduled the hearing for 
April 28, 2016.3 The hearing was convened as scheduled. Applicant chose to testify at 
the hearing and the exhibits offered by both sides were admitted in evidence without 
objection.4 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on May 13, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 39, is married, with two children. He submitted a letter from the 
principal of his high school, confirming that he completed all requirements for graduation 
in June 1996. He also submitted his June 1996 high school diploma, which documents 
the highest level of education he completed.5 
 
Applicant served in the U.S. military, either with the National Guard or on active 
duty, from approximately 1995 to about 2002. His military service included a 
deployment in support of early U.S. combat operations in Afghanistan. He is currently 
seeking a position with the National Guard. He was initially granted a security clearance 
in approximately 1995 in connection with his military service.  
 
After leaving the military, Applicant and his wife purchased a home. He was 
working at a chain store of a large retail computer and electronics company, which has 
since filed for bankruptcy. He worked at the chain store for a year and was in the 
company’s accelerated management program before obtaining a job with Employer A, a 
federal contractor. Applicant listed his employment at the chain store on his security 
clearance application, but not on the resumes or employment applications he submitted 
to Employer A. He received a starting annual salary of $88,000 from Employer A, which 
was far higher than any of his previous salaries.6 
 
Applicant worked for Employer A from 2003 to 2011. On the resume Applicant 
submitted to Employer A (2003 resume), he stated that he was seeking a position as a 
“senior subject matter expert/systems engineer.”7 Applicant falsely claimed on his 2003 
resume that he earned a bachelor’s degree and two master’s degrees from two top U.S. 
universities. He did not attend nor earn a degree from either university. Instead, in 
approximately 2002, he paid about $5,000 to an unaccredited private college for a 
fraudulent college degree. His father would not lend him the money because he 
(Applicant’s father) was concerned about the legitimacy of the unaccredited college. 
                                                          
3 Prehearing scheduling correspondence and the notice of hearing are attached as Hx. II and III, 
respectively.  
 
4 Government exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 18 and Applicant’s exhibits (Ax.) A – G. 
 
5 Gx. 1; Ax. G.  
 
6 Gx. 1; Gx. 4 – 6; Gx. 8 – 10; Tr. 33-34, 43-45, 65-74. 
 
7 Gx. 4. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was surprised when he was sent a college and a master’s degree by the 
unaccredited college. He claims that he listed the two universities on his 2003 resume 
because he was purportedly told by a representative of the unaccredited college that 
they were affiliated with these top-tier schools. He further claims that he was unaware 
that the degrees he received were bogus. Applicant’s claims were not credible.8  
 
Applicant claimed in his 2003 resume that he graduated with top honors, with 
grade point averages of 3.8 or higher. He claimed to have earned a bachelor’s and a 
master’s degree from University A, and a second master’s degree from University B.9 In 
his employment application for a position with Employer A, Applicant no longer listed the 
second master’s degree. He, however, continued to claim to have earned a bachelor’s 
and master’s degree from University A. He further claimed to have earned these 
degrees after attending University A for a combined total of six years, including starting 
his purported studies at University A before graduating from high school.10 When 
questioned about his purported attendance at and degree from these top-tier schools, 
Applicant testified as follows: 
 
Q:  So just to be clear, from 1999 to 2000, were you at [University A]?11  
A:  Say that again, Your Honor. 
 
Q:  From 1999 to 2000, were you at [University A]? 
A:  No, Your Honor. 
 
Q:  In 2000 to 2001, were you at [University B]?  
A:  No, Your Honor. 
 
Q:  Did you receive a degree in U.S. National Security Policy from [University B]? 
A:  No, Your Honor. 
   
Q:  Did you receive a computer engineering degree from [University A]? 
A:  No, Your Honor. 
 
Q:  Did you receive an information systems management degree from [University 
A]? 
A:  No, Your Honor.12   
                                                          
8 Gx. 2; Gx. 4; Gx. 5; Gx. 12 – 14; Tr. 32-45, 70-72. Applicant initially only claimed that he was told by the 
unaccredited college that they were affiliated with University A. (Gx. 2; Tr. 30) Upon being questioned by 
Department Counsel, Applicant claimed for the first time that he was also told by a representative from 
the unaccredited college that they were also affiliated with University B. (Tr. 40-41). He provided no 
documentation to corroborate his self-serving claims. (Tr. 45) 
 
9 Gx. 5; Tr. 46-48. 
 
10 Compare, Gx. 5, with, Ax. G.  
 
11 The dates and degrees asked about correspond to the information Applicant listed on his 2003 resume.  
 
12 Tr. 70-71. 
 
4 
 
 
In an October 2014 affidavit that Applicant submitted as part of his recent 
security clearance reinvestigation, he admitted that he would not have received the job 
offer from Employer A without a college degree. At hearing, he attempted to minimize 
his previously sworn statement, claiming that when he left Employer A, his former 
employer was hiring former military members without college degrees “left and right.”13 
   
In June 2003, Applicant submitted a pre-employment statement to Employer A. 
He signed the statement attesting to it and his 2003 resume’s accuracy. Instead of 
listing the two top-tiered schools, which he had previously identified on his 2003 
resume, Applicant listed the unaccredited college as the institution from which he had 
earned a bachelor’s and a master’s degree. He also claimed in the pre-employment 
statement to have graduated from the U.S. Army’s General Staff College in 2001.14 
 
In June 2003, Applicant also submitted to Employer A a disclosure and 
authorization form to initiate his security clearance background investigation. On the 
authorization form, Applicant claimed he earned a bachelor’s degree in business 
administration (not information management systems) and a master’s degree from 
University A. He listed the dates of his attendance at University A from “Fall 1995 – 
Spring 1999,” which, if accurate, would mean that Applicant started attending college 
before he graduated from high school.15  
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in December 2003 in 
connection with his employment with Employer A. He listed earning a bachelor’s degree 
from the unaccredited college. He claimed that his dates of attendance at the 
unaccredited college were from October 1995 to June 1999, which would overlap with 
the time he was completing high school and on active duty. He recertified the accuracy 
of the information he provided on the SCA in June 2004.  
 
In 2006, in connection with a job transfer, Applicant submitted another false 
resume to Employer A. Applicant claimed in his 2006 resume to have earned a 
bachelor’s and a master’s degree from University A, and to have been on the dean’s list 
and graduated summa cum laude.16  
 
Applicant’s work performance while an employee of Employer A was good. As of 
March 2009, he was receiving a base salary of over $140,000, and earned a cash 
award and stock options totaling over $12,000. In 2010, he was promoted to a vice 
president (VP) position, with a total compensation package of nearly $170,000.17  
                                                          
13 Compare, Gx. 2 at 4, with, Tr. 53-54. 
 
14 Gx. 6. But see, Tr. 42 (Applicant testified that the highest rank he attained in the military was coporal, 
E-4). Contrast with, Ax. G, DD Form 214 (highest rank achieved listed as specialist, E-3). 
 
15 Compare, Gx. 7, with, Ax. G. 
 
16 Gx. 9 at 111. But see, Tr. 70-72.  
 
17 Ax. A; Ax. C; Ax. F; Ax. G.  
 
5 
 
 
In March 2011, Employer A discovered that Applicant did not possess the 
educational degrees he listed on his resumes and employment application. After being 
asked to provide proof of his listed education, Applicant submitted the transcript and 
copies of the diplomas he received from the unaccredited college.18 At hearing, he 
acknowledged he never attended the unaccredited college, which was essentially run 
out of a store front.19 He also supplied to Employer A’s HR department an undated 
training certificate, which he purportedly received while in the military after completing a 
20-credit-hour course, as proof of a second master’s degree in U.S. national security 
policy.20 Applicant then submitted his resignation “effective immediately.”21 Applicant 
testified that his resignation from Employer A had nothing to do with the discovery that 
he had falsified his educational qualifications.22 His testimony was not credible. 
 
In 2012, Applicant submitted an SCA in connection with his employment with 
another federal contractor. He did not disclose that he “left . . . [Employer A] following 
charges or allegations of misconduct.” Instead, he listed his reason for leaving Employer 
A as a “career growth opportunity.”23 He subsequently stated in an affidavit, which he 
provided in the course of his recent security clearance reinvestigation that he decided to 
resign from Employer A “to pursue self-employment.”24 Yet, in the same month he 
resigned from Employer A, Applicant started a full-time position with another federal 
contractor.25 As of October 6, 2014, the date when Applicant submitted the affidavit, he 
had not told his wife about what he described as the “invalid degrees.”26  
 
Applicant also claimed on his 2012 SCA that he received a “Continuing Ed 
Certificate” from X State University. He subsequently explained in his 2014 affidavit that 
                                                          
18 Gx. 12 – 16, Tr. 35-36, 55-61. The transcript Applicant provided to Employer A’s HR department lists a 
number of college-level courses he purportedly took and received an “A” grade, including 
“Macroeconomics,” “Modern Physics,” “Elementary Accounting I and II,” and “International Management.” 
Applicant admitted he had never taken these classes or even been to the unaccredited college. Instead, 
the college allegedly assessed his past military experience as justifying the courses and grades listed on 
the transcript. The “unofficial education assessment” that Applicant received from the Army National 
Guard in 2006 does not support the college-level credits he received. (Gx. 15; Ax. G; Tr. 38-39, 72-74) 
 
19 Tr. 38-39, 55-56.  
 
20 Compare, Gx. 16 at 158, with, Gx. 4 and Gx. 14.  
 
21 Gx. 17.  
 
22 Tr. 62.  
 
23 Gx. 1 at 16.  
 
24 Gx. 2 at 4. Applicant’s failure to disclose the adverse circumstances under which he resigned from 
Employer A and the misinformation he provided during the recent security clearance reinvestigation were 
not alleged in the SOR. I have not considered this information as a separate basis for disqualification, but 
have considered it in assessing Applicant’s mitigation case, credibility, and whole-person factors. 
 
25 Gx. 1 at 14; Tr. 61-62.  
 
26 Gx. 2 at 5.  
 
6 
 
 
“he attended a two-week course through the [University of X State] sponsored by 
[Employer A].”27 These colleges have similar sounding names and their main campuses 
are located in the same state, but are two separate educational institutions. 
 
After resigning from Employer A in 2011, Applicant posted a resume online 
noting his work experience for the federal government and the different levels of 
security clearances he has held. He also claimed in this online resume to have earned a 
bachelor’s degree in information systems management from a different top U.S. school, 
which he had not previously listed on any application, resume, or security clearance 
application. Applicant misspelled the name of this other top school from which he had 
purportedly earned a degree. At hearing, Applicant admitted that he did not earn a 
degree from this other top U.S. school. He has supposedly taken two courses, earning 
about 6 credit hours towards the 120 credits needed to graduate.28  
 
In the 2014 affidavit that Applicant submitted as part of his current security 
clearance reinvestigation, he stated the following regarding his lack of the requisite 
education required for his previous employment with Employer A: 
 
I do not feel like the lack of education obtained impacted my ability to 
perform my duties at [Employer A]. I feel that my military and previous 
educational background allowed me to work competitively with other 
individuals that possess college degrees. I did not experience any 
disciplinary issues or performance issues . . . .29  
 
 Applicant currently works for a different federal contractor and has been with his 
current employer, Employer C, since April 2012. His 2013 performance appraisal from 
Employer C reflects that he received a $5,600 performance-based promotion and earns 
an annual salary in excess of $145,000. He submitted numerous certifications and 
achievements he has received over the years. He also submitted favorable references 
regarding his past work performance and competence in handling and managing 
information technology systems. He has not disclosed the adverse circumstances that 
led him to resign his VP position with Employer A to his current employer.30  
 
                                                          
27 Compare, Gx. 1 at 10, with, Gx. 2 at 3. 
  
28 Gx. 10; Tr. 37, 47-53. Applicant also claimed on his 2011 online resume to be working on earning a 
bachelor’s degree from another school, with an expected graduation date of 2012. He also listed this 
information on his 2012 SCA. He registered with the school in 2006 or 2008, but never took any classes. 
Instead, he stopped pursuing the degree after the school would not provide an assessment crediting him 
with completion of college-level courses for his past work and military experience. Compare, Gx. 1 at 10-
11 and Gx. 11, with, Tr. 50-51. Applicant has over the years approached a number of other schools and 
“battled” with them over the amount of credit they are willing to extend to him for his past work and military 
experience. Until recently, he continued to request credit for the classes he had purportedly completed at 
the unaccredited college. (Tr. 36-37, 50-51)  
 
29 Gx. 2 at 4. 
 
30 Gx. 1; Gx. 2 at 5; Gx. 8; Ax. B; Ax. D; Ax. E; Ax. G; Tr. 63-70. 
 
7 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant falsified his 2003 and 2006 resumes, employment application, and 
authorization form to initiate his industrial security clearance background investigation. 
Applicant claimed in each of these documents that he had attended and earned college 
and master’s degrees from University A. He further claimed to have received a second 
master’s degree from University B on his 2003 resume. He never attended either of 
these top U.S. schools nor earned the degrees he claimed in these employment 
documents. He was only able to obtain his initial and subsequent positions with 
Employer A by deliberately misstating his educational qualifications. He was only able to 
apply for an industrial security clearance by obtaining the job with Employer A under 
false pretenses. Therefore, SOR 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f, which reference these deliberate 
falsifications, were established. 
 
 Applicant also deliberately falsified his 2003 SCA and pre-employment statement 
with Employer A. Even though Applicant listed the unaccredited college as the 
institution from which he received his degrees, his claims that he attended the college, 
including before graduating from high school, are clearly false. Instead, in about 2012, 
Applicant paid a diploma mill for bogus degrees. His conduct after being caught by 
Employer A’s HR department, notably, submitting his resignation from a job that was 
paying him over $150,000 within a few short hours after receiving an e-mail questioning 
his educational qualifications, reflects a consciousness of guilt. Moreover, Applicant’s 
claims of having been duped by the unaccredited school are undercut by the extent of 
his misrepresentations regarding his educational background that he made before, 
during, and after resigning his position with Employer A. Consequently, SOR 1.c and 
1.e, which reference Applicant’s deliberate falsification of his 2003 SCA and pre-
employment statement, were also established. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct after leaving Employer A reflects that he continues to 
deliberately falsify his educational qualifications to obtain high-paying positions with 
federal contractors. Specifically, as alleged in SOR 1.g, Applicant claimed in his 2011 
online resume that he earned a bachelor’s degree from another top U.S. school. He 
misspelled the name of the school and the record clearly reflects that he did not earn 
such a degree. He has at most earned 6 credit hours towards the 120 needed to 
graduate. Thus, the falsification allegation in SOR 1.g was also established.  
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant’s deliberate falsification of several employment forms that he submitted 
to Employer A allowed him to obtain his initial and subsequent positions, and allowed 
him to attain or retain a security clearance. Applicant’s dishonesty raises the personal 
conduct security concern and establishes the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 
16(a)31 and 16(b).32  
 
 Once disqualifying conditions are established, the burden shifts to Applicant to 
present evidence demonstrating extenuation or mitigation sufficient to warrant a 
favorable security clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 4 (citing Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15). The adjudicative guidelines set forth a number of potential conditions that may 
mitigate the personal conduct security concern. I have considered all the applicable 
mitigating conditions and none apply.  
 
Applicant’s dishonesty regarding his educational qualifications continued after he 
left Employer A. He provided misleading information during the course of the current 
security clearance investigation, notably, regarding the circumstances leading to his 
resignation from Employer A. He refuses to acknowledge his conduct. His hearing 
testimony was not credible and contradicted by the weight of the record evidence. 
Consequently, I find that none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my 
comments under the personal conduct guideline and highlight some additional whole-
person matters. Applicant served honorably in the military. He is a skilled IT 
professional who despite not possessing a college degree has met and exceeded his 
employers’ expectations. Yet, time and again, he has provided false and misleading 
information about his educational qualifications. His falsifications allowed him to obtain a 
position with a federal contractor and gain or maintain eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
 It appears from his testimony and the record evidence that Applicant is convinced 
he is as qualified for the positions he has held as a federal contractor as those who 
legitimately hold the prerequisite degree(s) required for the position. Instead of doing 
the work necessary to attain a college degree, he continues to look for shortcuts and 
provides false and misleading information about his educational background. 
Applicant’s long history of dishonesty raises concerns about his judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness – essential character traits required of all clearance holders. 
                                                          
31 Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
32 Deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
10 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility for continued access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
