 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05099 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, I conclude that Applicant provided adequate 
information to mitigate security concerns for foreign influence under Guideline B. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 7, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for his employment with 
a defense contractor. (Item 2) The Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On June 20, 2015, DOD 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
foreign influence under Guideline B. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 13, 2015. He denied the SOR allegation 1.a 
that his wife is a citizen of Cuba explaining that she is now a United States citizen. He 
admitted SOR allegation 1.b that his mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Cuba. He 
denied SOR allegation 1.c that he has a friend who is a citizen and resident of Cuba 
explaining that he does not have friends in Cuba but he does have family in Cuba. He 
admits SOR allegation 1.d that he traveled to Cuba in 2010 and 2012. He elected to 
have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on October 27, 2016. Applicant received a complete file 
of relevant material (FORM) on February 3, 2016, and was provided the opportunity to 
file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. He did not provide any additional information in response to the FORM. I 
was assigned to case on August 16, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant was born in the United States and is 34 years old. He is a high school 
graduate with some college credits. He has been employed by a DOD contractor since 
July 2008 as a Local Area Network (LAN) administrator. He has held an interim security 
clearance since 2012. Applicant married in October 2010 and has no children. (Item 2, 
e-QIP) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of Cuba but a resident of 
the United States; that his mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Cuba; that he has a 
friend that is a citizen and resident of Cuba; and that he traveled to Cuba in 2010 and 
2012. 
 
All of the information concerning Applicant’s connection to Cuba was provided by 
Applicant in response to questions on his e-QIP.  Applicant ‘s parents were both born in 
Cuba and immigrated to the United States and became United States citizens. The 
record does not contain information on when they came to the United States or when 
they became citizens. Applicant was the fourth of five siblings. The two oldest were born 
in Cuba in 1969 and 1976. The three youngest, including Applicant, were born in the 
United States in 1978, 1982 (Applicant), and 1984. His parents must have immigrated to 
the United States between 1976 and 1978. All members of Applicant’s immediate family 
are now United States citizens. Applicant’s wife was born in Cuba in September 1983. 
There is no information in the case file as to when she came to the United States. She 
became a United States citizen on August 16, 2014.  
 
Applicant admits that his mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Cuba. 
Applicant has monthly telephone contact with her, and personal contact during his visits 
to Cuba.  Applicant listed a foreign contact in Section 19 of the e-QIP. The contact is 62 
years old. Applicant lists the date of his first contact as March 2008 and last contact as 
June 2012. The contact is personal which would indicate the contact is based on family 
ties, friendship, affection, or common interest. Applicant normally has contact with her 
 
3 
 
 
monthly by telephone and when he visits Cuba. Applicant also noted that the foreign 
contact is not affiliated with a foreign government, military, security, defense industry, or 
intelligence service. Applicant does not know if the foreign contact is employed. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he does not have any friends in Cuba, just 
family members. In response to additional questions on the e-QIP, Applicant does not 
list any other foreign contacts or activities. I conclude from this information that the 
foreign contact is a relative either from his parents’ family or his wife’s family.  
 
Applicant admits to traveling to Cuba to visit friends or family for six to ten days in 
March 2010. He encountered no problems during this visit. In his response to the SOR, 
he also admits traveling to Cuba to visit relatives in 2012. 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take Administrative Notice of certain facts 
concerning Cuba. (Item 3) I take Administrative Notice that Cuba became a totalitarian 
communist state headed by a dictator, Fidel Castro, in 1961. The country is now headed 
by his brother, Raul Castro.  It has a one-party system with the Communist party being 
the only legal political party. The United States severed diplomatic relations with Cuba 
and established broad trade embargo against Cuba in 1961.  
 
The Cuban government in the past routinely employed repressive methods 
against internal dissent, and monitored and forcefully responded to perceived threats to 
government authority. The government may employ physical and electronic 
surveillance, as well as detention and interrogation of both Cuban citizens and foreign 
visitors. In the past, Cuba has targeted the United States for intensive espionage 
activities. Since the 1980s, there have been numerous reported cases of government-
sanctioned and supported espionage against the United States.   
 
Human rights conditions in Cuba have been poor under the Castro dictatorships. 
The Cuban government limited fundamental freedoms, including freedom of expression 
and peaceful assembly. Human right abuses were official acts committed at the 
direction of the government. The Cuban government detained U.S. citizens it suspected 
of engaging in activities perceived to undermine state security. In the past, the Cuba 
state security or judicial systems have not carried out their responsibilities according to 
international norms. The principal human right abuses and limitations include the ability 
of its citizens to change the government, the use of government threats, and extra-
judicial physical assault and intimidation. The government organized violent counter-
protests against peaceful dissent and harassment, and used detentions to prevent free 
expression and peaceful assembly. The government also has placed severe restrictions 
on freedom of speech and press, restricted internet access, maintained a monopoly on 
media outlets, limited academic freedom, and places significant restrictions on the 
ability of religious groups to meet and worship. The government continued to prevent 
workers from forming independent labor unions or otherwise exercise their labor rights.  
 
On July 20, 2015, the United States re-established diplomatic relations with 
Cuba. The trade embargo and the restriction on United States citizens visiting Cuba, 
and Cuban citizens visiting the United States were lifted. It is not known how the 
 
4 
 
 
thawing of relationships between the United States and Cuba will change the dynamics 
between the two governments.  However, the changes are positive and should continue 
to improve the Cuban/United States relationship.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the U.S. 
interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which 
the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not limited to, such 
consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to 
obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG ¶ 6)  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and a family member are citizens and residents of 
Cuba. Applicant has weekly to monthly telephone contact with them. He sees them on 
his trips to Cuba. Applicant’s contact with family members in Cuba raises the following 
security concern under Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 7: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion: 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information: and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 The mere existence of foreign relationships and contacts is not sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. The nature of Appellant’s contacts and relationships 
must be examined to determine whether it creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. “Heightened” is a relative 
term denoting increased risk compared to some normally existing risk that can be 
inherent anytime there are foreign contacts and relationships. The totality of an 
applicant’s ties to a foreign country as well as to each individual family tie must be 
considered. The foreign influence security concern is not limited to countries hostile to 
the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not 
authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or 
country has interests inimical to those of the United States. Even friendly nations can 
have profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as 
important to their vital interests or national security. Friendly nations have engaged in 
 
6 
 
 
espionage against the United States, especially in economic, scientific, and technical 
fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant is at 
risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress. Cuba’s past authoritarian government, 
aggressive targeting of sensitive and protected U.S. technology and military information, 
and poor human rights record places a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion on Applicant.  
 
 I considered Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is   
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual or 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 The mitigating conditions apply. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, his immediate family members or the family 
members of his spouse. Applicant presented information that rebuts this presumption. 
He has limited contact with his mother-in-law and a family member. His contacts are 
limited to weekly or monthly telephone conversations and occasional visits to Cuba.  
Applicant’s contact with family members in Cuba is minimal at best, rebutting the 
presumption that he has ties of affection or obligation to his mother-in-law or another 
relative. This information negates the heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of the presence of the family 
members in Cuba and the intelligence activities of the Cuban government. In balancing 
all of these factors, I am satisfied that Applicant’s family members in Cuba are not in 
positions that make it likely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of the family members and the interests of the United 
States. Accordingly, Applicant has met his heavy burden to show that his relationships 
with his family members in the Cuba are not a security concern. Appellant has mitigated 
security concerns for foreign influence with the Cuba. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The whole-person concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant to reach a determination 
concerning Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The presence of Applicant’s mother-in-law and a relative in Cuba creates a 
heightened risk of foreign influence leading to the potential for vulnerability, pressure, or 
coercion of Applicant by Cuba against the interest of the United States. Applicant does 
not have close and frequent contact with his relatives in Cuba. These facts leave me 
without questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated foreign 
influence security concerns based on his family members in the PRC. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
