 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06281 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John R. Teakell, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 26, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on September 30, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on October 6, 2015, scheduling the hearing for October 21, 2015. The 
case was continued when Applicant retained counsel. Rescheduling of the case was 
 
2 
 
delayed because Applicant’s counsel stopped representing him for a period and then 
was retained again. The case was reassigned to me on April 12, 2016. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on May 20, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 21, 2016. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) 1 through 4 and 7 through 9, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant’s brief was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 29, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer at different locations since 1996. He served on active 
duty in the military from 1977 to 1981 and in the reserves from 1981 until he was 
honorably discharged in 2003. He seeks to retain a security clearance, which he has 
held for many years. He has a bachelor’s degree that was awarded in 1986. He married 
in 2006 and divorced in 2012. He has a minor child from the marriage and two minor 
children from previous relationships.1 
 
Applicant bought a house in 1997. Credit reports show a 1997 mortgage loan 
with a high credit of $215,222. He refinanced the mortgage loan in 2006. Credit reports 
show the refinanced loan with a high credit of $369,416. Applicant stopped paying the 
mortgage loan in about October 2011. He wanted a lower interest rate, and he was told 
the bank would only work with him if the loan was delinquent. The loan was modified at 
an unspecified date, but Applicant still did not pay the loan. He lived in the house 
without paying the mortgage loan until his company relocated him to another state in 
2013. The loan was transferred and the balance due increased because of interest. A 
credit report from June 2016 shows the loan in foreclosure with $90,730 past due and a 
$423,639 balance. Applicant stated that the house was sold, but he was unaware of the 
sales price.2 
 
 The SOR alleges the delinquent mortgage loan and 17 additional delinquent 
debts. However, the following debts are duplicates: SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($538), 1.l ($499), and 
1.n ($333). The 15 non-duplicate debts total about $5,850.  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted owing the $1,941 and $333 
(duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.d) department store accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.n, but 
he stated the accounts were used by his ex-wife. He admitted owing the $368 utilities 
account (SOR ¶ 1.g) and the $95 debt owed to the city where he used to live (SOR ¶ 
1.m), but he stated the accounts were tied to a pending insurance claim at his 
foreclosed house when the pipes burst. He stated the accounts would be paid by the 
insurance company after the work on the house was completed. He admitted owing the 
medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($686), 1.f ($461), and 1.h ($250). He wrote that 
he was finally in the financial position where he could pay the debts. He denied owing 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20-24, 27, 62-64; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 5. 
 
2 Tr. at 65-69, 82-83; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5. 
 
3 
 
most of the remaining debts. All of the debts alleged in the SOR are listed on at least 
one of the three credit reports in evidence.3 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his ex-wife not paying her share of 
the household expenses and opening accounts without his knowledge, his divorce, 
paying about $4,200 per month in child support to the three mothers of his children, and 
relocating for his job. His annual salary is about $142,000, and he contributes 6% of his 
income to his 401(k) retirement account, which has a balance of about $400,000. He 
has not paid any of the debts alleged in the SOR. He testified that he lives a frugal 
lifestyle. He received financial counseling. He will start receiving his military retirement 
pay in about a year, which will provide additional income that can be used to pay his 
debts.4 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
March 2013. He did not divulge a 2010 arrest for failure to obey traffic control device, 
reckless driving, and driving under the influence (DUI), which resulted in a 2011 
conviction of reckless driving.5 He also answered “No” to all the financial questions 
under Section 26, including the following: 
 
In the past seven (7) years, you defaulted on any type of loan? (Include 
financial obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those 
for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency? (Include financial obligations for which you were the 
sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor or guarantor).  
 
In the past seven (7) years, you have been over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt not previously entered? (Include financial obligations for which 
you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which you were a cosignor 
or guarantor).  
 
You are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt? (Include financial 
obligations for which you were the sole debtor, as well as those for which 
you were a cosignor or guarantor).6    
 
 Applicant discussed his finances when he was interviewed for his background 
investigation in April 2013. He admitted that he had not been paying his mortgage loan. 
He stated that he was in a hurry to complete the questionnaire and he could not recall 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 66; GE 2-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 23-42, 60-63, 69-81, 84-87; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5. 
 
5 Tr. at 55-58; GE 1; AE 9. The SOR did not allege the arrest and conviction or that Applicant falsified the 
SF 86 by failing to report them. Those matters will not be considered for disqualification purposes. I am 
using them solely to determine Applicant’s credibility. 
 
6 GE 1.  
 
4 
 
the last time he looked at his credit report. He stated that he did not recognize most of 
the other delinquent accounts that were listed on the March 2013 credit report. He 
stated that he would obtain a copy of his credit report and contact the creditors. He 
stated that he would pay the accounts that were his.7 
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. He stated that he completed 
the SF 86 in a rush and he was unaware of many of the delinquent accounts. He 
admitted that he was aware that his mortgage loan was considerably delinquent. He 
stated that he intended to go back and update the questionnaire in about six months 
after his finances had stabilized, but he just never got around to doing so.8 Having 
considered all the evidence, I am convinced by substantial evidence9 that Applicant 
intentionally falsified the SF 86 when he failed to report his delinquent debts. 
 
Applicant submitted numerous documents and letters attesting to his excellent 
job performance. He is praised for his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, professional 
knowledge, honesty, ethical values, and integrity.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
7 GE 5. 
 
8 Tr. at 32-37, 48-54, 58-59, 62, 65-66; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5. 
 
9 Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” ISCR Case No. 10-09035 at 
5 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2014) (citing Directive ¶¶ E3.1.14; E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the 
weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence 
does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal 
Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than 
a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994); ISCR 
Case No. 04-07187 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2006). 
 
10 AE 1-4. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he is unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.l, and 1.n are duplicates. When the same conduct is alleged more 
than once in the SOR under the same guideline, the duplicate allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 
2005) (same debt alleged twice). SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.n are concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to his ex-wife not paying her share of 
the household expenses and opening accounts without his knowledge, his divorce, 
paying about $4,200 per month in child support to the three mothers of his children, and 
relocating for his job. His annual salary is about $142,000, and he contributes 6% of his 
income to his 401(k) retirement account, which has a balance of about $400,000. He 
has known that his finances were an issue since his background interview in April 2013, 
but he has not paid any of the debts alleged in the SOR. He stated that he will start 
receiving his military retirement pay in about a year, which will provide additional income 
that can be used to pay his debts. The Appeal Board has held that “intentions to pay off 
debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of debt repayment or other 
responsible approaches.” See ISCR Case No. 11-14570 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 23, 2013) 
(quoting ISCR Case No. 08-08440 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2009)).  
 
 
7 
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(d), and 20(e) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. The first section of AG ¶ 20(c) (financial counseling) is applicable; the 
second section (clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
is not applicable. I find that financial considerations concerns remain despite the 
presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 when he failed to report his delinquent 
debts. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
8 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 Having determined that Applicant intentionally provided false information on the 
SF 86, I have also determined that his explanations that the omission was unintentional 
were also false. It would be inconsistent to find that conduct mitigated.11   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case 03-22819 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2006), in which the Appeal Board reversed the 
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant Applicant’s security clearance: 
 
Once the Administrative Judge found that Applicant deliberately falsified a security 
clearance application in September 2002, the Judge could not render a favorable security 
clearance decision without articulating a rational basis for why it would be clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant 
despite the falsification. Here, the Judge gives reasons as to why he considers the 
falsification mitigated under a “whole person” analysis, namely that Applicant has 
matured, has held a position of responsibility, recognizes how important it is to be candid 
in relation to matters relating to her security clearance, and has changed her behavior so 
that there is little likelihood of recurrence. However, the Judge’s conclusion runs contrary 
to the Judge’s rejection of Applicant’s explanations for the security clearance application 
falsification. At the hearing (after earlier admitting the falsification in her March 2003 
written statement to a security investigator), Applicant testified that she had not 
intentionally falsified her application. Given the Judge's rejection of this explanation as 
not being credible, it follows that the Judge could not have concluded Applicant now 
recognizes the importance of candor and has changed her behavior. 
 
 
9 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. I considered Applicant’s 
character evidence and his honorable military service. However, he has unresolved 
financial problems and he intentionally provided false information about his finances on 
his SF 86.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o-1.r:   Against Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
