 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
         
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 14-01062   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant used marijuana after being 
granted a security clearance in 1982. He continued to use marijuana after receiving 
special program access and signing his employer’s code of conduct prohibiting illegal 
drug use in 1997. He falsified the duration, frequency, and his date of last illegal drug 
use on three security clearance applications and in two background interviews.  
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the drug involvement and personal 
conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On April 4, 2016, I 
issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2 The parties 
submitted documents by the April 15, 2016 deadline. At the hearing, which proceeded 
as scheduled on April 28, 2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, and Hearing Exhibits I – II, without objection. The 
Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) received the transcript (Tr.) on May 10, 
2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
SOR Amendments 
 
Without objection from the parties, SOR ¶ 2.a. is amended to read as follows: 
 
 2.a. You falsified material facts on security clearance applications, standard form 
86, dated July 17, 1997, July 25, 2001, and October 18, 2006, on which you indicated 
you had not used illegal drugs during the seven-year scope of inquiry.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 60, has worked for a federal contractor since 1982. Six of Applicant’s 
coworkers, most of whom he has worked with for more than 10 years, wrote letters of 
support, each recommending him for continued access to classified information. Each 
letter writer describes Applicant as honest, trustworthy, and reliable. Applicant 
completed his most recent security clearance application in October 2012, disclosing 
marijuana use from January 1978 to January 2011. He clarified that he used marijuana 
fewer than five times in the seven years before he completed the October 2012 
application. He also disclosed that he used marijuana while having a security clearance 
and that he had no intention of using the drug in the future. The ensuing investigation 
revealed additional information about Applicant’s clearance history and his history of 
illegal drug use.4   
 
Applicant was first granted access to classified information in 1982. Applicant’s 
access level was upgraded in 1997; he also received access to a special program from 
another government agency (AGA). As part of his special program access, he 
underwent polygraph examinations and interviews. He also signed a code of conduct 
provided by his employer, requiring that he abstain from all illegal drug use. The code of 
conduct warned Applicant of the potential adverse consequences of future drug use, to 
include loss of access. Applicant underwent periodic reinvestigations in 2001, 2006, and 
2011. During his 2011 reinvestigation, Applicant discussed his history of drug use in 
June 2011 and July 2011 interviews. He provided conflicting information about the 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 Tr. 29-33. 
 
4 GE 1; AE A-F.  
 
3 
 
extent, frequency, and date of his last use of marijuana. In February 2012, AGA revoked 
Applicant’s special program access based on his history of marijuana use, his use while 
having a security clearance, and his violation of his employer’s code of conduct 
regarding illegal drug use.5  
 
Applicant continued to provide conflicting information about his history of drug 
use on his October 2012 security clearance application, during his October 2012 and 
January 2013 background interviews, in his answer to the SOR, and during his 
testimony at hearing. However, Applicant consistently admits that he began using 
marijuana while in high school. He also admits that he continued to use marijuana into 
adulthood with varying frequency, that he did so while holding a security clearance, and 
in violation of the code of conduct. Applicant gave several reasons for his conflicting 
statements. He claims that he was not trying to deceive the Government about his 
history of drug use, but that he could not remember it because the activity was not a 
large part of his life. He also explained the uncomfortable nature of the June and July 
2011 interviews, during which he felt pressured to provide answers very quickly. He also 
cited his misunderstanding of his state’s marijuana laws, which he believed changed in 
2009 to decriminalize marijuana use.6 
 
Policies  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
                                                          
5 GE 4-5, 6. 
 
6 Answer: GE 2-3; Transcript, dated April 28, 2016.  
 
4 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
Drug Involvement 
 
Use of an illegal drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.7 
Applicant’s history of illegal drug use, which began in high school, continued through 
adulthood, and after being granted a security clearance in 1982 and through at least 
2011, is disqualifying.8  
 
None of the drug involvement mitigating conditions apply. Given Applicant’s 
inconsistent statements about the duration, frequency, and date of his of last use of 
marijuana, it is not possible to conclude that his illegal drug use is a thing of the past or 
that it is unlikely to recur. Nor is his statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the 
future credible. Applicant’s history of use after being granted access to classified 
information and having signed a code of conduct continues to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified facts on his July 1997, July 2001, and 
October 2006 security clearance applications, as well as those he provided during his 
October 2012 and January 2013 background interviews regarding his history of illegal 
drug use and his illegal drug use while holding a security clearance. Applicant denies 
the falsification allegations. A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly 
and willfully). An omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the 
person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the 
question, or genuinely thought the information did not need to be reported. The record 
supports a finding that Applicant’s statements were intentionally misleading.9  
 
Applicant became aware in at least June 2011 that the Government was 
interested in his history of illegal drug use. Because an applicant is required to provide 
full, frank, and candid answers at all times to all inquiries made during the investigation 
and adjudicative process, it became incumbent on Applicant to take the time to provide 
accurate information about his past use of marijuana. He had at least six subsequent 
opportunities to do so. Instead, he provided a series of inconsistent statements, making 
it nearly impossible to glean the truth regarding his drug involvement. These false 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 24. 
 
8 AG ¶¶ 24(a) and (g). 
 
9 AG ¶¶ 16 (a) and (b). 
 
5 
 
statements cannot be considered minor and continue to negatively reflect on Applicant’s 
ongoing security worthiness. His actions indicate that he may not properly report or 
disclose adverse information in the future.  
 
The SOR also alleges that Applicant intentionally violated his employer’s code of 
conduct prohibiting illegal drug use. Applicant denies this allegation, offering a series of 
conflicting explanations. In light of the conflicting dates of marijuana use reported by 
Applicant, none of his explanations mitigate his actions.10 Applicant chose to use illegal 
drugs in direct contravention of his employer’s code of conduct without thought for the 
potential consequences. Applicant’s actions show a disregard for the fiduciary 
relationship he entered into with his employer and the Government upon being granted 
access to classified information and a special access program. Furthermore, Applicant’s 
explanations show a failure to take full responsibility for his misconduct. None of the 
personal conduct mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s judgment and 
trustworthiness. I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. The federal 
government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in persons 
granted access to classified information.11 Security clearance decisions are not an exact 
science, but rather are predictive judgments about a person's security suitability in light 
of that person's past conduct and present circumstances.12 Applicant has held a 
security clearance for over 30 years and special program access for the last 10 years. 
During that time, he has used illegal drugs and has lied to the government about it. His 
decision to use an illegal drug while having access to classified information and special 
program access shows that Applicant does not possess the good judgment or 
trustworthiness required of an individual to maintain such access. Clearance is denied. 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 16(f).  
 
11 Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
 
12Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528-29 (1988).  
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:      Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.a – 2.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
