 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03984 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 15, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On October 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F.  The SOR detailed 
reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be continued or denied.  
 
2 
 
 
On November 6, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On January 4, 2016, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On March 4, 2016, the case was initially 
assigned to another administrative judge, however, on April 15, 2016, it was 
reassigned to me. On May 19, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for June 8, 2016. Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, did 
not call any witnesses, and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was received into 
evidence without objection. On June 16, 2016, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.).  
 
I held the record open until July 8, 2016, to afford the Applicant an opportunity 
to offer additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE B through AE O, which 
were received into evidence without objection.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e; and denied 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.f. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old metrology operations program manager employed by 
a defense contractor since November 1978. He seeks to retain his secret security 
clearance. Applicant has successfully held a security clearance at some level since he 
began working for his company. (Tr. 12-16; GE 1; AE J)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1976. He attended college for 
approximately three semesters after graduating from high school, but did not 
graduate. Applicant has completed “numerous” job-related courses since he began 
working for his company. (Tr. 17-19; GE 1)  
 
Applicant married his first wife in July 1981 and divorced her in April 1998. He 
has three adult sons from that marriage. He remarried his second wife in December 
2001 and divorced her in March 2012. He has no children from his second marriage. 
Applicant did not serve in the U.S. armed forces. (Tr. 19-22; GE 1)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists six debts totaling $38,948. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1f) Applicant’s 
financial difficulties began following the divorce from his first wife. She was a habitual 
alcoholic who used household money to sustain her drinking habit. Applicant kept the 
 
3 
 
 
house, however, to keep the house he refinanced it to pay his wife $50,000 in their 
divorce settlement. (Tr. 22-23)  
 
After his sons were emancipated, Applicant needed to downsize and sold the 
family home, which was in need of costly repairs. The only way he was able to sell the 
house in 2013 was through short sale as a result of a depressed housing market. After 
selling his house through short sale, he was left with a $23,120 second mortgage. 
(SOR answer; Tr. 24-25)  
 
In addition to Applicant’s home sale problems, his oldest son had developed an 
addiction to prescription painkillers following a skateboard accident. In order to finance 
his habit, he stole Applicant’s identity to open up at least five credit accounts. 
Applicant is pleased to report that his oldest son has been drug-free for over two 
years. (SOR answer; Tr. 26-27; AE A) 
 
Applicant has paid, settled, resolved, or successfully disputed his six debts. His 
first debt is a charged-off second mortgage for $23,120 that has been settled in full as 
of November 27, 2013. Account resolved. (SOR ¶ 1.a; SOR answer; Tr. 27-28) 
Applicant denied his second debt which was a collection account for $13,894 claiming 
he had no knowledge of this creditor. The creditor has since closed the account and 
ceased further collection efforts as of June 10, 2016. Account resolved. (SOR ¶ 1.b; 
Tr. 28-30; GE 2; AE B) The third debt is a charged-off utility account for $598. This 
account was paid and closed as of July 17, 2013. Account resolved. (SOR ¶ 1.c; Tr. 
30-32; AE C) 
 
Applicant denied this fourth debt, which is a charged-off department store debt 
for $268. This account was opened by Applicant’s son. Applicant provided 
documentation in which the creditor acknowledged this is not Applicant’s account. This 
account does not appear on Applicant’s latest credit report. Account resolved. (SOR 
¶ 1.d; Tr. 32-33; AE A, AE D) Applicant’s fifth debt is a collection account for $868 for 
a cell phone. Applicant submitted a letter from the creditor dated June 10, 2016, 
advising that this was not Applicant’s account and that the creditor was removing this 
entry from Applicant’s credit report. Account resolved. (SOR ¶ 1.e; Tr. 33-34; AE E) 
Applicant’s last debt is a collection account for $200. This account was opened by his 
son. Applicant submitted a letter from the creditor dated June 10, 2016, advising this 
account was paid in full. Account resolved. (SOR ¶ 1.f; Tr. 34-35; AE F) 
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is approximately $100,700. He is sharing a house 
with his girlfriend and they split expenses. (Tr. 35-37) His post-hearing budget shows 
a net monthly remainder of $3,221. Applicant’s budget further reflects that he is 
leading a modest lifestyle and living within his means. (AE G; Tr. 42) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted four work-related reference letters that were written by 
individuals who are at the management level within the company. These letters 
 
4 
 
 
collectively describe Applicant as hard working, having a positive attitude, loyal, 
trustworthy, and someone who is making a contribution to the national defense. (AE H 
– AE K) Applicant also submitted his performance evaluations for the years 2013 
through 2015. These evaluations document Applicant’s above average performance 
and clearly reflect that he is an individual who is an asset to his company. (AE L – AE 
N; Tr. 42-44) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
    
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1.  
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
 
5 
 
 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant’s divorce and post-divorce 
fallout could not have been anticipated. Nor could he have foreseen that the housing 
market would have declined to the extent that it did when he sold his house in 2013. 
To exacerbate matters even more, Applicant’s oldest son stole his identify to support a 
prescription painkiller addiction that contributed to Applicant’s credit problems.  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), 20(e) are fully applicable. Although Applicant did not 
participate in financial counseling, there are clear indications that his financial 
problems are resolved and under control. Applicant has settled, paid, or successfully 
disputed all six of his SOR debts. Having heard Applicant’s testimony, it is clear that 
this process has made a substantial impression on him. He clearly realizes the 
importance of maintaining financial responsibility.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s 37 years of employment in the defense industry and having 
successfully held a security clearance during those years weighs heavily in his favor. 
He is a law-abiding citizen and a productive member of society. He is current on his 
day-to-day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debts have been resolved. 
Due to circumstances beyond his control, his debts became delinquent. Despite his 
financial setback, it is clear from Applicant’s actions that he had regained financial 
responsibility. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery, the steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, his reference letters, 
and his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclu sion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
