KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline J; Guideline E
DIGEST: This case has an unusual history, including three hearings that occurred over the better
part of a year, each with a different Judge DOHA’s authority to adjudicate an Industrial
Security Clearance application is predicated upon the applicant’s need for access to classified
information.  Should that need be terminated, DOHA is divested of jurisdiction, and all actions
pursuant to the Directive cease.  There are three exceptions to this rule, one of which arises when
the applicant’s need for a clearance terminates after “[a] hearing has commenced.”    In that
situation, DOHA can continue to process the case through the appeal, if any.  In this case a
hearing to adjudicate Applicant’s clearance commenced on March 12, 2015, at which time
DOHA clearly possessed jurisdiction because Applicant’s employer sponsored him.  Applicant’s
employer did not take steps to separate him until months after that date, which was during
pendency of the adjudication previously begun.  That separation action did not divest DOHA of
jurisdiction.  The Judge was authorized to issue his Decision.  This is true despite whatever
Applicant’s current employment status may be.
 
CASENO: 14-03753.a1
DATE: 09/23/2016
DATE: September 23, 2016
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03753
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
October 13, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).1  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 31, 2016, after the
hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge James F. Duffy
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether DOHA lacked jurisdiction to issue
the Decision.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
Applicant asserts that he no longer works for the sponsoring employer and that DOHA had
no jurisdiction to issue a Decision.  Department Counsel has provided a Reply Brief in which he
argues that jurisdiction has attached.  The briefs of the parties contain matters from outside the
record.  Normally, we cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  However, we
will consider new evidence insofar as it pertains to threshold issues such as jurisdiction or due
process.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.14-00812 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2015).  Because the parties’ briefs
do not conflict regarding the dispositive facts, we do not need to remand the case for additional fact-
finding.
This case has an unusual and complex history, including three hearings that occurred over
the better part of a year, each with a different Judge.  The first hearing began on March 12, 2015. 
At that time Applicant’s employer sponsored him for a clearance.  The Judge granted a continuance
so that Applicant could obtain counsel.  Tr., March 12, 2015, at 50.  The hearing reopened on
October 5, 2015, at which time Applicant’s employer still sponsored him for a clearance.  Applicant
failed to appear that this hearing and was found to be in default.  Tr., October 5, 2015, at 17.  His
employer assigned him a separation date.  Reply Brief at 5.  Subsequently, the DOHA Director
vacated the default.  Id.  Applicant’s employer advised DOHA that it was again sponsoring him for
1The Guideline J allegations were subsequently withdrawn.  
2
a clearance.  Id.  A hearing occurred on December 9, 2015, and the Judge issued his Decision as set
forth above. 
DOHA’s authority to adjudicate an Industrial Security Clearance application is predicated
upon the applicant’s need for access to classified information.  Should that need be terminated,
DOHA is divested of jurisdiction, and all actions pursuant to the Directive cease.  Directive ¶ 4.4. 
There are three exceptions to this rule, one of which arises when the applicant’s need for a
clearance terminates after “[a] hearing has commenced.”  Directive ¶ 4.4.1.  See ISCR Case No. 05-
04831 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2006) (“[S]ubject matter jurisdiction attaches by commencement of
the actual adjudication phase of the proceedings[.]”)   In that situation, DOHA can continue to
process the case through the appeal, if any.  In the case before us, a hearing to adjudicate Applicant’s
request for a clearance commenced on March 12, 2015, at which time DOHA clearly possessed
jurisdiction because Applicant’s employer sponsored him.  Applicant’s employer did not take steps
to separate him until several months after that date, which was during pendency of the adjudication
previously begun.  Therefore, that separation action did not divest DOHA of jurisdiction.  We
conclude that the Judge was authorized to issue his Decision, as are we to decide Applicant’s appeal. 
This is true despite whatever Applicant’s current employment status may be.
Having so concluded, we note that Applicant has not otherwise raised an issue of harmful
error.  Our scope of review is limited to those cases in which the appealing party raises such an
issue.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.  Therefore, the Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                    
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                 
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
