1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-00693 
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
September 30, 2016 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant’s relationship with his cohabitant, who is a citizen of Mexico and an 
undocumented resident of the United States, creates a risk of exploitation, manipulation, 
or duress under the Guidelines for Foreign Influence and Personal Conduct. Applicant 
failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted his electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on August 21, 2012. On August 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR twice: in an undated submission, and on March 28, 
2016. (Answer.) He requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on 
June 13, 2016. A notice of hearing was issued to Applicant on June 15, 2016, 
scheduling the hearing for July 11, 2016. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on July 25, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. (GE 1; Tr. 13.) He has been employed by a 
Government contractor for the past 33 years, and currently works as a flight test 
technician. He has held a security clearance that entire time and has received several 
promotions. (GE 1; Tr. 19-20.) Applicant cohabitates with his girlfriend. He has two 
children from a prior relationship; and his girlfriend has two adult children. (GE 1; Tr. 29) 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant’s girlfriend is a citizen of Mexico and resides 
illegally in the United States. (SOR subparagraphs 1.a and 2.a). Applicant admitted 
these allegations, with clarifications. (Answer.) 
 
Applicant met his 38-year old girlfriend in 2003, at a party. He testified that they 
have lived together for approximately 13 years. Both of her children are natural-born 
U.S. citizens. Applicant has been aware, for the duration of their relationship, that his 
girlfriend was an undocumented immigrant. She entered the United States at the age of 
14. Applicant reported his relationship to his Facility Security Officer (FSO) in 2011 or 
2012. Applicant’s FSO suggested to Applicant that he should not marry his girlfriend, 
because it might affect his security clearance. Applicant heeded that advice. Although 
he wishes to marry his girlfriend, he has not. He also reported their relationship on his 
2012 e-QIP. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 20-32.) 
 
Applicant’s girlfriend has not taken any steps toward obtaining legal residency 
status in the United States. Applicant testified the only way she could obtain legal status 
would be if they married, but he has refrained from doing so due to the advice of his 
FSO. He has not sought the advice of an immigration attorney. (Tr. 20-32.) 
 
Applicant testified: “I’m as American as you can get. My son is a former Marine. 
My son-in-law is a former Marine. I love my country. I’ve done, you know, I’ve done a 
great job for 33 years for my company. I need my security clearance for that.” (Tr. 32.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
 
4 
 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. One is applicable in this case:   
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. 
 
  Applicant has cohabitated with his girlfriend for 13 years. She is a citizen of 
Mexico and resides in the United States illegally. The heightened risk required to raise 
this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk 
greater than the normal risk inherent in having a foreign family member. In this instance, 
a heightened risk is present because his girlfriend is violating U.S. immigration laws. As 
a result, both Applicant and his girlfriend could be subject to manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion due to her undocumented status. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(d).  
 
  AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline. I considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these people are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s girlfriend has lived in the United States since the age of 14. Her 
children were born and raised here. Applicant has loyally served his company for over 
33 years. He is a natural-born U.S. citizen, as are his children. These factors weigh in 
Applicant’s favor and are mitigating, in part. However, Applicant has close ties of 
 
5 
 
affection to his girlfriend and wishes to marry her. They live together and have ongoing 
contact with one another. Her status as an undocumented immigrant leaves Applicant 
highly susceptible to coercion. I cannot conclude: (1) that it is unlikely Applicant will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.; (2) that he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; or (3) that there 
is little likelihood that his girlfriend could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. Although he has close ties to the United States, his long-term relationship 
with his girlfriend is significant. Applicant bears the burden to introduce sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the Government’s concerns with respect to those issues, and he 
has not met this burden. None of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant’s decision to cohabitate with an undocumented immigrant leaves him 
vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. Additionally, her status as an 
undocumented immigrant may affect Applicant’s personal, professional, or community 
standing within the defense community. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
6 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, the 
evidence does not establish mitigation under any of them. Applicant’s relationship with 
an undocumented immigrant is ongoing and likely to continue, despite the security 
significance, so neither AG ¶ 17(c) or 17(d) apply. He failed to document steps taken to 
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, so AG ¶ 17(e) does not 
mitigate the Government’s concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a patriotic American citizen, whose employment has been of value to 
our Government. He takes pride in his contributions. He forthrightly reported his 
relationship with an undocumented immigrant to his FSO, and followed the advice from 
the FSO that he should not marry his girlfriend. However, he has close ties to his 
girlfriend who is a citizen of Mexico residing illegally in the United States. That concern 
remains unmitigated. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Influence or Personal Conduct 
security concerns. 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
