 
 
 
 
1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 15-04614 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant started experiencing financial difficulties between 2006 and 2013, 
mainly related to real estate investments. He mitigated the security concerns raised 
under the guideline for financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 14, 2013, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing Investigation Request (e-QIP), as part of a re-investigation for 
a security clearance. On December 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
 
 
 
 
2 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on December 30, 2015, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On April 21, 2016, DOHA assigned 
the case to me. On June 15, 2016, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case 
for July 13, 2016. The case was heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 4 into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through AE H into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 21, 2016. The record 
remained open until August 8, 2016, in order to provide Applicant time to submit 
additional documents.  Applicant timely submitted exhibits that I marked as AE I through 
AE L, and admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the 11 allegations in the SOR, Applicant denied ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 
1.g through 1.k, on the basis that he paid or resolved them. He admitted the remaining 
four allegations. All admissions are incorporated herein. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and married for ten years. He and his wife have two 
children, ages six and two. He earned a master’s degree in 2007. He began working for 
his current employer in June 2000. He is a program manager and supervises several 
teams of employees. He is active in community organizations. (Tr.17-21.) 
 
 When Applicant completed his e-QIP in July 2013, he disclosed four foreclosures 
and other delinquent debts. (GE 1.) In August 2013 a government investigator 
interviewed Applicant about matters in his e-QIP, including the foreclosures and other 
debts. Applicant stated that he had purchased properties for investment purposes, but 
when the real estate market began its downward spiral in the mid-2000s, he could no 
longer afford to maintain or renovate some of them, or find appropriate tenants. (AE H.)  
 
 Applicant testified that he purchased ten investment properties between 2001 
and 2005. He successfully sold four or five of them. The remaining properties, alleged in 
the SOR, went into foreclosure because he could not maintain or sell them. He said that 
he was never assessed a deficiency balance after any of the foreclosures. He asserted 
that the matters are closed and resolved. (Tr. 24-32.)   
 
 Based on a credit bureau report (CBR) from July 2013 and information from 
Applicant’s e-QIP, the SOR alleged six real estate investments that resulted in 
foreclosures, and five delinquent debts. (GE 2, GE 3, and GE 4.) The debts arose 
between 2006 and 2013. A summary of the status of each debt is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: The $9,720 judgment for an unpaid real estate line of credit was paid 
and released in May 2013. This debt related to one of Applicant’s investment 
properties. (Tr. 24; AE C.)  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: The $422 jewelry debt was paid in June 2016. (Tr. 24; AE D.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: These three real estate investment loans, which were owed to Bank 
B, went into foreclosure and were resolved in 2008 and 2013. Applicant 
purchased the properties that secured these loans between 2001 and 2005.  (Tr. 
25-30, 40; AE I, AE K.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: This real estate investment loan owed to Mortgage Company L went 
into foreclosure in 2007. Applicant stated the company is no longer in business. 
He contacted the company which purchased Company L, and it has no 
information about his previous loans. It does not appear on his 2015 or 2016 
CBR. (Tr. 38; GE 1; AE I.) This debt is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: This real estate investment loan owed to Bank C went into 
foreclosure in 2007. Applicant testified that the matter was resolved and there 
was no deficiency due. At one point, he received a small payment from the bank 
for mishandling the loan. (Tr. 40; AE H, AE I.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: This real estate investment loan owed to Bank W went into 
foreclosure. It was resolved in 2010. (AE I, AE J, AE L.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: The $209 owed to a credit service for a medical bill was paid in 2013. 
Applicant said the debt does not appear on his 2015 or 2016 CBRs. (Tr. 42-45; 
GE 1.) It is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: The $65 debt was a utility bill owed for one of Applicant’s former 
rental properties. Applicant said that he paid it in July 2013. It does not appear on 
his 2015 or 2016 CBRs. (Tr. 45-49; AE E, AE H.) It is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i: The $204 debt for a credit card account was resolved with the 
creditor. Applicant said he did not open or use the card that was sent to him, and 
was not liable for fees related to it. The debt no longer appears on his 2015 CBR. 
(Tr. 50; AE B, AE H.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j: The $793 medical debt owed to a hospital was fully paid in 2016. 
Applicant had been making payments on it and other bills owed to this creditor. 
(Tr. 51-52; AE F.) It is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k: The $135 medical debt owed to the same hospital as noted above 
was paid in 2016. (Tr. 51-52; AE F.) It is resolved. 
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is $124,000 and his wife’s is $70,000. (Tr. 22-23.) 
According to his 2016 CBR, his financial obligations are current, including student loans. 
(AE B.) He submitted performance evaluations from 2007 through 2015. All of them rate 
Applicant as “exceeding requirements.” (AE G.) Applicant’s supervisor is aware of the 
 
 
 
 
4 
security concerns underlying this hearing. (Tr. 21.) Applicant admitted that when he 
purchased the properties he was a “young investor” and did not consider the possibility 
of a market crash. (Tr. 31.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
As documented by CBRs and his admissions, Applicant began experiencing 
financial problems between 2006 and 2013 that he had been unable or unwilling to 
manage. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
 
 
 
6 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
Some of Applicant’s financial problems had been ongoing into 2016. Hence, the 
evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant attributed his 
financial problems to the real estate market collapse that occurred in the mid-2000s, 
and his subsequent inability to sell or maintain properties. While that market situation 
may have contributed to his problems and been a circumstance beyond his control, he 
bears some responsibility for the financial decisions he made when he decided to 
purchase ten properties within a short period of time, which were circumstances within 
his control. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that he attempted to responsibly 
manage his debts or obligations while they were accumulating. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) has 
minimal application.  
 
Applicant provided evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(c). Although 
he has not participated in credit or financial counseling, there are clear indications that 
his financial issues are under control, and all matters alleged in the SOR are resolved. 
He paid 5 of the 11 SOR allegations, exhibiting a good-faith effort to resolve those debts 
and establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible and educated 39-
year-old man, who has successfully worked for a defense contractor since 2000. In 
early 2001 he began purchasing investment properties, which he could not financially 
manage when the real estate market collapsed. As a consequence, he had difficulty 
paying his living expenses and maintaining the properties, which resulted in 
 
 
 
 
7 
foreclosures of the properties. At this time his financial situation is sufficiently stable, 
and he is no longer involved with investment properties. He is aware that further 
financial problems could jeopardize his security clearance and employment. The 
evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k:                  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                               
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
