                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-03080
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference security concerns, but failed to
mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On February 5, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD)  issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines C, foreign preference,
and B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG).
Applicant answered the SOR on February 19, 2016, admitting all of the
allegations  and requesting a hearing. On October 23, 2015,  the case was assigned to
me. On June 16, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
1
notice of hearing scheduling the case for July 20, 2016. I held the hearing as scheduled
and considered four Government exhibits (GE), marked as GE 1 through 4, and I took
administrative notice, at Department Counsel’s request, of the facts set forth in 8
documents (Hearing Exhibits (HEs) I-VIII). At Applicant’s request, I left the record open
at the close of the hearing, without objection, to allow him the opportunity to submit
additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, he submitted four exhibits that I incorporated
into the record as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D. The transcript was received on
July 28, 2016.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 41-year-old married man. He has been married to his current wife
since December 2010. A previous marriage ended in divorce in 2008. Applicant earned
an undergraduate degree in electrical engineering in 1996 and a master’s degree in
business administration (MBA) in 2009. Since 2001, he has worked as a software
technology engineer. (Tr. 18) Currently, he works for a defense contractor as a senior
project manager. His duties include managing software teams and business proposals.
(Tr. 58)
Applicant was born, raised, and educated through college in Turkey. He
immigrated to the United States in 2001 and has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since
2013. (Tr. 21) 
Applicant’s immediate family and in-laws are citizens and residents of Turkey.
Applicant’s father is a retired elementary school teacher, and his mother is a
homemaker. He communicates with his parents once or twice a week through text
messages or phone calls.  Applicant travels to Turkey once or twice a year to visit his
parents. (GE 1 at 36-53) He periodically supports his parents financially. Most recently
he gave his father $7,000 to help pay for a surgery. (Tr. 39)
Applicant has two sisters. His youngest sister is a doctor. He communicates with
her once every other week. She visits the United States frequently, attending medical
conferences and completing sabbaticals. She often visits him while she is here. (Tr. 41,
48) Applicant typically stays with her or his parents when he visits Turkey. Applicant’s
oldest sister is a civil engineer. She works for the equivalent of a municipality in Turkey.
(Tr. 49) Applicant does not stay in touch with this sister as much as his other sister
because she is preoccupied with raising her young children. She last visited him in the
United States at his MBA graduation ceremony in 2009. (Tr. 41)
Applicant’s in-laws are divorced. His father-in-law owns a packaging company and
his mother-in-law is a homemaker. (Tr. 45) He speaks with his father-in-aw
approximately once every three or four months and speaks with his mother-in-law
approximately once every two to three months. (GE 2 at 15)
 
2
As of the hearing date, Applicant possessed a valid Turkish passport, issued in
November 2011 before he became a United States citizen. He used it to facilitate trips
after becoming a U.S. citizen on two occasions to countries that either imposed fees on
U.S. - passport travellers, or required a visa for U.S. - passport travellers. (Tr. 19) He
never used it to travel to Turkey, and he stopped using it once he was informed during
his investigative interview of its security significance. (Tr. 20) On July 28, 2016, he
surrendered it to the facility security officer of his employer. (AE B) Applicant voted in a
Turkish election in August 2014. (Tr. 22) He did so at the Turkish embassy in the United
States. Applicant was not aware of the negative security inferences of possessing a
foreign passport and voting in foreign elections until he met with an investigative agent in
November 2014. 
In June 2012, Applicant and his wife opened and deposited $83,000 into a
savings account at a bank in Turkey. (GE 2 at 15) At the time, they were considering
purchasing a Turkish investment property. By June 2014, they decided not to purchase
an investment property. They withdrew $30,000, transferring it to a U.S. account, and
maintained the Turkish account for emergencies. In August 2016, they closed the
account and transferred the money to one of their U.S. accounts. (AE C at 2; AE D) They
intend to use these savings to purchase a home.  Applicant maintains a checking1
account with a $500 balance in Turkey. (Tr. 30) His U.S. - based assets total $450,000.
(Tr. 53) 
Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliamentary system and a
president. (HE IV at 1) It is a candidate for European Union membership, and belongs to
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), representing NATO’s “vital eastern
anchor,” and is a longstanding counterterrorism partner with the United States, co-
chairing the Global Counterterrorism Forum. (HE III at 2) (HE I at 1) The United States-
Turkey relationship is “based on mutual interests and mutual respect, and is focused on
areas such as regional security and stability, as well as economic cooperation.” (HE I at
1)
Over the past few years, there have been multiple terrorist attacks in Turkey, and
the possibility of terrorist attacks against U.S. citizens and interests remains high. (HE II
at 5) Turkey has fought the Kurdistan Worker’s Party, a terrorist group in the country’s
southeastern region, for 30 years. The peace process has been arduous, with cease
fires, followed by a resumption of terrorist attacks. (HE III at 5)  Turkey is the main transit
route for Islamic State terrorist fighters from the Middle East to Europe. (HE III at 1)
In 2014, three members of the Islamic State killed a policeman, a non-
commissioned officer, and a truck driver at a checkpoint. (HE II at 3) Significant terrorist
episodes from 2015 include a suicide bombing at a police station, killing one person, and
a bombing near the Syrian border that killed 30 people. (HE II at 2)
Turkey has addressed these threats with a multi-pronged response, organizing
programs in restive, impoverished communities analogous to U.S. anti-gang initiatives,
Applicant and his family are currently living in a rental property.1
3
organizing risk analysis units to detect suspected foreign fighters at airports and borders,
and introducing tougher screening procedures. (HE III at 1-3) Working with neighboring
countries, Turkey has developed an extensive banned-from-entry list of known or
suspected terrorist fighters. (HE III at 1) Also, Turkey has sought assistance from the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security to develop an automated advanced
passenger/passenger name record system. (HE III at 2) In 2014, Turkish national police
offered counterterrorism training programs to law enforcement officers from several
Central Asian countries.
Turkey’s security apparatus has sometimes interpreted its anti-terrorism laws
overbroadly, using it as a pretense to jail reporters, politicians, and activists. (HE III at 2)
Other significant human rights problems include restrictions on freedom of speech and
assembly, and mistreatment of refugees. (HE IV at 26)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses
and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of
persuasion for obtaining a favorable security decision.
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
4
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Analysis
Foreign Preference
Under this guideline, “when an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United
States.” (AG ¶ 9) Applicant’s Turkish passport possession, together with his use of it
after becoming a U.S. citizen, and his vote in a Turkish election triggers the application of
AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member
...[including] but not limited to . . . possession of a current foreign passport . . . [and] . . . 
voting in a foreign election.”
Applicant was unaware of the security significance of his actions before meeting
with an investigator in 2014. Since the meeting, he has neither voted in a Turkish
election, nor travelled with his Turkish passport. Applicant recently surrendered his
passport to the FSO of his company. AG ¶ 11(e), “the passport has been destroyed,
surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated,” applies.
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in the United States interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign
interest.” Moreover, “adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located,
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known
to target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with
a risk of terrorism.” (AG ¶ 6)
Although Turkey is a U.S. ally, its problems with terrorism create “a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” vis a vis
Applicant’s family members who are Turkish citizens and residents. (AG ¶ 7(a)).
Applicant’s bank accounts in Turkey trigger the application of AG ¶ 7(e), “a substantial
business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or
foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to heightened risk of
foreign influence or exploitation.”
The remaining money deposited in Applicant’s bank account in Turkey is nominal
compared to his overall assets in the United States. AG ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine
5
nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they are
unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate,
or pressure the individual,” applies. Accordingly, I resolve subparagraph 2.f in Applicant’s
favor.
Applicant’s casual, infrequent contact with his sister the civil engineer and his
parent-in-laws trigger the application of AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with
foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create
a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  I resolve subparagraphs 2.c and 2.e in
Applicant’s favor.
Applicant has a close relationship with his parents, speaking with them each
week, and visiting them once or twice per year. Although he does not talk to his sister the
physician as much as his parents, he is similarly close to her, as she visits him in the
United States when she travels here for medical conferences. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply
to these relationships.
Applicant has been living in the United States for 15 years and has been a
naturalized citizen for the past three years. He earned a postgraduate degree here and
has cultivated a successful career. Conversely, Applicant just voted in a Turkish election
within the past five years. Moreover, he presented minimal evidence of roots in the
community or interpersonal relationships in the United States sufficient to trigger the
application of AG ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the United States, that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in
favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant has failed to mitigate the foreign influence security
concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.d: Against Applicant
6
Subparagraph 2.e - 2.f: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
7
