 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02753 
 ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
July 2, 2014. On November 19, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 1, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 12, 
2016, scheduling the hearing for June 9, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 17, 
2016. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He 
submitted AE D through F, which were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant is indebted on 12 delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $33,773. Applicant admitted all but one SOR allegation regarding arrears 
owed for child support, and provided explanations with his answers. The evidence 
supports the SOR allegations. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old and is employed as an engineering technician and 
quality control inspector for a defense contractor since 2013. He suffered a period of 
unemployment between 2004 and 2008 while he was on long-term disability for a back 
injury. He returned to his profession in 2008. He has had two previous divorces, 2002 
and 2012, which impacted his financial situation. He has lived with his girlfriend since 
2013. He has four children between the ages of 18 and 24. He has held a security 
clearance since 2002. 
 
The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts, some of which date back to 2009. 
Applicant’s actions with respect to the SOR allegations and the current status are noted 
below: 
 
SOR ALLEGATION ACTION TAKEN CURRENT STATUS 
1.a Judgment $2,795 Testified that account paid. 
No documentary evidence 
of payment. 
Not resolved 
1.b Judgment $7,280 Judgment satisfied. AE A 
and B. 
Resolved 
1.c Collection $120 Paid. AE C. Resolved 
 
3 
 
1.d Cable service collection 
$836 
Testified that account paid. 
Checked with provider who 
could not find an open 
account. No evidence of 
payment provided. 
Not resolved 
1.e Medical $132 No resolution. Not resolved 
1.f Collection agency 
account $1,786 
Auto payment plan 
arranged for July – 
November 2016. AE E.  
Resolved with payment 
plan. 
1.g Child support arrears 
$517 
Unpaid medical bill. Paid via 
wage garnishment. AE D. 
Resolved 
1.h Charged-off bank debt 
$4,995 
No resolution. Not resolved 
1.i  Charged-off bank debt 
$11,508 
Testified that personal loan 
that Applicant could not 
pay. Claims rec’d IRS Form 
1099 (Cancellation of debt). 
No documentary evidence 
provided. 
Not resolved 
1.j Past-due credit card debt 
$1,704 
Testified that he paid via 
installment agreement. 
Provided AE F but shows 
as of June 2016, agreement 
to settle account – no proof 
of payment.  
Not resolved 
1.k Charged-off credit card 
debt $1,100 
Submitted inconclusive 
payment email that does 
not correspond with the 
account number or amount 
owed.  
Not resolved 
1.l Charged-off credit card 
debt $1,000 
Submitted inconclusive 
payment email that does 
not correspond with the 
account number or amount 
owed. 
Not resolved 
 
 Applicant has approximately $1,900 in savings; $11,000 in a 401k retirement 
plan; and $850 to $1,300 per month in discretionary funds remaining after paying 
monthly expenses. In 2012, he borrowed money from his 401k account to take his 
family on a cruise. In 2014, Applicant consulted with a bankruptcy attorney, but decided 
 
4 
 
not to file. Applicant has not sought financial counseling or assistance with debt 
reduction. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.3 The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of the evidence.4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.5 
 
 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security 
clearance). 
 
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant incurred long-standing delinquent debts that have largely gone 
unresolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant allowed his debts to remain unresolved for many years before they 
became a security concern. Although he suffered a period of unemployment and 
divorce that contributed to his financial problems, he has been steadily employed since 
2008 and he has resolved only four delinquent debts. He has not shown evidence of a 
good-faith effort to resolve the remaining debts. He has not established a financial track 
record to show similar issues are unlikely to recur. His financial issues have been long 
standing and remain recent and ongoing and there is no evidence of financial 
counseling or use of a professional to resolve debts. Mitigating condition ¶ 20(d) is 
applicable to SOR ¶¶ 1.b, c, f and g. Any other efforts to resolve debts have not been 
proven through documentary evidence. His overall financial responsibility and 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations remain a concern, and his financial 
condition casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. His 
efforts so far have been inadequate to demonstrate that his financial circumstances are 
under control or that he is willing and able to meet his past financial obligations. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
 
7 
 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Applicant has proven that four debts have been resolved. Although he claims to 
have made progress on some others, he did not follow through with evidence of 
payments or successful resolution. Overall, the record leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, d, e, h - l:  Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b, c, f and g:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
