 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01705 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 29, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 26, 2015, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on March 2, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 4, 2016, and the hearing was 
 
2 
 
 
convened as scheduled on March 29, 2016. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s 
exhibit index was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified. He did not offer 
any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 8, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer, he admitted both allegations in the SOR, except that he 
denied any intent to deceive by his answers on his security clearance application (SCA). 
After a thorough and careful review of all the pleadings and evidence, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He is married and has two children, ages 8 and 11. 
Since March 2012, he has worked for a defense contractor as a security specialist. He 
has a bachelor’s degree. He served in the Army from 1998 to 2005 when he was 
honorably discharged as a sergeant (pay grade E-5). He deployed to Kuwait in 2004 to 
2005.1   
 
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) In August 2011, 
refusing to provide a urine sample to his employer after being presented with a 
reasonable suspicion letter and instead submitting his resignation (See SOR ¶ 1.a); (2) 
his deliberate omission or falsification by failing to disclose his resignation in lieu of 
providing an employer-required urine sample in August 2011 on his April 2012 SCA 
(See SOR ¶ 1.b)  
  
 From February 2009 to August 2011 Applicant worked as a security specialist for 
another government agency (AGA). He testified that his job was highly stressful and he 
did not enjoy it. Sometime before August 18, 2011, Applicant took leave and went on a 
family vacation. Upon returning to work, he was summoned to his supervisor’s office 
where he was presented with a letter of “Notice of Reasonable Suspicion Testing for 
Illegal Drugs and/or Misuse of Alcohol.” The letter stated that agency officials 
determined sufficient grounds existed to authorize Applicant’s urinalysis testing for 
illegal drugs or misuse of alcohol (no further record evidence exists concerning the 
basis of the agency’s suspicion). The letter also outlined that refusing to submit to 
testing was grounds for removal from federal service. Applicant decided to resign his 
position rather than to participate in the required testing. He signed a letter of 
resignation that same day. The letter did not state a specific reason for the resignation.2 
 
 Applicant filled out his SCA in April 2012. In the application he was asked to list 
all his previous employment. He listed his position at AGA from which he resigned 
rather than participate in a drug test as described above. He stated his reason for 
leaving was, “To pursue other employment and follow a career path away from 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5, 18, 59, 61; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 19-20; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
intelligence analysis.” When asked if he had been fired, quit after being told he would be 
fired, left by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct, or left by 
mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance, he checked the “no” 
box. During his Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview in June 2012, he told 
the investigator that he “left the job for personal reasons.” He failed to mention that he 
resigned rather than participate in a required urinalysis test. During a second OPM 
interview in January 2013, when confronted with the resignation and refused-urinalysis 
issue, Applicant stated he resigned rather than take the drug test, but he did not 
consider that a refusal. He thought this was an opportunity to resign, something he had 
thought about for some time because of his job disgruntlement. He also denied using 
illegal drugs or having an intent to deceive with his SCA answers.3 
  
 In his hearing testimony, Applicant stated that he planned to resign before he 
received the urine test letter. He admitted that he would not have resigned on August 
18, 2011, had he not received the letter. He further claimed he had prepared his own 
resignation letter. No such letter was offered into evidence. Applicant did not have 
another job offer when he resigned. He is the primary financial provider for his family. 
He had recently experienced financial difficulties, including seeking bankruptcy relief in 
2010.4 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
                                                          
3 GE 1, 4, 5. 
 
4 Tr. at 32, 47-48. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
 
5 
 
 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
Applicant decided to resign his government position rather than submit to a 
urinalysis. His actions amount to untrustworthy and unreliable behavior. He deliberately 
misrepresented his reason for leaving his AGA position by stating he left to pursue other 
employment and by leaving out that he resigned rather than participate in a urinalysis 
test. His “no” answer to the question of whether he left by mutual agreement following 
an allegation of misconduct was a deliberate omission of relevant facts. The letter 
requiring his participation in a urinalysis test is an allegation of misconduct and his 
resignation accepted by his employer constitutes mutual agreement. Applicant’s denials 
of intentionally misrepresenting this information are not credible. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(d) 
apply.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s 
falsifications and his resignation in lieu of taking a required urine test. He had an 
opportunity during his first OPM interview to reveal the accurate circumstances of his 
resignation, but he failed to do so. It was not until he was confronted during the second 
interview that he spoke to the issue. Falsifying or omitting relevant information on a 
 
6 
 
 
security clearance application is not a minor offense and doing so casts doubt on his 
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) do not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service. However, I also considered that rather than take a required urinalysis test as a 
federal employee he chose to resign and intentionally omit this information and 
misrepresented the circumstances of his resignation when he completed his SCA. 
Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:    Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
