 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: )  
  ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00706 
 ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86)1 on 
February 10, 2014. On August 28, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations.2 
                                                     
1 Also known as a Security Clearance Application (SCA). 
 
2 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 22, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 
11, 2016, scheduling the hearing for June 8, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 16, 
2016. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He 
submitted AE D through G, which were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant is indebted on 21 delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $15,000. Applicant admitted all but six SOR allegations, and provided 
some explanations with his answers. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and is employed as a computer technician for a defense 
contractor since 2014. He suffered a period of unemployment between September 2013 
and March 2014. He is not married and has one child of whom he took custody in 
August 2014 while she was in high school. She recently graduated and he has taken on 
the responsibility to assist her and his grandchild who resides with him. He was 
awarded a bachelor’s degree in 2000, and has held a security clearance since 2001. 
 
The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts, which range in date to 2008. Applicant’s 
actions with respect to the SOR allegations and the current status are noted below: 
 
SOR ALLEGATION ACTION TAKEN CURRENT STATUS 
1.a Child Support Paid (AE A and B) Resolved 
1.b Phone Utility Claims disputed by debt 
resolution co. 
No documented resolution 
provided 
1.c Cable Utility Claims payoff plan arranged No documented resolution 
provided 
1.d Phone Utility Claims disputed with 
creditor and credit bureaus 
No documented resolution 
provided 
1.e Medical Not paid No resolution 
 
3 
 
1.f Medical Not paid No resolution 
1.g Collection for phone 
utility 
Claims disputed by debt 
resolution co. 
No documented resolution 
provided 
1.h Medical Claims should have been 
settled via victim restitution 
fund/disputed by debt 
resolution co. 
No documented resolution 
provided 
1.i  Collection for insurance 
debt 
Not paid No resolution  
1.j Collection for insurance 
debt 
Not paid No resolution 
1.k Collection account Claims disputed by debt 
resolution co. 
No documented resolution 
provided 
1.l State motor vehicle 
collection account 
Claims paid – no record of 
current debt owed 
No documented resolution 
provided 
1.m Medical Not paid No resolution 
1.n City collection Claims paid No documented resolution 
provided 
1.o City collection Claims paid No documented resolution 
provided 
1.p City collection Claims paid No documented resolution 
provided 
1.q Medical Claims paid No documented resolution 
provided 
1.r Renters insurance Not paid – intend to pay by 
July 15, 2016. 
No documented resolution 
provided 
 
4 
 
1.s Medical Claims should have been 
settled via victim restitution 
fund/disputed by debt 
resolution co. 
No documented resolution 
provided 
1.t County judgment Claims should have been 
settled via victim restitution 
fund/disputed by debt 
resolution co. App claims 
debt belongs to co-offender 
and App relieved of 
responsibility 
(AE G shows joint default 
judgment against App) No 
final documented resolution 
provided to show App 
relieved of responsibility 
1.u Judgment account Paid (AE C) Resolved 
 
 Applicant testified that he was not current on his federal and state tax returns 
because his accountant files them every two years, however in post-hearing 
submissions, Applicant asserted that 2013 and 2014 tax returns have since been filed. 
Additionally, he provided documentation from a credit repair company, from December 
2015, showing they disputed three accounts and requested account validations on three 
accounts; however no evidence was submitted showing responses or final resolution of 
the accounts. 
  
 Applicant has approximately $200 in savings, $11,000 in a 401k retirement plan 
on which he is repaying a loan, and approximately $200 to $400 per month in 
discretionary funds remaining after paying monthly expenses. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
5 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.3 The Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a 
preponderance of the evidence.4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.5 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995). 
 
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. DOD, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a security 
clearance). 
 
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
6 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant incurred long-standing delinquent debts which have largely gone 
unresolved. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant allowed his debts to remain unresolved for many years before they 
became a security concern. Although he suffered a period of unemployment from 
September 2013 to March 2014, he has been steadily employed since and his 
delinquent debts date to 2008. He has taken some action toward challenging some 
collection accounts and paid two others. He has not shown a good faith effort to resolve 
the remaining debts or to establish that he is not responsible for certain debts. He has 
not established a financial track record to show similar issues are unlikely to recur. His 
financial issues have been longstanding and remain recent and ongoing. Although he 
has shown that he used a debt resolution company in 2015, no evidence of specific 
financial counseling or continued use of the company to resolve debts has been 
provided. Mitigating conditions ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) partially apply, but Applicant’s efforts 
have not been proven through documentary evidence of follow-up action. His overall 
 
7 
 
financial irresponsibility and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations remain a 
concern, and his actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. He has exhibited a long-term laissez faire attitude toward his financial 
responsibilities and showed little effort to resolve the debts until they became a security 
clearance issue. His efforts so far have been inadequate to demonstrate that his 
financial circumstances are under control or that he is willing and able to meet his 
financial obligations, past and future. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the evidence in favor of 
and against Applicant, and the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person 
analysis.  
 
 Applicant has proven that two debts have been resolved. Although he claims to 
have made progress on others or asserted disputes, he did not follow through with 
evidence of payments or successful disputes. Overall, the record leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant  
 
 
8 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b – t:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.u:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
