 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02504 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 12, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On February 22, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, and it was received on February 26, 2016. Applicant was afforded an 
 
2 
 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government’s 
evidence and provided documents within the time period. The Government’s documents 
are identified as Items 2 through 8 and admitted into evidence. Applicant’s documents 
are marked as Applicant Exhibits A through G and are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on August 26, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole allegation in the SOR with an explanation. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 1997 and is 
presently pursuing a bachelor’s degree. He served in the military from 2002 to 2013 and 
was honorably discharged.1 He served two combat tours from February 2003 to June 
2003 and from February 2005 to September 2005. He married in 1998. He has two 
children from the marriage, ages 17 and 14, and two stepchildren, ages 23 and 21. 
Applicant’s stepdaughter has two children, and they all live with him and his wife. 
Applicant provides financial support for his stepchildren, children, and grandchildren. He 
has worked for a federal contractor since his discharge from the military in 2013.2 
 
 While on active duty, Applicant was stationed in State A from 2007 to 2013. In 
February 2014, Applicant completed a security clearance application. In it he disclosed 
that he had not filed his 2007 through 2012 state income tax returns. He stated: “I have 
always paid and filed Federal taxes. I have always paid State taxes, but am working 
with the State of [A] as some years have not been filed. However, I owe no monies to 
the state.”3  
  
 In April 2014, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. He 
advised the investigator that he always paid his state taxes, but he failed to file his 2007 
state income tax return because he did not know he was required to file if he did not 
owe any taxes. Because he believed he was due a refund, he thought it was 
permissible to not file a tax return. Also, because the refund amount was minimal, it was 
not a priority to file the return. He indicated that because he did not file the state income 
tax return in 2007, he did not have the proper forms and figures to file his 2008 state 
income tax return, and the same was true for subsequent tax years. Applicant further 
advised the investigator that he was working with the State A’s tax office to obtain 
                                                          
1 Applicant indicated his separation from the military was due to medical reasons.  
 
2 Item 4.  
 
3 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
copies of his federal income tax returns, so he could file his 2007 through 2012 state tax 
returns. He believed he was owed a substantial refund.4  
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that his failure to file his state 
income tax returns was based on incorrect information he received from State A’s tax 
office. He indicated he had a discussion with its representative and was told that as an 
active duty member he was not required to file a State A income tax return. He indicated 
that State A notified him that he owed fines even though the state had received taxes 
withheld from his pay.5  
 
 Applicant indicated that due to deployments and multiple permanent change of 
station moves, it took years for State A to talk to him. He indicated that he paid all taxes, 
interest, penalties, and fines imposed, and he had a zero balance owed to State A.6  
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he provided documentation to show that in 
August 2013 he made a request to the Internal Revenue Service requesting information 
about his 2009 through 2012 federal income tax returns. These were the years he was 
missing the federal income tax returns that he needed so he could file those years state 
tax returns. He was also missing some of the required W-2 forms, which are required by 
the state to file. He contacted the local Installation Personnel Administration Center to 
inquire about how to request these forms. He was only able to obtain the forms for the 
most recent three years. He was provided information on how to request the W-2 forms 
for earlier years from his service’s records division. He was given a specific email and 
telephone number. He attempted to contact the division and the phone number 
consistently went to voice mail with no option to leave a message. Applicant indicated 
he was attempting to resolve this matter during the same time his stepdaughter, who 
was living with him, had a baby, and he was separating from the service.7 
 
 During late 2013, Applicant became aware that State A began garnishing his 
wages for about $50 monthly. Due to his hectic personal and professional life at the 
time, Applicant believed that this was likely the easiest way to resolve the amount owed 
for interest, penalties, and fines. He acknowledged that he should have realized that it 
was equally as important to file the delinquent state tax returns.  
 
 After receiving the SOR, Applicant realized that the Government still saw the 
matter as unresolved. He then took immediate steps to rectify the problem. Applicant 
again requested from the records division that he be provided past years W-2 forms. He 
became aware that the email he was previously provided was an incorrect email 
address. He made a new request, which was answered. He completed the delinquent 
                                                          
4 Item 5. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Item 3.  
 
7 AE A, E. 
 
4 
 
 
state tax returns in March 2016, and drove to the tax office in the state’s capital city and 
hand-delivered the tax returns for 2007 through 2014. He provided a confirmation letter 
from the state.8 
 
 Applicant provided copies of the completed state income tax returns, which show 
he was due a refund for every year from 2007 through 2014, except for tax year 2009 
when he owed $78. Applicant attributed tax year 2009 as an anomaly because he 
received a reenlistment bonus that year.9 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that he could not remember if 
the misunderstanding about his requirement to file state income tax returns was the 
result of a conversation he had with a representative from the state’s taxation office or 
the Tax Center Assistance office aboard his active duty station. There was confusion 
about state taxes because Applicant’s spouse was required to pay state taxes in the 
state where she was working, which was different than Applicant’s home of record 
state.10 
 
 Applicant indicated in his response to the FORM that if at any time he had 
thought he owed any taxes, he would have filed and paid them. He never intended to 
evade paying his state income taxes. He did a preliminary assessment at the time the 
taxes were due to determine if he would receive a refund. He believed he was entitled 
to refunds and not required to file.11  
 
 Applicant indicated that he has held a security clearance for almost ten years and 
has never had a security violation or incident. He was the recipient of a Navy 
Commendation Medal, Navy-Marine Corps Achievement Medal (two awards), and 
Marine Corps Good Conduct Medal (three awards), while on active duty. He regrets that 
he put himself in the position where his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness are 
being questioned. He apologized for his actions.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
8 AE A, C, D. 
 
9 AE A, D.  
 
10 AE A. 
 
11 AE A. 
 
12 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
6 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.13 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant failed to timely file state income tax returns for 2007 through 2013. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
condition. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 Applicant erroneously believed that he did not have to file state income tax 
returns because he believed he was receiving a refund. He was notified in 2013 that 
fines were being imposed because of his inaction. In August 2013, he contacted the IRS 
to obtain copies of prior years’ federal tax returns, which were required so he could file 
his delinquent state tax returns. Applicant also attempted to obtain his past W-2 forms 
so he could file the delinquent returns, but when the state garnished his wages, he 
decided this was likely the easiest way to resolve the issue. During this time, his 
stepdaughter, who was living with him and his wife, gave birth, and Applicant was 
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
7 
 
 
separating from the service. He admitted he was distracted. He did not consider the 
impact his inaction would have on his security clearance.  
 
 Applicant has filed all of the delinquent state income tax returns. Except for one 
year, he was due a refund. He has taken responsibility for his behavior and is 
apologetic. It is evident Applicant was not attempting to evade paying his taxes, but 
rather he was misinformed about his requirement to file state tax returns. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to conclude Applicant’s behavior happened under circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. Applicant is aware of his legal obligations to timely 
file his tax returns, and the problem is resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He served honorably in the military for 11 years, 
including two combat tours. He has held a security clearance for approximately ten 
years without incident. He failed to timely file his state income tax returns because he 
erroneously believed he was not required to do so because he was receiving a refund. 
He disclosed this information on his SCA. His delinquent state income tax returns are 
filed. He understands his legal responsibilities. I believe it is highly unlikely any future 
issues will occur. After considering all of the evidence, I conclude that Applicant has met 
his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
8 
 
 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
