 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00993 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by circumstances beyond her 
control. She resolved 9 of the 10 SOR debts, and has one SOR debt left to resolve. She 
has established a track record of debt payment and resolution. Financial considerations 
security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 30, 2012. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On August 13, 2015, the DOD issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on September 9, 2015, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
The case was assigned to me on December 2, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on December 9, 2015, scheduling the hearing for January 13, 2016. Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled. Government exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, and Applicant 
exhibits (AE) 1 through 29, were admitted into evidence without objection. On January 
22, 2016, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing. Applicant provided three 
additional documents after her hearing, and they were admitted without objection. (AE 
30, 31, 32)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, 1.i, and 1.j 
with explanations. She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e through 1.h. Her 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She graduated from 
high school in 1994, and attended college on-and-off from 1995 to 2010, but did not 
earn a degree. She married in 1995, separated in 2012, and the divorce was final in 
2014. She has two children, ages 16 and 12 of this marriage. She married her current 
husband in August 2014, and acquired a 9-year-old stepdaughter. 
 
Applicant first applied for a security clearance in 2006, and believes she was 
granted eligibility for a top secret clearance in 2007 or 2008. She held her top secret 
clearance until 2012, when it was downgraded to a secret clearance because she had 
no need for it. Her secret clearance was continued to present.  
 
Between 2002 and 2005, Applicant was self-employed and then worked as an 
office manager. She worked for a large federal contractor from 2005 until 2009, when 
she was laid off. She was unemployed between August 2009 and April 2010. She has 
worked for federal contractors from April 2010 to present. She has worked for her 
current employer since August 2011. Applicant’s continued employment is contingent 
on her retaining her eligibility to possess a security clearance. There are no allegations 
and there is no evidence of any rule or security violations.   
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of the 2012 SCA asked Applicant to disclose 
whether during the last seven years she had any financial problems, including 
delinquent or in-collection debts; loan defaults; credit cards or accounts suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled; and whether she was currently over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt, or had been over 120 days delinquent on any debts.  
 
Applicant answered “yes” and disclosed that she had financial problems that 
included being delinquent on rental and primary home mortgages, personal loans, 
student loans, and credit card accounts. The subsequent background investigation 
confirmed Applicant’s disclosures and revealed the ten debts alleged in the SOR, 
totaling about $194,000. Applicant’s credit reports and her SOR and hearing admissions 
established most of the debts in the SOR. The status of her SOR debts is as follows: 
 
3 
                                         
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($118,611) Applicant and her first husband purchased this home in 
2004 and lived in it until 2010. At the time, their combined yearly income was about 
$105,000 and they could afford the property. Both Applicant and her spouse were laid 
off from their jobs (2007-2009) and forced to move to another state seeking 
employment. They rented their home when they moved; however, the renters failed to 
pay rent and damaged the property. Applicant could not afford to pay the mortgage and 
their living expenses. They tried to sell the property and asked for a mortgage 
modification without success. Additionally, Applicant and her husband separated in July 
2012, which increased their living expenses. The house foreclosure proceedings started 
in 2013 and were completed in August 2015. The proceeds of the foreclosure sale were 
sufficient to settle the mortgage deficiency balance. (AE 31, p. 12) This allegation is 
resolved for Applicant. 
  
SOR ¶ 1.b ($34,983 – the SOR alleged a charged-off second mortgage owing 
$45,803. The correct balance is $34,983. (AE 31)) This was a second mortgage on the 
home alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for a loan to build a swimming pool and fence. Applicant and 
her ex-husband have been in contact with the creditor since 2012. They are attempting 
to negotiate a settlement and they are disputing what they believed are overcharges. 
They are also trying to identify the legal owner of the second mortgage account 
because it has been resold several times. This debt is unresolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($16,979 – the SOR alleged a delinquent mortgage.) This mortgage 
was for a property Applicant’s father purchased. When he died in 2006, Applicant 
inherited his estate and assumed the delinquent mortgage as well as about $50,000 in 
credit card debt, and delinquent taxes owed to the IRS ($12,000). The credit grantor 
reclaimed the property and the mortgage was settled. (AE 31, p. 11) Between 2006 and 
2009, Applicant established payment agreements with the IRS and other creditors and 
paid or settled most of her father’s delinquent debts, totaling close to $100,000. 
Applicant’s documentary evidence shows she established a payment plan with the IRS 
in 2013 and has been making consistent monthly payments of $300. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.i ($5,832 and $6,128, respectively, alleged the same account) 
Applicant submitted documentary evidence showing the account was paid. (AE 19, 32; 
Tr. 51-52; 65) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($350) This was a debt for unpaid telephone services. Applicant 
submitted documentary evidence showing the account was paid. (AE 17, 31, p.16; Tr. 
65) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f ($288), 1.g ($204), 1.h ($201) Applicant successfully disputed these 
debts and they were removed from her credit reports. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j ($50) This was a debt for unpaid medical services. Applicant testified 
that she paid it. 
 
Applicant credibly explained that her financial problems were caused by a 
combination of factors: her and her ex-husband’s periods of unemployment, their 
 
4 
                                         
 
inability for find jobs where they were living, having to move to another state to find 
employment, their separation and divorce, providing financial assistance to her 
grandmother, the death of her father, and her assuming her father’s inheritance and 
debts.  
 
After Applicant was laid off and could not find employment, she moved from one 
state to another seeking employment. After securing a job, she established payment 
agreements with some of her creditors, and paid most of her father’s delinquent debts 
including her father’s tax debt to the IRS ($12,000), a $50,000 credit card debt, $11,000 
on legal fees, and $5,000 funeral expenses. She had to repay his father’s delinquent 
debts to release liens on his property and then be able to sell the properties. Applicant 
estimated she paid about $100,000 to settle her father’s estate over a period of four 
years. Applicant believes that she has been paying her debts responsibly and reducing 
her expenses to be able to pay her debts.  
 
Applicant believes that she is currently financially stable and that she is in control 
of her finances. When asked whether she has acquired any recent financial obligations, 
Applicant disclosed that she and her current husband owed her state of residency 
$1,000 in back taxes, but she has a $165 monthly payment plan established. 
Additionally, she and her ex-husband owe the IRS about $6,000. She presented 
evidence showing that she established a payment plan with the IRS in 2012. Her 
documents show consecutive monthly payments of $300 to the IRS between December 
2013 and January 2016. 
 
Applicant expressed sincere remorse and embarrassment for her financial 
problems. She noted that she has been managing her financial situation and has 
brought her debt down. She believes she is back in control of her finances, and plans to 
pay all her creditors.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
5 
                                         
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in her credit reports, SOR 
response, and hearing record. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
 
6 
                                         
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
All the above mitigating conditions apply and mitigate the financial considerations 
concerns. Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by circumstances beyond her 
control, including: her and her ex-husband’s periods of unemployment, their inability for 
find jobs where they were living, having to move to another state to find employment, 
their separation and divorce, providing financial assistance to her grandmother, the 
death of her father, and her assuming her father’s debts.  
 
Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that she worked diligently to remain in 
contact with her creditors and resolve most of the SOR debts with little help from her ex-
husband. Applicant settled SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. She paid SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.i, and 1.j. 
She also successfully disputed SOR ¶¶ 1.f through 1.h, and the debts were removed 
from her credit reports. Of the ten delinquent debts alleged, only SOR ¶ 1.b is 
unresolved. Applicant plans to resolve this debt in the near future.  
 
Based on Applicant’s actions addressing and paying her debts, and her credible 
and sincere promise to timely pay her debts, future delinquent debt is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I 
find there are clear indications that her financial problem is being resolved and is under 
control. Her payments of some of her debts showed good faith. She and her current 
husband have sufficient income to keep their debts in current status and to continue 
making progress paying her remaining delinquent debts. Her efforts are sufficient to fully 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
  
 
7 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, 
but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has held a 
security clearance since 2007. There are no allegations of rule or security violations. 
Applicant has worked for two federal contractors since 2011.  
 
The SOR alleged 10 delinquent debts. Applicant showed financial responsibility 
by staying in contact with her creditors, making payment arrangements to resolve her 
delinquent debts, and by disputing some questionable debts. She resolved nine SOR 
debts. He still has one SOR debt to resolve.  
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by circumstances beyond her 
control. She promised to pay or resolve the remaining unpaid SOR debt. She 
understands that she is required to demonstrate financial responsibility to retain her 
security clearance.  
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:  
 
[T]he concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I am confident she will maintain her financial responsibility. Financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
 
8 
                                         
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
