 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03523 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 10, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 8, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 22, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 20, 2016. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 28, 
2016.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted written requests, with supporting documents,2 
that I take administrative notice of certain facts about Iraq and Jordan. Applicant did not 
object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the request that 
is supported by source documents from official U.S. Government publications. The facts 
are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He was born in Iraq. He earned a bachelor’s degree 
from a service academy in Iraq in 1984 and was commissioned an officer in the Iraqi 
military. He married in 1988 and has a 26-year-old son and 21-year-old daughter. He is 
sponsored by a federal contractor for a job.3  
 
 Applicant served with the U.S. military in Iraq beginning in late 2005 until 
approximately 2007. He described his service as dangerous as he was traveling 
throughout Iraq to military bases, and he was targeted because of his service. He 
testified he was shot at and a bullet grazed his forehead. He indicated he worked for a 
defense contractor sometime in 2010 supporting operations in Iraq.4  
 
In 2007, because of Applicant’s service he was granted a special visa, and he 
and his family were permitted to immigrate to the United States. He and his wife made a 
decision that he would immigrate to the United States, but she and the children would 
remain in Iraq so the children could complete school. They did not want their children’s 
education to be disrupted. In 2012 after completion of his schooling, Applicant’s son 
immigrated to the United States. In November 2012, Applicant became a citizen of the 
United States. His wife and daughter remained in Iraq so his daughter could complete 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibits I and II are Department Counsel Memoranda. Although there were no objections, 
Department Counsel commented on some of the exhibits. 
 
2 GE 3, 4, 5 and 6 are the administrative notice requests and supporting documents. 
 
3 Tr. 15-18. 
 
4 Tr. 28-31. 
 
3 
 
 
school, which she did in 2014. At that time, they applied for visas to come to the United 
States. Their applications are still pending. Applicant has requested updates of their 
status from the U.S embassy, but has not received a response. He has no indication of 
when his wife and daughter will be permitted to immigrate to the United States. It is too 
risky for him to travel to Iraq using a U.S. passport; otherwise he would travel there to 
go to the U.S. embassy and attempt to inquire in person as to the status of his family’s 
visa applications.5 
 
 Applicant’s son is an Iraqi citizen, and a permanent resident of the United States. 
Applicant’s wife, daughter, mother, brother, older sister, and mother-in-law are citizens 
and residents of Iraq. His brother is a retired banker. He has three children. Applicant’s 
last contact in person with his brother was in 2012, and he maintains telephonic monthly 
contact. He does not know if his brother is interested in immigrating to the United 
States. His older sister is self-employed and has a daughter. He last saw his sister, who 
lives in Iraq, in 2012, but maintains monthly telephonic contact. His younger sister is a 
citizen of Iraq residing in Jordan. He contacts her by telephone annually. She and her 
husband are permanent residents of Jordan. They have applied for humanitarian visas 
to immigrate with their two children to the United States. Applicant’s mother visited him 
in the United States for eight months and then returned to Iraq. He maintains contact 
with her in Iraq regularly. Applicant indicated he has no control over his brother’s and 
sisters’ choices.6  
 
 Applicant’s wife and daughter live together with his wife’s three sisters, (along 
with one sister’s husband), and her mother in Iraq. He acknowledged that it is not a safe 
area, and they do not go outside their compound often. Applicant has minimal contact 
with his mother-in-law. His family is aware that he worked for the U.S. military in the 
past, and they are aware that he is applying for a security clearance. Applicant has 
made numerous trips to Iraq since 2007 for his work. He did not visit his family during 
these trips. He has also made two trips in 2008 and 2009 to visit his family. He testified 
that he has not used his Iraqi passport to travel since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2007. 
He communicates every week with his wife and daughter through video on the 
computer.7  
 
 Applicant served in the Iraqi military from 1981 until he retired as an Army 
captain in 1991. He is entitled to a military pension from the Iraqi government. On his 
December 2012 security clearance application (SCA), he indicated he received the 
pension from November 1991, and it was expected to end in January 2013. During his 
background interview with a government investigator in January 2013, he indicated that 
he no longer received a retirement pension. He indicated that the procedure for 
maintaining his pension was complex and difficult, and he did not wish to continue the 
process. At his hearing, he testified that he continues to receive a retirement pension 
                                                          
5 Tr. 18-22, 24-25; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. 27, 32-35, 45; GE 1, 2. 
 
7 Tr. 33, 39-43. 
 
4 
 
 
from the Government of Iraq. The pension goes to his wife and daughter to support 
them while they live in Iraq. He estimated the amount was $100 a month. He testified 
that once his wife and daughter immigrate to the United States, he will no longer be 
entitled to the pension. His wife’s family provides additional support for her and his 
daughter. Applicant also occasionally sends money to help. He does not own any 
property in Iraq.8  
  
Applicant has purchased a house in the United States. His son will apply for U.S. 
citizenship once he completes the required time period. He lives with Applicant. His son 
has obtained a state license so he can work in his field of study.9  
 
Applicant possessed an Iraqi passport that was issued in August 2007 and was 
valid through August 2015. He provided a letter from his prospective employer that 
indicated he relinquished his Iraqi passport to the employer.10  
 
Applicant provided a 2007 copy of a letter from Iraqi Automated Fingerprint 
Information System, Ministry of Interior of Iraq verifying no adverse findings were 
detected in his background.11 He also provided Performance Certificates he received 
from the U.S. government contractors for whom he worked and the U.S. Army from 
2005, 2006, and 2007, recognizing him for his attitude, dedication, initiative, hard work, 
and bravery. Applicant provided a character letter from 2006, which indicated he was 
held in high regard by the Coalition Force, and he was frequently requested by name to 
work because of his proven skills. He demonstrated a strong work ethic and was 
considered a valuable contributor to the team. His intelligence, resourcefulness and 
adaptability were considered a tremendous asset.12 
 
A character witness who has known Applicant for six years testified on his behalf. 
He considers Applicant a friend who is trustworthy. Because of Applicant’s cultural 
expertise he is a highly sought after employee. He is considered a respected 
professional.13 
 
IRAQ 
 
 The U.S. Embassy warns U.S. citizens to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. 
U.S. citizens remain at high risk for kidnapping and terrorist violence while in Iraq. The 
                                                          
8 Tr. 25-27, 37-39; GE 1, 2. 
 
9 Tr. 35-36, 40. 
 
10 Tr. 23, 28, 36-37; GE 1; AE B. 
 
11 AE C. 
 
12 AE D. 
 
13 Tr. 49-51. 
 
 
5 
 
 
U.S. Government considers the potential threat to U.S. citizens to be serious enough to 
require them to live and work under strict security guidelines.  
 
 Iraq’s sectarian and ethnic divisions have reemerged and create a major 
challenge to Iraq’s stability. Al-Qaeda continues to be a major threat to Iraqi stability. In 
2013, Al Qaeda in Iraq adopted the name Islamic State of Iraq and Levant (ISIL), or 
alternately, Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS). In 2014, the group changed its name 
to the Islamic State (IS). In May 2014, the Department of State amended the Foreign 
Terrorist Organization designation to add ISIL.  
 
 ISIL conducts widespread active insurgency in parts of Iraq and Syria as it seizes 
territory in both countries. Within areas under ISIL control, the Iraqi government has little 
or no ability to control and ensure public safety. People belonging to minorities, 
religious, ethnic, or otherwise, and those who express support for the government of 
Iraq or western institutions are at grave risk in these areas and may be subject to 
kidnapping, imprisonment, or execution.  
 
 ISIL has murdered numerous journalists and aid workers, and posted their 
executions on YouTube. There has been a surge in terrorist activities in Iraq since 2014 
from other insurgent groups as a result of ISIL’s activity.  
 
 The 2014 U.S. Department of State’s annual human rights report on Iraq reflects 
that due to attacks and offensive operations by ISIL, the Iraqi government lost effective 
control over large areas of the country. Control over the security forces was inconsistent 
and the deterioration of the security situation led to the reemergence of militia operating 
outside of the authority of the government. ISIL committed the overwhelming number of 
serious human rights abuses. It systematically targeted government officials and 
members of the security forces, as well as religious and ethnic minorities, and women 
and children.14 
 
Jordan 
 
 Jordan is a constitutional monarchy. The U.S. Department of State’s 2015 human 
rights report indicated Jordan’s most significant human rights problems were (1) 
restrictions on the freedom of expression, including the detention of journalists, which 
limited the ability of citizens and media to criticize government policies and officials; (2) 
citizens’ inability to change their government peacefully; and (3) the mistreatment and 
allegations of torture by security and government officials. Other human rights problems 
included restrictions on freedom of association, poor prison conditions, arbitrary arrest 
and denial of due process through administrative detention, prolonged detention, and 
allegations of nepotism and influence of special interest on the judiciary. In addition, 
there are infringements on citizens’ right to privacy, interference in the media, violence 
against women and abuse of children, and trafficking in persons.  
 
                                                          
14 GE 3, 4. 
 
6 
 
 
 The U.S. State Department assesses the threat of terrorism in Jordan as high. 
The State Department remains concerned about the continued threat of terrorist attacks 
and other violent actions against U.S. citizens and interests overseas. It warns travelers 
to be cognizant of the fact that violent extremist groups have carried out terrorist 
activities against U.S. and government of Jordan targets in Jordan.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
15 GE 5, 6.  
 
7 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; and 
 
(c) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country. 
 
 Applicant held a valid Iraqi passport after becoming a United States citizen. He 
receives a retirement pension from the Iraqi Government for his military service. The 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
is potentially applicable:  
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant’s Iraqi passport expired in 2015. He surrendered it to his prospective 
employer. AG ¶ 11(e) applies to SOR ¶ 2.b. Applicant served in the Iraqi military and 
 
8 
 
 
earned a retirement pension. He received the pension before becoming a United States 
citizen. He continues to receive the retirement pension, which he provides to his wife 
and daughter who continue to live in Iraq. AG ¶ 11(c) does not apply. Foreign 
preference security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them. The following conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation pressure, or coercion. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile 
to the United States. 
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
classified information from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to 
have access to it, regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has 
interests inimical to those of the United States.16 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
9 
 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.”17 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record 
are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue.18  
 
Applicant’s wife, daughter, mother, brother, older sister and mother-in-law are all 
citizens and residents of Iraq. His younger sister is a citizen of Iraq and resident of 
Jordan. His son is a citizen of Iraq and a resident of the United States. Applicant has 
regular contact with his family living in Iraq. That country is a high-risk country for 
kidnapping and terrorist violence. The influence and activities of ISIL within the country 
makes it an extremely dangerous place. There is a serious threat to U.S. citizens and its 
interests in Iraq. The terrorist threat in Jordan is also high. Violent extremist groups 
have carried out terrorist activities against United States and government of Jordan 
targets in Jordan. I find that these factors rise to the level of creating a heightened risk. 
The above disqualifying conditions apply.19 
 
I have analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions for 
this security determination under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **16-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
18 See generally; ISCR Case. No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activities in area where family members 
resided). 
 
19 GE 5, 6.  
 
10 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
Applicant’s wife, daughter, mother, brother, sister, and mother-in-law live in Iraq. 
Applicant has frequent contact with his wife, daughter and mother. He provides his Iraqi 
military pension to them. His contact with his family is not casual or infrequent. He and 
his wife made a decision for her and their children to remain in Iraq so the children could 
complete their education. Applicant’s mother visited him in the United States for about 
eight months before returning to Iraq. He maintains contact with his brother and sister in 
Iraq. Applicant acknowledged it is too dangerous for him to return to Iraq using his U.S. 
passport. Applicant’s family in Iraq is aware that he is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance. Applicant’s relationship with his family, the instability of security and the 
terrorist activities that are prevalent in Iraq makes is likely that Applicant could be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of his family and the interests of 
the United States. Applicant’s devotion to his family living in Iraq is not minimal and the 
difficulty he would potentially encounter in having to choose between his family or his 
adopted country would be too difficult. I find the same analysis applicable for Applicant’s 
contact with his sister in Jordan. That country has the same type of risks. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 
8(b), and 8(c) do not apply.  
 
Applicant’s son is a citizen of Iraq and a permanent resident of the United States. 
Because Applicant’s son lives with him in the United States the security risk is reduced. 
It is unlikely Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of his son and the interests of the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(a) applies to 
Applicant’s son. Foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
11 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He served in the Iraqi military and earned a retirement 
pension. I have considered his service with the U.S. Army and defense contractors in 
Iraq. He and his family were granted special visas to immigrate to the United States in 
2007. Applicant immigrated, but he and his wife decided that she would remain in Iraq 
until the children completed school. His son immigrated in 2012 after completing his 
schooling. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2012. In 2014, he surrendered his Iraqi 
passport, which expired in 2015, to his prospective employer. In 2014 when his 
daughter completed her schooling, Applicant applied for visas for his wife and daughter 
to immigrate. The visas have not yet been issued. Applicant continues to receive an 
Iraqi retirement pension that is given to his wife and daughter for support. They live in a 
family compound in Iraq and are also supported by her family. His family is aware he 
has worked for the U.S. government and its contractors in the past. They are aware he 
is applying for a security clearance. There is no question that Applicant has been loyal 
to the United States through his work, but at this time, his continued close contacts with 
family in living in Iraq and Jordan make him vulnerable to pressure and coercion and 
therefore are a security concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
foreign preference and foreign influence guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:    For Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph  2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
