1 
            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-00384 
)
 Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: David Hayes, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kevin J. Tagliaferri, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial 
problems were not caused by irresponsible, reckless, or negligent behavior. She is 
making a good-faith effort to resolve her delinquent accounts. To date, she has 
rehabilitated her mortgage and has paid almost $30,000 to the resolution of non-SOR 
debts. Clearance is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On September 30, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to 
an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke her security clearance.  
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
     09/26/2016
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On April 4, 2016, I 
issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2  Department 
Counsel provided documents as requested.3 At the hearing, convened on April 27, 
2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, without objection. The record 
remained open after the hearing to allow Applicant to submit additional information 
about her finances. She timely submitted AE A through I, which were also admitted 
without objection.4 I received the transcript (Tr.) on May 10, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 50, has worked for a federal contractor since 2003. She was initially 
granted a security clearance during her service in the U.S. Air Force between 1983 and 
1988. Applicant completed her current security clearance application in June 2014, 
disclosing her history of financial difficulties.  She disclosed having sought financial 
assistance, as well as 46 delinquent accounts, the majority of which are related to 
medical expenses. The ensuing investigation confirmed Applicant’s history of financial 
problems. The resulting SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to five creditors for 
approximately $131,011, 83%  of the alleged debts are related to the two mortgages on 
her home.5  
 
 Applicant is married with two children, ages 14 and 13. She resides with her 
family in the home she and her husband purchased from her father-in-law in 2001. 
Applicant’s financial problems began in 2009. Applicant’s youngest son, then six years 
old, was diagnosed with a serious medical condition as was Applicant. Applicant’s son 
requires extensive and ongoing medical care. Also that year, Applicant’s husband, who 
works in construction, was only able to work nine months of the year due to inclement 
weather that prevented outside work. The loss of household income along with the 
increased medical expenses caused Applicant to rely on credit cards to pay expenses.  
By 2010, she could not afford the credit card payments. The SOR alleges three credit 
cards debts, SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($19,334), 1.c ($1,046), and 1.e ($1,955). Applicant admitted 
that she used each to pay for necessities, including medical care and clothing for her 
growing sons.  These debts remain unresolved.6 
  
 In 2012, Applicant’s home fell into such a state of disarray that her insurance 
company threatened to cancel the insurance policy unless Applicant made extensive 
repairs. To complete the repairs, Applicant took a $26,000 loan from her retirement 
account. Since then, she has repaid $200 toward the loan each month. The loan will be 
satisfied in 2017. In 2013, Applicant learned that her youngest son suffered from 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 The discovery letter, dated November 23, 2015, is appended to the record as HE II. 
 
4 AE E. 
 
5 GE 1-4;  AE C. 
 
6 Tr. 15-18, 26, 40, 43, 52, 59.  
 
3 
 
another medical condition that requires him to maintain a strict diet. In addition to her 
son’s medical expenses, the continued increase in expenses caused by the loan 
repayment and her son’s new diet caused additional financial difficulty. In the face of her 
overwhelming financial problems, Applicant became depressed. After seeking help, she 
re-focused her efforts on resolving her delinquent accounts. In 2013, she sought the 
advice of an attorney about filing for bankruptcy protection. By 2014, Applicant could not 
afford to pay the mortgage on her home, which went into foreclosure. Between 2014 
and 2015, Applicant applied for modification of her primary home loan three times. Her 
final application for modification was approved in May 2015, and her primary mortgage 
is currently in good standing (SOR ¶ 1.b) The creditor holding the second mortgage on 
her home forgave the loan in December 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.d).7  
 
 With her home mortgage under control, Applicant decided to resolve her other 
debts directly. She began by maxing out her the health savings plan benefit offered by 
her employer to help offset some of her medical expenses. Under her current insurance 
plan, Applicant pays $4,600 in out-of-pocket medical expenses before her medical 
expenses are covered by insurance. Applicant usually meets her deductible half-way 
through the year. She uses the second half of the year to try to stock up on as many 
medical supplies as possible in an effort to lessen her out-of-pocket expenses for the 
upcoming year. Applicant has also worked on resolving several debts that were not 
alleged in the SOR. In addition to repaying the loan from her retirement account, she 
has focused her attention on paying outstanding medical expenses. Applicant has paid 
almost $2,000 in medical expenses and $1,275 in outstanding state taxes. She has also 
paid a collection account arising from a returned check for $80.8  
 
 Despite her efforts, Applicant has ongoing financial problems. At the time of the 
hearing, Applicant recently learned that she and her husband owe almost $11,000 in 
past-due federal taxes. She has contacted the IRS and set up a payment arrangement 
of $50 per month. The creditor holding SOR ¶ 1.a is suing Applicant to collect the past-
due account. She plans to use money from her retirement account to satisfy any 
judgment. Applicant bears the responsibility of resolving her family’s financial issues. 
Her husband is not coping well with the changes in their family life caused by their son’s 
medical issues. She pays the majority of the household bills. Her husband gives her 
money to help with their expenses. She is able to set aside $500 each month to cover 
emergency expenses. Applicant has expressed her intent to keep working on her 
finances until she is able to resolve her delinquent accounts.9  
 
 Applicant is well regarded at work. For the past five years, Applicant has been 
entrusted with a corporate credit card to facilitate the purchase of office supplies. She 
                                                          
7 Tr. 14, 19-23, 28, 33-34, 45, 49-50, 56-57, 59; AE G. 
 
8 Tr. 17-18, 23-25, 35-37, 44-49, 60; AE E-F, H. 
 
9 Tr. 36, 38-39, 42, 55-56, 58-59; AE H.  
 
 
4 
 
has never used the card for personal use. Applicant does not believe that her employer 
would allow her to retain purchasing responsibilities if she were not trustworthy.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
10  Tr. 30, AE A-B, D. 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”11 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $131,011 on five delinquent 
accounts, the largest two accounts being the primary and secondary mortgages on her 
home, totaling $108,676. The record supports a prima facie case that Applicant has a 
history of not paying her bills and, that for several years, she has had an inability to do 
so.12 However, Applicant’s financial problems did not occur under circumstances that 
raise doubts about her security worthiness. Her financial problems were caused by 
events beyond her control - medical diagnoses for her youngest son that require 
extensive and costly medical care and food.13 The record shows that Applicant has 
been working to rehabilitate her finances. She sought legal counsel to determine her 
available options.14 Applicant is making a good-faith effort to repay her creditors. She 
actively and persistently pursued a home loan modification. As a result, she has 
rehabilitated her primary home loan and the obligation is now current. She no longer 
owes the secondary mortgage. Although the three other SOR debts remain unresolved, 
Applicant has taken steps to resolve almost $30,000 in non-SOR accounts.15  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about her suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicants are not held to a standard of perfection. Even 
though Applicant is still struggling financially, she has provided sufficient history of debt 
repayment and intent to resolve her delinquent accounts.  
                                                          
11  AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
13 AG ¶ 20(b).   
 
14 AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
15 AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
