KEYWORD: Guideline C
DIGEST: Applicant argues that her dual citizenship has not caused a concern with her
performance of duty.  The government need not wait until an individual mishandles or fails to
safeguard protected information before it can make an unfavorable public trust decision.  
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 15-05418.a1
DATE: 09/12/2016
DATE: September 12, 2016
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 15-05418
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On March 8, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On July 19, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness
designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Appellant was born in the U.S.  She visited Australia after graduation, where she met her first
husband.  The two were divorced in the late 1990s.  After the divorce, Applicant obtained Australian
citizenship.  She did so in order to take advantage of the Australian health care system and to qualify
for an advanced degree program that would not otherwise be available to her.  She has voted in
Australian elections.  Applicant possesses an Australian passport, which she renewed in 2010.  After
the hearing, Applicant notified the Judge that she had tried to surrender her passport to the
Australian Consulate.  She stated that the Consulate indicated that it would take the passport but
would not issue a letter stating that they had done so.  Her employer would not accept it either. 
Applicant is still in possession of the passport.
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s Australian citizenship is not based on birth or parentage but on her own
application for naturalization.  She was reluctant to renounce her Australian citizenship because of
benefits to which it entitled her.  Applicant had exercised certain prerogatives of Australian
citizenship, such as obtaining the passport, utilizing the educational benefits referenced above, and
voting.  She never clearly indicated that she had surrendered her passport.  However, even if she had
surrendered it, her having availed herself of other Australian citizenship privileges precluded a
favorable conclusion.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge did not properly evaluate her case according to its facts
but, rather, relied on regulatory technicalities.  She provides an explanation and context for her
circumstances, claiming that she had acquired Australian citizenship “only because her ex-husband
was an Australian citizen.”  Appeal Brief at 1.  She also cites to her effort to surrender her passport
and argues that, due to her marriage, she acquired “permanent resident”status, as a consequence of
which she had no choice but to accept medical benefits.  Id. at 2.  She also cites to evidence that
voting is a legal obligation in Australia, with a monetary penalty for those who do not do so.  She
reiterates information contained in the Judge’s findings of fact to the effect that she had not been
successful in surrendering her passport, and she notes that she has never renounced her U.S.
citizenship.  
We have considered Applicant’s arguments in light of the record.  The evidence, including
her own testimony, establish that she acquired Australian citizenship not by operation of law but by
choice, in order to take advantage of that country’s health care system and educational benefits.  See,
for example, her answer to Department Counsel’s question about why she obtained Australian
citizenship after she was divorced: “Two main reasons: One being health care; the other being
education.”  Tr. at 33.  Some of the assertions in Applicant’s Appeal Brief do not appear consistent
with her testimony at the hearing.  When taken in conjunction with the other evidence referenced
above, the Judge’s conclusion that none of the mitigating conditions fully apply is sustainable. 
Applicant’s arguments are not enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that
was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  ADP Case No. 12-09387 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 26,
2016). 
Applicant states that her dual citizenship has not caused a concern with her performance of
duty.  The government need not wait until an individual mishandles or fails to safeguard protected
information before it can make an unfavorable public trust decision.   See, e.g., ADP Case No. 08-
07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2009).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness
cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding
security clearances:  such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013). 
See also Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan     
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy             
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
