 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01929 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kristofer Hofstra, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence 
and Guideline C, foreign preference. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 28, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. The 
DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 12, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On March 2, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On 
March 4, 2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant 
that the hearing was scheduled for March 30, 2016. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant's Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 7, 2016. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning the country of Russia. Department 
Counsel provided references to supporting documents that verify, detail, and provide 
context for the requested facts. The specific facts noticed are included in the Findings of 
Fact.1 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.2 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations with 
explanations.4 Those admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. In 1998, he came to the United States with his parents 
when he was 11 years old. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2004. 
He obtained a U.S. passport in March 2005. He completed all his education in this 
country to include high school, undergraduate (bachelor’s), and graduate (master’s) 
studies. He is single, never married and has no children. He is currently an engineer for 
a defense contractor who he has worked for since 2012.5 
                                                          
1 The Government’s request and the supporting background documents were marked as hearing exhibit 
(HE) I. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). 
 
3 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
4 At hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.c. The motion was granted. My 
Formal Findings, supra, will indicate that those three allegations were withdrawn. Tr. At 8-9. 
 
5 Tr. at 38; GE 1-2. 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant exercised his Russian citizenship by applying for 
and being issued a Russian passport in 2007 after becoming a U.S. citizen in 2004; 
possessed a Russian passport that he renewed in 2012; and used his Russian passport 
when he traveled to Russia in 2009 in lieu of his U.S. passport. The SOR also alleges 
his maternal and paternal grandparents, two aunts, and an uncle are all residents and 
citizens of Russia. 
 
 Applicant presented documentation showing that he renounced his Russian 
citizenship and that citizenship was terminated in 2015. Before his Russian citizenship 
was terminated, Applicant explained that he renewed his Russian passport in 2007 
because it was easier to travel to Russia to visit relatives and there was no good reason 
not to use it then. He used his Russian passport to travel to Russia in 2008 for ease of 
travel and convenience. After starting work at his current job and understanding the 
ramifications of having Russian citizenship, he decided to renounce that citizenship in 
2013. In order to do so, he needed a current Russian passport. This is the reason he 
renewed his Russian passport in 2012. It allowed him to renounce his citizenship that 
resulted in termination in 2015. He sent his Russian passport along with his written 
intent to renounce his Russian citizenship to the Russian consulate. This was witnessed 
by a security representative from his company.6 
 
 Applicant’s relatives who are Russian citizens and residents (his testimony 
revealed that his paternal grandparents are residents of Georgia) include his paternal 
and maternal grandparents, two aunts and an uncle. His grandfathers are in their 80s 
and one grandmother is in her 70s, while the other is in her mid-60s. One aunt is 45 
years old and Applicant’s uncle is in his 50s. He does not know the age of his other 
aunt. He has not visited these relatives since his last trip to Russia in 2008. None have 
any government or military affiliation. He has minimal contact with all his grandparents, 
aunts, and uncle. That contact is limited to an annual birthday phone call. He does not 
receive or provide any financial support to any of these relatives.7 
 
 Applicant owns no property or any other assets in Russia. He owns his own 
home and two cars here in the United States. His parents are citizens and residents of 
the United States.8 
  
Russia has a highly centralized, weak multi-party political system dominated by 
the president. Russia has significant human rights problems, marked by restrictions on 
civil liberties, discrimination, denial of due process, forced confessions, torture, other 
prisoner mistreatment, and the government’s failure to prosecute officials who commit 
serious violations. Government officials also engage in electronic surveillance without 
proper authorization. 
                                                          
6 Tr. 19-22; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 26-31; GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 32-33; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Russia is one of the most aggressive countries conducting espionage against the 
United States, focusing on obtaining proprietary information and advance weapons 
technologies beneficial to Russia’s military modernization and economic development. 
Russia is one of the most capable and persistent intelligence threats and aggressive 
practitioner of economic espionage against the United States. Russia’s intelligence 
services as well as private companies and other entities frequently seek to exploit 
Russian citizens or persons with family ties to Russia who can use their insider access 
to corporate networks to steal secrets. They also have offered financial inducements to 
U.S. government officials and citizens to encourage them to compromise classified 
information. Russia’s attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic information 
represent a growing and persistent threat to U.S. security. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Russia is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The relationship of 
Russia with the United States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his relatives living in 
Russia do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position where 
he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
his relatives living in Russia who might be coerced by governmental entities.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”9 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Russia seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his relatives 
living in Russia, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign influence.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his relatives 
who live in Russia. Applicant communicates with these Russian relatives on a sporadic 
basis. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. Applicant has not attempted to rebut this 
presumption. Given Russia’s aggressive intelligence approach toward the United 
States, Applicant’s relationships with his relatives living in that country are sufficient to 
create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.”  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) partially applies. Applicant’s in-laws are not in government positions 
and do not have affiliations with the Russian government. Applicant’s parents reside in 
the United States and he has limited contact with his Russian grandparents, aunts and 
uncle. It is unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose 
between his Russian relatives’ interests and those of the United States. Because the 
contact is with relatives, the contact is presumed not casual. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He has resided in this country since he was 11 
years old, he became a citizen in 2004, and has attended high school, college, and 
graduate school in this country. He owns a home and two cars here. The evidence 
supports that Applicant has longstanding loyalties toward the United States and would 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 9:  
 
"When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States." 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
 
8 
 
 
The security concern under this guideline is not limited to countries hostile to the 
United States. Applicant's possession and use of a Russian passport after becoming a 
U.S. citizen establishes AG ¶ 10(a)(1).  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant renounced his citizenship and surrendered his Russian passport. In 
2015, his Russian citizenship was terminated. Both mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denying his clearance at this time. I considered the ties he established in this 
country, thereby demonstrating his longstanding loyalty to this country and his 
termination of Russian citizenship. Therefore, he provided sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
9 
 
 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign 
influence, and Guideline C, foreign preference. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph    1.a:    For Applicant 
    
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs   2.a: - 2.c:    Withdrawn 
 Subparagraphs   2.d: - 2.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
