 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01299 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial 
problems were caused by events beyond her control, three years of unemployment 
between 2009 and 2012. Applicant has made arrangements toward the resolution of 
three of the five alleged SOR debts, representing 94% of the alleged debts. Clearance 
is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke her security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On April 4, 2016, I 
issued a prehearing order to the parties regarding the exchange and submission of 
discovery, the filing of motions, and the disclosure of any witnesses.2  Department 
Counsel provided documents as requested.3 At the hearing, convened on April 26, 
2016, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 
A through D, without objection. The record remained open after the hearing to allow 
Applicant to submit additional information about her finances. She timely submitted AE 
E through G, which were also admitted without objection.4 I received the transcript (Tr.) 
on May 4, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 48, has worked as an engineer for a federal contractor since 
September 2012. Applicant was initially granted access to classified information in 2007 
while working for another federal contractor. She completed her most recent security 
clearance application in September 2012, disclosing a delinquent student loan account. 
The ensuing investigation revealed additional delinquent accounts. The SOR alleges 
that Applicant is indebted to five creditors for approximately $34,800.5 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in 2009, after she was laid off from the 
federal contractor job she held since 2003. She remained unemployed for the next three 
years. To ease her financial demands, Applicant moved home with her parents and 
allowed her son, then a teenager, to live with his father until she was able to get back on 
her feet. While unemployed, Applicant’s bills fell delinquent. Since returning to full-time 
employment Applicant’s financial situation has stabilized and she has been able to 
accumulate a few thousand dollars in savings. Applicant, who has not used credit cards 
since 2001 and lives within her means, knew that her student loans were delinquent, but 
did not learn of the other debts alleged in the SOR until her current security clearance 
investigation. Applicant, now earning $80,000 per year, testified that although she had 
the means to resolve her delinquent accounts, severe anxiety kept her from making 
progress toward their resolution.6 
  
. . . I get anxious when it comes time to pay bills, or if I’m behind, and I get 
really anxious. . . it’s a battle. . . . When I get really, anxious it 
[exacerbates my other medical conditions]. I just kind of partition that off in 
my mind, and when that happens it goes away . . . I am not stressed any 
                                                          
2 The prehearing scheduling order is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 The discovery letter, dated November 23, 2015, is appended to the record as HE II. 
 
4 AE E. 
 
5 Tr. 15; GE 1-2.  
 
6 Tr. 16-18, 23, 25-30, 36; Answer.   
 
 
3 
 
more, I can breathe, and I’m not panicking. But it also makes things 
disappear. . . .7 
 
 Since the hearing, Applicant has contacted her two largest creditors, SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
($5,858) and 1.d ($26,757), and set up payment plans. To avoid the anxiety and stress 
of ongoing communication with the creditors, Applicant has set up recurring automatic 
payments on both accounts.  Applicant pays $250 each month on her student loan 
account (SOR ¶ 1.d) and $120 on the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant 
attempted to contact the creditor holding the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($74), but 
could not find a working phone number. Instead, Applicant sent a check paying off the 
account to an address listed in one of the credit reports provided to her by the 
Government. The two other accounts alleged in the SOR do not appear on the most 
recent credit report in the record, dated November 2013.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 19. 
 
8 GE 4; AE E-F. 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”9 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $34,800 on five delinquent 
accounts, the largest being a delinquent student loan for $26,757. The record supports 
a prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not paying her bills and, that for 
several years, she had an inability to do so.10 However, Applicant’s financial problems 
were caused by events beyond her control, three years of unemployment after being 
laid off from a job in 2009.11 Despite dealing with severe anxiety, Applicant has made a 
good faith-effort to resolve her delinquent accounts. She has taken steps to resolve 
three of the five alleged accounts, SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d comprising 94% of the 
alleged accounts. 12 Now employed for four years, Applicant continues to live within her 
means and her finances are otherwise under control.13  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about her suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). The Appeal Board has held that, “an applicant is not 
                                                          
9  AG ¶ 18. 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
11 AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
12 AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
13 AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
5 
 
required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly given her 
circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by 
concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the 
plan.14 Applicant has done so, thereby mitigating the security concerns raised by her 
delinquent accounts.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
14 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009). 
