 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-04487 
 ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Douglas Velvel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 21, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on March 2, 2015. (Item 
5) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
November 27, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 11, 2016. She admitted the 34 
allegations of delinquent debt with explanations. She noted that some of the debts were 
duplicates. She elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on February 22, 2016. 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on March 3, 2016, and 
she was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM. I was assigned the case on September 6, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI) with an OPM agent (Item 5) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over her objection. She was further advised that she could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
she could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a 
Government witness. She was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the 
summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that she waived any objection to 
the admissibility of the summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so she did not 
raise any objection to consideration of the information in the PSI. Any objection to the 
information is waived. I will consider information in the PSI in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 30 years old. She received her GED in 2004. She was employed in 
various low-paying clerk positions from 2004 until 2014. Since August 2014, she has 
been employed at a military maintenance facility. She has never been married, but has 
two children at home ages seven and ten. She has never received any support for the 
children from the fathers. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated August 21, 2014; and Item 5, PSI, dated 
March 2, 2015) 
 
The SOR lists and credit reports (Item 4, dated November 23, 2015; and Item 5, 
dated September 13, 2014) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a 
judgment for medical debts filed by a hospital for $6,450 (SOR 1.a); a debt for 
apartment rent in collection for $1,510 (SOR 1.b); another debt for apartment rent for a 
different apartment in collection for $1,400 (SOR 1.c); medical debts in collection for 
$408 (SOR 1.d), $503 (SOR 1.e), $408 (SOR 1.f), $408 (SOR 1.g), $506 (SOR 1.h), 
$529 (SOR 1.i), $529 (SOR 1.j), $788 (SOR 1.k), $563 (SOR 1.l), $1,004 (SOR 1.m), 
$560 (SOR 1.n), $1,259 (SOR 1.o), $373 (SOR 1.p), $481 (SOR 1.q), $361 (SOR 1.r), 
$436 (SOR 1.s), $1,078 (SOR 1.t), $1,371 (SOR 1.u), $458 (SOR 1.v), $595 (SOR 1.w), 
 
3 
 
 
$408 (SOR 1.x), $53 (SOR 1.bb), $53 (SOR 1.cc), $53 (SOR 1.dd), $50 (SOR 1.ee), 
$50 (SOR 1.ff), $50 (SOR 1.gg), and $50 (SOR 1.hh); a loan to pay medical expenses 
past due for $265 on a balance of $540 (SOR 1.y); a debt to a local housing authority 
for $180 (SOR 1.z); and a debt to a city for $179 (SOR 1.aa). Applicant established that 
the delinquent debt at SOR 1.a is a compilation of many smaller medical debts owed 
the hospital creditor listed in the SOR. It is not known how many of the listed medical 
debts are included in the cumulative $6,450 medical debt at SOR 1.a. Applicant 
established that the debts at SOR 1.f, 1.g, and 1.x are duplicates of the debt at SOR 
1.d. Applicant established that SOR 1.j is a duplicate debt of the debt at SOR 1.i, as well 
as the debt at SOR 1.n being a duplicate of the debt at SOR 1.l. Applicant established 
that the debts at SOR 1.cc. and 1.dd are duplicates of the debt at SOR 1.bb, and the 
debts at SOR 1.ff, 1.gg, and 1.hh are duplicates of the debt at SOR 1.ee. The amount of 
the delinquent debt listed in the SOR is approximately $23,644. All of the debts are 
listed on the credit reports. There is over $2,500 in identifiable duplicate debt. 
Considering the potential duplicate debts, the amount of delinquent debt is less than 
$20,000. The debts at SOR 1.f, 1.g, 1.n, 1.x, 1.cc, 1.dd, 1.ff, 1.gg, and 1.hh are resolved 
for Applicant. 
 
In both the PSI and in her response to the SOR, Applicant attributes her 
delinquent debts, particularly the medical debts, to being a single mother with two 
children, to her employment in low-paying positions, and her lack of health insurance. 
Applicant has a history of a medical problem that required hospital treatment. She has 
not been contacted by any creditor or collection agency in an attempt to collect any debt 
from her. Applicant noted in the PSI that since she now has quality well-paying 
employment, she would start to contact creditors and make arrangements to pay her 
financial obligations. (Item 5, PSI, at 3/4)  
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant reports that she has been trying to clear 
up her delinquent debt since she received the SOR and has a good-paying job. She 
claims to have established a payment plan with the collection agency, and funds will be 
taken from her account on the 21st of each month to pay debts. Applicant provided no 
documentation to verify either her claim of a payment plan or payments under a plan to 
resolve her delinquent debt. The Department Counsel pointed out in the FORM that 
Applicant did not provide documentation showing any debt payments, or a plan she 
established with the creditors to pay the debts, or an improving financial status. 
Department Counsel emphasized that Applicant should provide documentation to 
establish that she is acting responsibly and in good faith to repay her financial 
obligations. Since Applicant did not respond to the FORM, she provided no 
documentation of payment of any of the debts or concerning her financial status in spite 
of the suggestion from Department Counsel. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
 
5 
 
 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in her obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person 
may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has a history of delinquent debts 
as documented in her credit reports, by her testimony to the OPM investigator, and her 
response to the allegations in the SOR. All of Applicant’s SOR debts are listed on the 
credit reports at Items 3 and 4. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The information raises both an inability and an unwillingness to pay 
delinquent debt. Once the Government has established delinquent debt, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate those debts. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely. Applicant is a 
single mother not receiving support from her children’s fathers. She was employed in 
low-paying positions without health insurance. While these were conditions beyond her 
control, she has not acted responsibly. She was aware that her financial problems were 
a security concern when she was interviewed by the security investigator in March 
2015. She has been gainfully employed since August 2014. However, she has not 
presented other information to verify actions taken to learn about, resolve, and pay her 
delinquent debts. The evidence does not support responsible management of her 
finances and her financial problems are not under control. Based on Applicant’s failure 
to verify her debts and make any arrangements to pay her debts, it is clear that she has 
not been reasonable and responsible in regard to her finances. Her lack of reasonable 
and responsible action towards her finances is a strong indication that she may not 
protect and safeguard classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant is a 
single mother raising two children while employed in low-paying jobs. Even though 
Applicant has been gainfully employed at a good-paying job since August 2014, she did 
not provide sufficient credible documentary information to establish that she has taken 
reasonable and responsible action to resolve her financial problems. Applicant did not 
demonstrate appropriate management of her finances and a consistent record of action 
to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. She has not 
established her suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I 
 
7 
 
 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.g  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.o – 1.w:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.x:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.y – 1.bb:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.cc – 1.dd:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.ee:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.ff – 1.hh:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
