 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02389 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On October 13, 2015, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR, and she 
elected to have her case decided on the written record. On December 16, 2015, 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on January 7, 2016. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
 
2 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the 
Government’s exhibits and did not provide documents within the time period. The 
Government’s documents are identified as Items 1 through 6 and admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on September 20, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.k, 1.r, and 1.u-1.w. She 
denied the remaining allegations. Her admissions are incorporated into the findings of 
fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. She is a high school graduate. She married in 1987 
and divorced in 1989. In 2009, she became the legal guardian for her boyfriend’s 
sister’s two children, due to their mother’s incarceration.1  
 
 In 2004, Applicant incurred a federal tax debt because she was working as an 
independent contractor and was unaware that taxes were not being withheld from her 
pay. She made $600 a month payments to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) from 
sometime in 2004 until June 2006, when she was no longer able to pay due to leaving 
her job. This debt is reflected in SOR ¶ 1.a ($18,827). In her answer to the SOR, she 
stated that the IRS has classified this debt as uncollectible due to her financial situation. 
Applicant did not provide any proof documenting the status of this debt.2  
  
 Applicant attributes her financial problems to unemployment, underemployment 
and health issues. On her security clearance application (SCA), she lists her longest 
period of unemployment from October 2008 to August 2012. Applicant was diagnosed 
with cancer in 2005. She had health insurance, but not all of her medical bills were 
covered by her insurance, and she incurred other expenses, such as copays. In 2006, 
her job was restructured and she decided to leave it due to the drastic reduction in 
income from $55,000 to $35,000. She indicated that she continued to work for a period 
of time and then, due to the economy, she was laid off. She collected unemployment 
compensation and used her savings and severance package to support herself.3 
 
 In approximately 2009, Applicant took custody of her boyfriend’s sister’s two 
children. Applicant did not provide additional information regarding whether she 
receives any form of child support from the parents, their uncle who is her boyfriend, or 
benefits from the state or government.4  
 
                                                          
1 Items 2, 3, 6. 
 
2 Items 2, 6.  
 
3 Items 2, 6. 
 
4 Items 2, 6. 
 
3 
 Applicant admitted she owes the delinquent student loan in SOR ¶ 1.l ($15,217), 
but stated it has been rehabilitated and is now in a forbearance status. She did not 
provide documentary proof of its current status. Her credit reports show the loan is in a 
collection status. 
 
 A judgment for $1,374 (SOR ¶ 1.b) was entered against Applicant in 2009. She 
indicated during her January 2014 background interview that she would contact the 
creditor to pay the debt. No evidence was provided that this judgment was paid.  
 
 During Applicant’s background interview with a government investigator she 
admitted she owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.s ($26,194) for a car loan. She indicated that 
she was delinquent in making three monthly payments, and the car was voluntarily 
repossessed and sold. She planned to pay the deficiency amount. In her answer to the 
SOR, she stated she understood that she owed a deficiency balance of $12,000, but not 
the balance alleged. She did not provide any proof of actions she has taken to resolve 
the debt.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.t is for a timeshare that was given to Applicant as a gift. She 
could not afford the maintenance fees, and she stated the unit was sold. She denied 
she owed the debt indicating she had informed the creditor that she could not afford the 
fees and asked them to sell it. Applicant did not provide documentary proof of her 
dispute or of the creditor’s affirmation that she was no responsible for the delinquent 
fees.  
 
 Applicant admitted she owes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.u, and 1.v, but she is 
unable to pay them. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d through 1.k are medical debts she 
incurred due to her health issues. She admits she owes them but did not give any 
indication that she intended to resolve them. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.m through 
1.q, Applicant believes are debts that were transferred or sold to collection agencies. 
She indicated they may be her debts, but she does not know. She stated that when she 
received telephone inquiries from collection agencies “years ago” she asked them to 
identify the debts and they did not. There is no evidence that Applicant has made 
attempts to determine the creditors or the legitimacy of the debts. Credit reports from 
February 2015 and December 2012 substantiate the debts alleged in the SOR.5  
 
 Applicant indicated that she is currently employed and has health benefits. Her 
bi-monthly net pay is $535. She was diagnosed in 2014 with congestive heart failure 
due to the radiation treatment she received during her cancer treatment. She also 
indicated that she now has full custody of the two children. She stated that she has 
been displaced due to massive flooding in the location where she lives.6  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
6 Item 2. 
 
4 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for  
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has 23 delinquent debts totaling approximately $82,700, which include 
a tax lien, a judgment, a student loan, and consumer and medical debts that she is 
unable or unwilling to pay. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant has numerous debts that are not 
resolved. Applicant attributes her financial problems to being unemployed, 
underemployed, and health issues beginning in 2006. She also indicated that she is the 
guardian for two children. These conditions were beyond her control. To fully apply AG 
¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly. Applicant has not presented evidence 
of action she has taken to address any of her debts or to dispute them. She did not 
provide sufficient evidence about her current financial situation, which may include 
contributions from her boyfriend or other benefits she may receive to care for the 
children. There is insufficient evidence that under the circumstances, Applicant has 
acted responsibly in addressing her delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude her financial problems are being resolved or are under 
control. There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant has made a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve her debts. Applicant did not 
provide documents to substantiate her statements that the tax lien has been classified 
as uncollectible and that she no longer owes it, or that her student loan is in 
forbearance. She has not provided evidence that she has contacted creditors to 
determine the legitimacy of certain debts or any action she may have taken to dispute 
the debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d) and 20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. She had a serious health issue in 2006 that impacted 
her finances. She also experienced periods of unemployment and underemployment 
and has taken on the responsibility of caring for two children. Applicant may legitimately 
be unable to pay her debts due to her financial situation, but she has failed to provide 
evidence of her actions to address any of the delinquent debts alleged or substantiate 
the status of the debts she says are not her responsibility. Applicant has an unstable 
financial track record. Limited information was provided to show the financial 
considerations are mitigated. Without additional explanations, information, and 
documents, I cannot conclude that Applicant’s finances are under control. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the Guideline F, financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.w:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
