 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-04600 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 3, 2014. On 
December 9, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 24, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 25, 2016, 
 
2 
 
and the case was assigned to me on May 2, 2016. On May 12, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for June 9, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but did 
not present the testimony of any other witnesses or submit documentary evidence. I 
kept the record open until July 11, 2016, to enable him to submit documentary 
evidence. He did not submit any evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 
17, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 
1.k, 1.m, and 1.q. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.l, and 1.s. He responded that he was “not 
sure” about SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.g-1.j, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.r; and I have treated these 
responses as denials. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated 
in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old information assurance analyst employed by a defense 
contractor since July 2013. He was employed by another defense contractor from 
November 2012 to July 2013, but he left by mutual agreement because he was unable 
to obtain a classified internet account. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 
August 1998 to November 2012 and received an honorable discharge. He held a 
security clearance and eligibility for access to sensitive compartmented information 
while on active duty. 
 
 Applicant married in November 2000 and separated in September 2012. He and 
his wife have continued to live together in the same house, but not as husband and 
wife, because he cannot afford to rent an apartment, and his wife is disabled. (Tr. 25-
26.) He has a 21-year-old daughter from a previous relationship. He and his wife have 
two children, ages ten and eight. His wife has a 17-year-old daughter from a previous 
relationship. The three younger children live with Applicant and his wife. (Tr. 28.) 
 
 Applicant attended a university from November 2012 until May 2015 and 
received an associate’s degree in network security. (Tr. 45-46; GX 1 at 9.) He financed 
his education with the GI Bill, and he has no student loans or educational debts. 
 
 The SOR alleges 19 delinquent debts totaling about $30,000. The evidence 
concerning the debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, judgments filed in 2015 for $3,096; $2,031; and $1,707. 
Applicant was unable to identify these debts at the hearing, and he has done nothing to 
investigate them. (Tr. 48-49.) 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, medical debt for $111. Applicant testified that he believed this debt 
was paid by TRICARE, but he submitted no documentation of payment. (Tr. 50-51.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e, department store debt, charged off for $1,023. This account was 
opened in 2008 and used to purchase clothing and household items. Applicant testified 
that he fell behind on his payments in 2012. The collection agencies offered to settle the 
account, but none of their settlement offers were affordable. (Tr. 52-53.) The debt is not 
resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f, department store debt, charged off for $1,851. Applicant testified 
that this account had a zero balance when he deployed in 2010 and had reached its 
maximum limit when he returned, due to his wife’s spending. He made a few payments 
and then could not afford to pay any more. (Tr. 53-54.) The debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h, credit-card accounts, placed for collection of $3,105 
and $1,689. Applicant was unable to identify these debts, but he had not contacted the 
original creditors or collection agencies, and he has not disputed the debts. (Tr. 54-56.) 
 
 SOR ¶ ¶ 1.i and 1.j, credit-card accounts, placed for collection of $609 and 
$902. The same collection agency is involved in these two debts. Applicant contacted 
the collection agency, determined that the debts were valid, but did not accept a 
settlement offer because he could not afford to pay it. (Tr. 56-58.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k, mortgage loan in foreclosure. This debt is a Department of 
Veterans Affairs real estate mortgage opened in April 2012 for $241,400. The payments 
were past due for about $1,465. Applicant’s last payment was in April 2014. He testified 
that he obtained a loan modification around November 2013 that lowered his payments 
by about $100, but he still could not afford them. The lender gave him six months 
without payments, which were added to the amount of the loan. When he could not 
resume making payments, the lender suggested a short sale. Applicant could not find a 
buyer, and foreclosure was initiated in August 2015. (Tr. 58-60; GX 4 at 6.) Applicant 
testified that he recently contacted the lender and was informed that he does not owe 
any money. (Tr. 83.) A credit bureau report from November 2015 reflects that the 
mortgage loan was paid and closed with a zero balance. (GX 4 at 9.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l, military credit-card account, charged off for $2,744. Applicant paid 
this debt in full in April 2014. (Attachment to SOR Answer.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n, department store debts, charged off for $3,104 and 
$2,031. Applicant admitted that these debts are valid, but he testified that he could not 
afford to pay them. He has not tried to resolve them. (Tr. 62-63.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.o, 1.p, and 1.r debts charged off for $901, $884, and $698. These 
debts involve the same creditor. Applicant was unable to identify these debts but has 
made no attempt to investigate them. (Tr. 64.) 
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.q, furniture store account, charged off for $698. Applicant admitted 
this debt, but it is not resolved. (Tr. 65.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.s, credit-card account, placed for collection of $3,399. Applicant 
denied this debt and testified that he had a credit card issued by this creditor but he 
closed it in 2008. He has not filed a dispute with the credit bureau. (Tr. 65-66.) The debt 
is not resolved. 
 
 Applicant’s wife stopped working in 2008 to take care of her parents, who were in 
poor health. Both of her parents passed away within a year after she stopped working. 
She never returned to the workforce because of her disability. She suffers from 
pulmonary embolism, fibromyalgia, neuropathy, and diabetes. (Tr. 26-27; GX 1 at 23-
24.) 
 
 Applicant testified that his financial problems began in 2011, when he received 
nonjudicial punishment in October 2011 for dereliction of duty. His punishment arose 
from his disagreement with his military superiors about the scope of his duties as an 
alternate security manager, and he believes that his punishment was unfair. (Tr. 31-35.) 
He was reduced from petty officer first class (pay grade E-6) to petty officer second 
class (pay grade E-5), which subjected him to discharge under the Navy “high-year 
tenure” rules that required a sailor with his years of service to hold a rate of petty officer 
first class or higher in order to remain on active duty. The reduction also lowered his pay 
from about $4,200 per month to about $3,200 month. (Tr. 36-37.)  
 
 After Applicant was discharged, he found a job with a defense contractor, earning 
less than $2,000 per month. (Tr. 37.) He left this job by mutual agreement when he was 
unable to obtain a classified internet account. (Tr. 40; GX 1 at 11.) In his present job, his 
monthly income is about $3,400. (Tr. 43.) He estimated that his monthly expenses are 
about $2,400, which would leave him a net monthly remainder of about $1,000, but he 
also testified that he is living paycheck to paycheck. He has no savings. (Tr. 67-70, 72-
73.) He has consulted with a bankruptcy attorney, but he has not decided whether to file 
a bankruptcy petition. (Tr. 24, 67-68.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
 
5 
 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, his testimony at the hearing, and his credit bureau 
reports establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”).  
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant encountered some conditions that 
were beyond his control: his wife’s disability and her excessive spending that resulted in 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. However, the primary cause of his financial problems was 
of his own doing. He was punished for dereliction of duty while in the Navy, which led to 
his reduction in rate, discharge from the Navy, and inability to find civilian employment 
with pay comparable to his Navy pay. He has acted responsibly regarding the military 
credit card (SOR ¶ 1.l) and his delinquent mortgage loan (SOR ¶ 1.k), but not regarding 
the other debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has consulted with a bankruptcy 
attorney, but he has not sought or received financial counseling, and his financial 
problems are not under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l, but not for 
the other debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant was unable to identify several debts 
alleged in the SOR, but he had done nothing to investigate them and he has not filed 
disputes with any creditors, collection agencies, or credit bureaus. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
8 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(a). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.k and 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.s:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
