 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02843 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 15, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On January 26, 2016, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, and it was received on February 9, 2016. Applicant was afforded an 
 
2 
 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government evidence and did not provide any material 
within the required timeframe. The Government’s documents identified as Items 2 
through 8 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on August 26, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He was married for a short time and the marriage was 
annulled. He has a child, for whom he is required to pay child support. He graduated 
from college in 2007 with a bachelor’s degree. He attended college part-time in pursuit 
of a master’s degree in 2010, but did not complete it. He attended a technical college 
from July 2011 to February 2012, and earned a diploma. He worked part-time from 
2003 to 2009. He worked full time from January 2010 to July 2011 and then changed 
careers. He has been employed by a federal contractor since March 2012. 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2012, and his debts were discharged 
in November 2012. He estimated he had about $60,000 of debts discharged. As part of 
the bankruptcy, Applicant was required to make monthly payments to the Bankruptcy 
Trustee.1 He failed to comply with the payments and in December 2013, the Bankruptcy 
Court revoked the discharge for his failure to pay the trustee.2 
 
 Applicant has eight delinquent student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 
1.k, and 1.l) totaling approximately $60,300. He has two medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c) totaling approximately $1,860, and one debt owed to a fire rescue unit (SOR ¶ 1.d) 
for $554. All the debts are supported by credit reports from October 2015, March 2015, 
and December 2012.3 During his interview with a government investigator in February 
2013, Applicant indicated that when his student loans were removed from deferred 
status in 2008, his parents paid them for him. They were again deferred when he 
resumed attending college and technical school. When he completed school, he stated 
he and his parents made $1,000 a month payments, each paying $500. He told the 
investigator the payments were applied to all of the loans, but he did not specifically 
know which ones were being paid. He indicated he had no idea what loans may have 
been included in his bankruptcy. He was aware that his federal student loans were not 
discharged in bankruptcy. He indicated he was unaware that any of his student loans 
were delinquent.4  
                                                          
1 The payments were required due to an amount the Trustee required Applicant to pay because of the 
value he claimed on his vehicle.  
 
2 Item 7. 
 
3 Items 4, 5, 6.  
 
4 Item 8. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR that he owed all of the alleged 
debts. He did not provide any information or documents to show any of the debts are 
resolved or current.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
5 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.6 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that are unresolved. He has eight student loans 
that are past due or delinquent. His debts were discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
2012; however, said discharge was revoked because he failed to pay the Bankruptcy 
Trustee as required. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
                                                          
6 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that are unpaid and unresolved. He has 
numerous delinquent student loans. He did not provide evidence of actions he may 
have taken to resolve these issues. He did not provide evidence of his current financial 
situation. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. His failure to timely address his delinquent debts casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant’s financial problems were 
due to conditions beyond his control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant received 
financial counseling required in accordance with bankruptcy procedure. There are not 
clear indications the problems are being resolved. The first part of AG ¶ 20(c) applies, 
the second part does not. Applicant failed to provide evidence that he initiated good-
faith efforts to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. There is no evidence 
Applicant disputed any of the alleged debts. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2012. He 
has eight student loans that are delinquent or past due, and three delinquent debts that 
are unpaid. He did not provide evidence to show what action he is taking to resolve or 
pay his debts. He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence 
leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
