         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
)  ISCR Case No. 15-00789
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On August 31, 2015, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 11, 2016. A notice of
hearing was issued on June 14, 2016, scheduling the hearing for August 18, 2016.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-G. I kept the record open until
September 19, 2016, for additional documentation. He submitted a packet of
documents, which was received into the record without objection and marked as exhibit
(AX) H. The transcript was received on August 26, 2016. Based on a review of the
pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
1
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under
Guideline F, with the exception of 1.b. He provided explanations for each alleged debt.
 
Applicant is 57 years old. He obtained his undergraduate degree in 1985.
Applicant is divorced and has two children. He is a senior engineer for a defense
contractor. He has been with this employer since 2006. He completed a security
clearance application in 2012. (GX 1) He has held a security clearance  since 1993. 
The SOR alleges three delinquent debts, which include a collection account in the
amount of $175; indebtedness to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for a 2008 Federal
tax lien in the amount of $23,211; and a charged off account in the amount of
$3,044.(GX 2;3)
At the hearing, the Government stipulated that the SOR debt alleged in 1.a in the
amount of $175 was paid in 2015. (AX A; Tr. 12) Applicant had no knowledge of the
cable debt as it never appeared on his monthly bill.  He acknowledged that he never
monitored his credit report. (Tr. 40)
As to SOR allegation 1.b, in the amount of $23,211, for a 2008 federal tax lien,
Applicant disputed the debt. He provided documentation that he does not owe any debt
to the IRS. (AX D) He explained that the IRS owes him and at the hearing, produced a
2016 account transcript. (AX G) The IRS lost his tax returns for the years 1999, 2000,
and 2003. They placed a lien against Applicant in 2014, and took $780 from his bi-
weekly paycheck. (Tr. 21) The IRS recognized its mistake and sent applicant two
separate checks in 2016. (AX G) As post-hearing submissions, Applicant provided  IRS
account transcripts for years 1999, 2000, and 2003. Each shows an account balance of
zero, with a date of lien removal in November 2014. (AX H) He visited the IRS office
several times and finally received the requisite transcripts that show Applicant does not
owe any money to the IRS. (AX H)
As to SOR allegation 1.c, Applicant provided documentation that the charged-off
account in the amount of $3,044 has been paid. (AX E ) The debt was the result of a
company credit card account that Applicant knew nothing about. He learned during his
OPM interview that the account appeared on his credit report. He believed that the
account had been paid about eight years ago. Applicant also produced a receipt
denoting payment in full and a copy of the visa card payment. (AX H)
Applicant was candid in that he has worked with the IRS for years, but they did
not provide information to him concerning the reason for the lien. (AX D; Tr. 37) He
received two checks from the IRS in 2016, which he showed at the hearing, one for
$17,368.85 and another for $2,933.91. The checks were noted as refunds for tax years
2000 and 2010. According to Applicant’s calculations, the IRS still owes him
approximately $4,000. He claims that he has been disputing the liens since 2008. (Tr.
47)
2
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
3
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. It also states that an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
The Government produced credible evidence that Applicant incurred delinquent
debt and a Federal tax lien. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply.  With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security
concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties 
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant’s financial difficulties
occurred in the past eight years. He disputed the tax lien for years. Based on his
documentation, I accept this lien as removed and resolved since 2014. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment) fully applies.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances) applies. His federal tax lien appears to be a
convoluted situation that has been resolved and was no fault of Applicant.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has application. He paid his debts in 2015.  FC MC
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling) does not apply, but there
are  clear indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 57 years old. He is a mature and educated man. He has held a security
clearance without incident for 35 years. He had no delinquent debts before the recent
collection accounts. When he learned about them, they were resolved. As to the IRS
lien, it is somewhat convoluted, but Applicant proved that he did not owe the IRS and
had disputed the issue for many years. He provided documentation from IRS account
transcripts that show zero amounts due and has received two checks in 2016 as
refunds. The transcripts show that any liens were removed in 2014.
Applicant had no other financial issues. He was candid. I have no doubts about
his judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. He has mitigated the security concerns under
the financial guideline in this case.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
5
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
6
