 
 
 
 
1 
          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 15-07175 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial security concerns raised as a consequence of a 
delinquent home equity loan. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 29, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 
86). On March 12, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information effective within the DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on April 6, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On June 2, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On July 18, 2016, 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case for August 17, 2016. The case was 
heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4 into evidence.  Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 3 into 
evidence. All exhibits were admitted without objections. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on August 25, 2016. The record remained open until September 14, 
2016, in order to provide Applicant time to submit additional documents. Applicant 
timely submitted AE 4, which was admitted into the record without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a, referencing a charged off 
account (Answer). His admission is incorporated herein. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and divorced from his wife since December 2008. They 
separated in January 2006 and have 3 children, ages, 18, 15, and 11. Applicant has full 
custody of the children, all of whom reside with him. He lives with his fiancée. Applicant 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 1994. He began a position with a defense contractor in 
January 2015, who is sponsoring him for a clearance. He was subsequently terminated 
from that position pending this proceeding. He then received unemployment 
compensation. For the past five months he has worked for another employer.  He 
coaches his daughter’s softball team. (Tr. 13-22, 25.) 
 
 In 1997 Applicant and his former wife purchased a house. In 2003 they assumed 
a home equity loan to resolve outstanding debts. After Applicant and his children moved 
out of the marital residence in January 2006, he continued to make payments on the 
mortgage and home equity loan without assistance from his wife. On the advice of his 
attorney, he stopped making both payments in 2007. At the time he was also paying all 
expenses related to caring for his children. The bank charged off the home equity loan 
in 2008 and subsequently foreclosed on the house. (Tr. 26-29; GE 4.) 
 
  In November 2014, the bank holding the mortgage and home equity loan 
executed a Release of Mortgage for the property, documenting that the mortgage lien 
was cancelled. (AE 4.) Applicant testified that subsequently he never received an IRS 
1099-C form related to the home equity loan, referencing a deficiency balance. He said 
the matter is resolved. (Tr. 30.) According to Applicant’s August 2016 credit bureau 
report (CBR), Applicant obtained a new mortgage in April 2015 from the bank that held 
his previous mortgage and home equity loan. (AE 3.) 
  
 Applicant submitted a budget. He and his fiancée have a net monthly income of 
$7,180. Included in the budget is a monthly payment of $52 to the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) for a $3,000 debt owed by Applicant for withdrawing money from his 
401(k) to manage expenses while unemployed and between positions. After paying 
expenses, they have about $1,330 remaining at the end of the month. (Tr. 22-23; AE 2.) 
 
 
 
 
3 
He testified that the home equity debt alleged in the SOR was the only debt on which he 
has ever defaulted. (Tr. 35.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that an adverse decision shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s home equity loan became delinquent in 2007 and was charged off in 
2008. It was not resolved for several years. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
                                            
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
 
 
5 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
Applicant’s home equity loan became delinquent under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur, and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. The evidence establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s delinquent 
loan arose as a result of marital issues, and his inability to pay it and other living 
expenses for himself and children. These were circumstances beyond his control. He 
did not present sufficient evidence demonstrating that he attempted to responsibly 
manage the debt while or after it was charged off. Limited mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is 
established.  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that he participated in credit, financial, or 
budgetary counseling. However, he submitted evidence indicating that the delinquent 
loan is resolved and a budget demonstrating that his finances are under control. 
Mitigation is established under AG ¶ 20(c). Based on his attorney’s advice, he stopped 
making payments on the loan sometime after he moved out of the marital home. That 
loan was not resolved until after the house went into foreclosure. Thus, there is minimal 
evidence to conclude that he made a good-faith effort to resolve it or support the 
application of AG ¶ 20(d) as to the allegation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible 43-year-
old man, who experienced, for the first time, financial difficulties after he separated from 
his former wife in 2006. At this time, he has resolved a delinquent home equity loan and 
established a new mortgage with the bank that held said loan and his foreclosed 
mortgage. His financial obligations are under control. The record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:           For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                               
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
