                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-01975     
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to
Applicant alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). The SOR was dated September
25, 2015. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)
implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 3, 2016. A notice of
hearing was issued  scheduling the hearing for June 3, 2016. The case was postponed
1
for good cause  and rescheduled for August 30, 2016. Government Exhibits (GX 1-8)1
were admitted into the record. Applicant testified. He did not present witnesses or
exhibits. At his request, I kept the record open until September 15, 2016.  Applicant
submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX A-C)  The transcript was received on September 7,
2016. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).
Applicant is a 42-year-old test engineer for a defense contractor. He received his
undergraduate degree in 1996 and is currently attending graduate school. He is
divorced and remarried, with two children and two step-children. Applicant has worked
for his current employer since 2008.  He has held a security clearance since 1998. (GX
1)
Financial Considerations
The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling about $13,206. (GX 5) Applicant
admits responsibility for the debts, and states that he intended to settle the debts but
did not have the money to do so. In his answer to the SOR, he also claimed he was not
aware of some of the debts. 
The debts alleged in the SOR are either collection accounts or charged-off
accounts. Applicant did not present documentation of payments or a payment plan for
any of the delinquent debts. His post-hearing submission noted that he has contacted
Lexington Law Firm. He noted that the judge could verify that information by calling the
firm. (AX A)
As to SOR 1.a for $2,619, he claimed that he tried to settle the credit card 
account that was charged off, but the company wanted the full amount. He has not
contacted them since 2008. As to SOR 1.b, for a charged-off phone account in the
amount of $56, Applicant stated that he would pay the bill as soon as possible, but he
has not produced any documentation to support his claim. As to SOR 1.c for $1,021, he 
stated that he really owes about $600. It was a credit card and the rest is for interest
and penalty. It is still unpaid. (Tr. 31). As to 1.d for $130 for a cable bill, but he has not
resolved the bill. (Tr. 32) As to 1.e for $6,917 for rent that was not paid, Applicant stated
that he attempted to settle the debt, but did not have the funds to do so. His plan is to
use the Lexington Law firm to help him with this issue. As to 1.f, for a collection account
in the amount of $888, for a gas bill, Applicant thought his first wife would pay the bill. It
is still unpaid. (Tr. 37) As for the debt in 1.g for a vehicle repossession, he co-signed a
car note and his wife did not make payments. He believes he owes about $6,000. He
Applicant stated that he was not prepared to go ahead with his case and wanted to seek counsel.      1
2
has not recently contacted the company. (Tr. 38) As to the debt in 1.h for $1,491 for a
collection account to a cable company, Applicant stated that he paid the account, but
he could not find the receipt. In his post-hearing submission, he provided the telephone
number of the company to verify payment. (AX A) As to 1.I for $84 for a medical
account,  he could not find a receipt that it was paid. He stated that his first wife has
agreed to pay the bill. He provided a phone number for verification. (AX A)  
Applicant testified that some of the financial difficulty began when his first spouse
lost her job and was injured and she lost her employment in about 2009. Due to a
medical condition, she has not been able to work. (Tr. 13) He further noted that she had
some debts before they were married  that he became responsible for. His current wife
has medical issues which do not allow her to work all the time. (Tr. 25)
Applicant’s annual salary is $99,000. His current wife just started working as a
cashier. He has a budget that he submitted as a post-hearing document. (AX B) He is
current with his daily bills. He has a net monthly remainder of about $600 to $700 a
month. (AX C) His child support obligation will end soon and leave him with more
discretionary money. He also helps pay his daughter’s college tuition.
Applicant submitted a character reference from his supervisor who has known
him since 2008. He praises Applicant for his dedication, technical skills, leadership and
his commitment. He works multiple projects at a time and works until the project is
completed. He is respected by his peers.  Applicant is described as a dedicated and
trustworthy employee. He has worked on high profile programs. His supervisor stated
that he is talented, dependable and highly recommends him. (AX B)
Criminal Conduct
Applicant was arrested in September 2009 and charged with driving under the
influence (DUI). He was found guilty and sentenced to probation before judgment. He
was at a birthday celebration and had beer and two shots. He realized he made a poor
decision. He was pulled over by the police for speeding. (GX 2) Applicant attended
counseling for a few weeks, went to MADD meetings and a MADD seminar. (Tr. 56)
In April 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving under the influence
(DUI). He was found guilty and sentenced to 18 months of probation and 26 weeks of
alcohol counseling. He also had an interlock device placed on his vehicle. (GX 2)
Applicant admits that he was drinking beer and shots and was drinking more than ususal
because he was depressed. His mother had died recently. Applicant stated that he had
a designated driver with him, but when it was time to leave, he could not find him. He
tried to call a cab, but a cab did not arrive. Applicant decided to sit for a while and drink
water. He then decided to drive to his brother’s house. However, he turned the wrong
way on a one way street. He realized it was bad judgment on his part. He does not drink
heavily anymore. He drinks a beer occasionally, but he avoids “hard liquor.” (Tr. 61) He
realizes the importance of not drinking and driving. He talked to his two daughters who
were very worried about him. He does not want to let them down.
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance2
of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of
trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
5
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant admits to nine delinquent debts that are listed in the SOR. The
Government produced credible evidence to establish the debts. Consequently, the
evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
6
Applicant has not resolved any of the debts. He provided no documentary
evidence that any are paid or in a payment plan. He obtained the services of Lexington
Law recently to help him.  He stated that the financial concerns arose due to the loss of
income from his first wife. He also noted that his second wife has a medical condition.
However, he has been employed since 2008. He provided no documentation that he has
paid even the smallest amount. He was given time to submit documentation, but he sent
a narrative that provided phone numbers for two debts that he claims are paid. He does
not have a plan in place. He contacted some creditors years ago, but he has not
followed up with them. He has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. None of
the mitigating conditions apply.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable
conditions;
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated
rehabilitation program.
Applicant’s admissions as to the two DUI’s in 2009 and 2011 is sufficient to raise
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). 
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
7
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement;
Applicant has not had any other incidents of DUI’s or criminal occurrences. He
acknowledged his poor judgment and has shown remorse. He has been employed since
2008 and has received praise for his accomplishments. He understands the gravity of
the situation. He completed alcohol counseling and attended MADD meetings. He
receives mitigation under ¶ 32 (d).
 Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
 
Applicant is an educated man and has many work accomplishments. He
presented a letter of recommendation from his current employer. He is divorced and
remarried with two children and two step-children. He began having financial difficulties
when his first wife lost her employment. He could not maintain the debts. He remarried
and his current wife has medical issues. She recently started work as a cashier. He fell
behind due to one income. He provided for his family. However, he has been gainfully
employed since 2008 and he has not resolved the delinquent debts. He intends to pay
his debts and has contacted the Lexington Law Firm. However, he has no record of any
payments or payment plan. He has not mitigated the financial considerations security
concern.
Applicant has two DUI’s. He acknowledges his mistakes. He has attended alcohol
counseling and attending MADD meetings. His last DUI was in 2011. He completed
8
probation. He has no other criminal incidents. He has mitigated the security concerns
under the criminal conduct guideline.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
9
