1 
            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-01101 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On August 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 5, 2015, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case 
was submitted on December 1, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
 
2 
 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
received the FORM on January 11, 2016. As of March 1, 2016, he had not responded.  
 
The case was assigned to me on March 29, 2016. I had a telephone conference 
call with Applicant and Department Counsel on August 16, 2016. I granted Applicant 30 
additional days to submit documentary evidence. He responded with documents that I 
have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B. The Government exhibits included in 
the FORM and AE A and B are admitted in evidence without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He served in the military reserves from 2004 until he 
was honorably discharged in 2012. He served in Iraq for more than a year in 2006 and 
2007. He attended college for a period without earning a degree. He has never married, 
but he has lived with his girlfriend since 2009. They have an 18-year-old child. His 
girlfriend has two children from another relationship during the years Applicant and she 
were not together.1  
 
Applicant had periods of unemployment and underemployment before he 
obtained his current job in 2007. His girlfriend lost her job in about 2009 and was out of 
work for about two years. Applicant was financially responsible for his girlfriend and her 
three children, only one of which was his biological child. He was unable to pay all his 
bills, debts became delinquent, his home was foreclosed, and a car was repossessed.2 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s mortgage loan that was in foreclosure, an $8,731 
judgment for the deficiency owed on a car loan after the car was repossessed, four 
defaulted student loans totaling about $20,000, and a charged-off credit card debt of 
$1,542.  
 
Applicant purchased his home in 2009 and financed it with a Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA) guaranteed mortgage loan of about $84,000. Applicant worked 
with his bank’s home preservation specialist. In January 2012, the home preservation 
specialist informed Applicant that she was unable “to help [him] find a mortgage 
assistance solution.” The VA purchased the property during a foreclosure sale in 
January 2012. There is no evidence of any deficiency owed after the sale. The two 
credit reports in evidence list the balance on the mortgage loan as $0.3  
 
Applicant established through documentary evidence that he has been paying 
$50 per month toward the $8,731 judgment (SOR ¶ 1.g) since August 2008. In March 
2014, he paid $605 toward the $12,056 defaulted student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. In 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4.  
 
2 Items 2-6.  
 
3 Items 2-6.  
 
 
3 
 
July 2015, the collection company for the student loan agreed to accept Applicant’s offer 
to pay $50 per month toward the loan. Applicant has been paying $50 per month since 
July 2015, except for August 2016, when he made two $50 payments.4  
 
The student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($4,579) and 1.d ($2,646) are in 
forbearance until September 2016. Applicant stated that he forgot about the $728 
student loan to the same creditor (SOR ¶ 1.f). He stated that he would attempt to set up 
payments arrangements or pay the debt in full.5 
 
Applicant questioned the legitimacy of the $1,542 charged-off credit card debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. The debt is not listed on the April 2012 combined credit report. 
Applicant wrote that he did not remember having an unpaid account with that company. 
He opened a new credit card account with the company in 2014, and he did not believe 
he would be able to do so if he owed money to the company. The SOR debt is listed on 
the January 2015 Equifax credit report. It is reported as being opened in March 2009, 
with a November 2011 date of last action. That report also lists the account with the 
same credit card company that Applicant opened in June 2014.6  
 
Applicant listed multiple delinquent debts on the Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) he submitted in March 2012. He also discussed his finances 
during his background interview in May 2012. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling. He paid other debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He stated that he 
intends to pay his delinquent debts.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
4 Items 2, 4, 5; AE A, B.  
 
5 Items 2, 4-6.  
 
6 Items 2, 5, 6.  
 
7 Items 2-6.  
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant had delinquent debts that he was unable to pay. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) as disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant and his girlfriend both had periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. He lost his home to foreclosure, but there is no evidence of a 
deficiency balance. He has been consistently paying the judgment since 2008 and the 
largest student loan since July 2015. Two student loans are in forbearance. He stated 
that he forgot about the smallest student loan to the same creditor, but he would pay it. 
He paid other debts that are not alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant questioned the legitimacy of the $1,542 charged-off credit card debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, stating that he did not remember having an unpaid account with 
that company and that he opened a new credit card account with the company in 2014. 
I have my own doubts about the debt. It is not reported on the 2012 combined credit 
report even though the later credit report listed it as being opened in March 2009, with a 
November 2011 date of last action. I have also considered that Applicant was 
forthcoming about other debts in the SF 86 and during his interview. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
applicable to that debt. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) are applicable; AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) are partially 
applicable. Applicant’s financial issues are mitigated. 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and particularly his service in 
Iraq. I also considered the nature of his financial problems, and the steps he has taken 
to resolve them. He has a plan to resolve his financial problems, and he has taken 
significant action to implement that plan.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
