 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01771 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E, 
personal conduct, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 13, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations, and E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 4, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On February 11, 2016, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
 
2 
 
 
and it was received on February 19, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not object to the Government evidence and provided 
documents within the time period. The Government’s documents identified as Items 2 
through 7 are admitted into evidence. Applicant’s documents were marked as Items 8 
through 13 and are admitted into evidence.1 The case was assigned to me on August 
26, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f. He denied the 
remaining allegation in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He served in the military from 1979 until he retired with 
an honorable discharge in 2000. He married in 1988 and has two grown stepchildren. 
Applicant has worked for different federal contractors since his retirement from the 
military. He has experienced periods of unemployment since his retirement.2  
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts, totaling approximately $49,589, which 
includes a judgment. Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in May 
2012. He did not disclose in the SCA that he had failed to pay his 2011 city income 
taxes, or that he had accounts that were charged off for failing to pay as agreed, or that 
he had debts turned over to a collection agency, or accounts that were delinquent over 
120 days, or that he was currently over 120 days delinquent on an account. Applicant 
indicated during his background interview with a government investigator that due to 
periods of unemployment and underemployment, he secured loans or used credit cards 
to help supplement his income. He indicated he would have trouble making the monthly 
payments, and the accounts would become delinquent. He then made agreements with 
the creditors to make monthly payments to bring the accounts current. He indicated he 
did not disclose the delinquencies because he did not believe he was ever over 120 
days delinquent on any of the accounts.3  
 
Applicant indicated that he had reached an agreement with the creditor holding 
the judgment (SOR ¶ 1.a, $2,335) and was making monthly payments, so he did not list 
the debt on his SCA. I find this explanation credible. He also indicated he was aware he 
failed to pay his 2011 city taxes. It is unknown when the city taxes for 2011 were due. 
Federal and state tax returns are due for filing in April following the tax year. If the city 
                                                          
1 The documents consisted of 10 pages. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 3, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
taxes were due at the same time, his taxes were not delinquent when he completed his 
SCA in May 2012.4  
 
 The debts alleged in the SOR are reflected in either Applicant’s October 2012 
or February 2015 credit reports. Both credit reports reflect the judgment alleged had not 
been released or satisfied.  
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated:  
 
When I completed my security clearance application for a secret 
clearance, I did not try to defraud the Government. I was behind on some 
of my debts and was attempting to work out payments for some of these 
debts. At this time, I am current on all of my outstanding debts, other than 
the ones that were written off by certain companies.5 
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM he stated that he is satisfying or has 
satisfied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f. He provided a document showing 
SOR ¶ 1.f is resolved.6 He provided a document showing he is making payments on the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.b.7 He provided one page of his 2016 credit report that shows he has 
no open collection accounts. It does not reflect that the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a is 
satisfied. Applicant did not provide evidence that he paid, settled or resolved the 
accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c (charged-off account of unspecified amount), 1.d ($9,947-
charged off), and 1.e ($17,512-charged off). In his answer to the SOR, he indicated he 
was not paying the charged-off accounts.  
 
 Based on Applicant’s statement to the investigator, his answer to the SOR, the 
dates of the credit reports, and his response to the FORM, there is insufficient evidence 
to conclude Applicant was aware he had delinquent debts that were more than 120 
days overdue when he completed his SCA. The allegations that he deliberately failed to 
disclose the information is not established.8 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
4 Items 3, 4. 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
6 Item 12.  
 
7 Items 10 and 11.  
 
8 The Government did not allege that Applicant failed to disclose on his May 2012 SCA that he had a 
judgment entered against. 
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.9 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant has delinquent debts that are unresolved. There is sufficient evidence 
to support the application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence he paid the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a. His 
February 2015 credit report reflects that the judgment has not been released or 
satisfied. He provided evidence he is making payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b and 
paid the debt in ¶ 1.f. He provided one page from his 2016 credit report showing he has 
no collection accounts, but did not provide evidence that he paid or settled the charged-
off accounts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e or that the judgment is satisfied and released. 
He stated in his answer to the SOR: “At this time, I am current on all of my outstanding 
debts, other than the ones that were written off by certain companies.” These debts are 
unresolved. Applicant did not provide evidence of his current financial situation. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. His 
failure to address his delinquent debts casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. This was a condition beyond his control. For the full application of 
AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant provided some evidence that he attempted to pay some of his 
creditors when he got behind in making the monthly payments. He provided evidence 
that he has been making some monthly payments on one debt. Applicant failed to 
provide evidence of actions he has taken regarding the large charged-off debts or the 
status of the judgment. In his answer to the SOR, he indicated he was not addressing 
the charged-off debts. There is some evidence to conclude Applicant acted responsibly 
under the circumstances regarding some of his debts, but others he has not addressed. 
He provided evidence that he has no collection accounts noted on his 2016 credit 
report, but did not provide evidence that the accounts alleged were deleted because he 
paid them, or because of their age they are no longer enforceable. AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies.  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that he has received financial counseling. He 
did show he paid his tax debt and is making payments on one credit card debt. He did 
not provide information about his current finances. Because some of his delinquent 
debts may no longer be legally enforceable due to their age, his financial problems may 
be more manageable, but there is minimal evidence in that regard. AG ¶¶ 20(c) has 
minimal application. Applicant is making monthly payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b 
and has paid the debt in SOR ¶1.f. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these debts. He did not 
provide evidence of his actions to resolve the remaining debts alleged. AG ¶ 20(d) does 
not apply to these debts. Applicant did not provide evidence of actions he has taken to 
 
7 
 
 
dispute the legitimacy of any of the debts or efforts to resolve them AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant indicated to the government investigator that he was unaware he had 
debts that were over 120 days delinquent when he completed his 2012 SCA. He was 
making payments on some debts when he was interviewed. Based on the October 2012 
credit report and Applicant’s interview during the same month, there is insufficient 
evidence proving he knew he had debts that were more than 120 days delinquent. It is 
reasonable that Applicant may have believed that because he made some payments on 
certain debts that they no longer were in a delinquent status. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude he deliberately failed to disclose his financial delinquencies. 
Therefore, the above disqualifying condition is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He honorably retired from the military. He has not 
provided evidence of action to resolve some of his delinquent debts. He failed to provide 
evidence he satisfied a 2010 judgment. Applicant does not have a reliable financial 
track record. He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant refuted the Guideline E, 
personal conduct security concerns, and failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
