 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01720 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant smoked marijuana with varying frequency from July 1995 to November 
2012. He purchased marijuana between July 1995 and January 2008. Applicant does not 
intend any future illegal drug involvement. Clearance is granted. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On August 26, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and explaining why it was unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him security clearance 
eligibility. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 2 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on September 9, 2015, and he 
requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
administrative judge. On February 23, 2016, the case was assigned to me to conduct a 
hearing to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. On February 25, 2016, I scheduled a hearing 
for March 21, 2016. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. One Government exhibit (GE 1) and seven 
Applicant exhibits (AEs A-G) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on March 30, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency from July 1995 to present (SOR ¶ 1.a), which as of the SOR was August 26, 
2015, and that Applicant purchased marijuana from approximately July 2005 to January 
2008 (SOR ¶ 1.b). When he responded to the SOR, Applicant denied any current use of 
marijuana because he had not used any illegal controlled substance since he applied for a 
clearance in November 2012. He admitted that he had previously purchased marijuana, but 
he added that the behavior had ceased eight years ago. After considering the pleadings, 
exhibits, and transcript, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old manufacturing engineer with a bachelor’s degree awarded 
in June 2001. He is currently pursuing a master’s degree in engineering management. (AE 
G; Tr. 26.) Applicant started his career as an electrical designer. (Tr. 27.) He has worked 
for his current employer, a defense contractor, since March 2008. (GE 1; AE F.) Applicant 
seeks his first DOD security clearance. (Tr. 34.) 
 
Applicant and his spouse began cohabiting in September 2009, and they married in 
August 2010. (GE 1.) They have a three-year-old son and are expecting their second child 
in October 2016. (Tr. 25.) Applicant purchased his first residence in October 2009. (GE 1; 
AE F.) He and his spouse now own a home in the suburbs. (Tr. 25.) 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana recreationally from July 1995 to November 2012. The 
drug relaxed him and made him feel happy. (AE F.) The frequency of his use varied over 
the years. As a college undergraduate from September 1995 to June 2001, he used 
marijuana three to five times a week with college friends. (GE 1; AE F; Tr. 30.) Marijuana 
was available at “any given party.” (Tr. 29-30, 39.) After college, Applicant continued to use 
marijuana one or two times a month with fellow members of a hard-rock band that 
Applicant and a friend (Mr. X) formed in 2001. There was some variation in band members 
until 2009 when the group solidified into Applicant, Mr. X, and three other friends. (Tr. 38-
39.) The band last performed in September 2012 (Tr. 32), but Applicant continued to use 
marijuana to at least November 2012. (GE 1; AE F; Tr. 36.) Applicant used marijuana at his 
home or at a friend’s home. Applicant purchased marijuana in small amounts on several 
occasions, at a cost of $10 to $50, between July 1995 and January 2008. Thereafter, the 
marijuana was provided to Applicant free of charge by Mr. X. (AE F; Tr. 32-33.) Applicant 
 
 3 
has not had any contact with any of his former band friends since the group disbanded in 
2012. (Tr. 32.) 
 
 On November 19, 2012, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). In response to an inquiry concerning 
any illegal use of a drug or controlled substance in the last seven years, Applicant 
disclosed that he used marijuana recreationally, one to two times a month, from 
approximately July 1995 to November 2012. He responded negatively to whether he 
intended to use the drug in the future, and he stated, “No-expecting first child soon. My use 
has been steadily decreasing as I’ve gotten older, and it will stop in the near future.” 
Applicant answered “Yes” to an inquiry concerning any purchase of an illegal drug in the 
last seven years, but then indicated that he bought marijuana when he was younger 
between July 1995 and January 2008. He indicated that he had not purchased any 
marijuana in several years. (GE 1; AE F.) 
 
 On January 8, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant reportedly disclosed that he smoked 
marijuana three to five times a week from 1995 to 2001 and one to two times a month from 
2001 to “present.” About his future intent, Applicant indicated that he planned on stopping 
his use of marijuana in the near future as he and his spouse were expecting a child. (AE 
F.) 
 
 On January 6, 2016, Applicant executed a statement of intent not to use any illegal 
drug in the future with automatic revocation of his security clearance for any violation. 
Applicant also reaffirmed his answer to the SOR allegations by denying use of any illegal 
controlled substance since 2012 and any purchase of marijuana in the past eight years.  
(AE E.) 
 
 Applicant reiterated at his hearing that he last used marijuana before his submission 
of his SF 86 in 2012. (Tr. 25, 37-38.) About the apparent discrepancy between his denial of 
no use of marijuana after his November 19, 2012 SF 86 and his reported admission in 
January 2013 that he used marijuana to “present” with a plan to stop in the near future, 
Applicant indicated that the statements were “copied verbatim from the SF 86 which [he] 
filled out in November 2012.” (Tr. 36.) When asked about his failure to unequivocally 
declare during his interview that he had stopped his drug use in November 2012 and 
intended no future involvement, Applicant responded: 
 
I guess what I am saying is I intend to stop. I don’t intend to use in the future. 
I feel those as being two parts of the same statement, which is what I feel I 
wrote in the SF 86, that I do not intend to use anything in the future and my 
use will be stopping. (Tr. 37.) 
 
 Applicant does not currently associate with anyone who uses illegal drugs. He 
maintains contact with two friends from college, neither of whom uses illegal drugs. (Tr. 
30.) Applicant is focused on his family and career. (Tr. 25-26.) 
 
 
 4 
 Applicant is well regarded by his co-workers for his dedication, professionalism, 
timely performance, attention to detail, and strong working relationships. Applicant’s 
manager (AE C), an electro-mechanical technician (AE D), and the company’s facility 
security officer (AE B) all endorse him for security clearance eligibility without reservations. 
Applicant’s performance reviews for 2012 through September 2015 show that Applicant 
has consistently exceeded his employer’s expectations in several core competencies. (AE 
G.)  He was selected for a supervisory position over a field of highly qualified and capable 
co-workers. (AE B; Tr. 26.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
 
 5 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),1 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because Applicant illegally used marijuana 
from July 1995 to November 2012, including on a regular basis while in college from 1995 
to 2001. There is no evidence to substantiate the allegation that Applicant was using 
marijuana “to present” as of the issuance of the SOR in late August 2015. AG ¶ 25(c), 
“illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” applies because Applicant purchased 
marijuana from July 1995 to 2008. Applicant possessed marijuana when he used it once or 
twice a month from 2009 to November 2012, but it was given to him free of charge. There 
is no evidence that Applicant ever sold or distributed marijuana to others. 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is 
established only in that it ceased in late 2012. While his use of marijuana declined after 
college to once or twice a month, it cannot reasonably be characterized as infrequent in 
light of his regular use of marijuana in college and his 17 years of involvement. His use of 
marijuana persisted after his marriage, albeit largely associated with his band activities. It is 
difficult to fully mitigate the drug involvement concerns under AG ¶ 26(a) given the 
circumstances. 
                                                 
1Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I drug. 
 
 6 
Applicant denies that he used any marijuana after he completed his November 2012 
SF 86. Under mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(b), “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any 
drugs in the future” may be shown by the following: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; or 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
 Concerning AG ¶ 26(b)(1), Applicant’s uncontroverted testimony is that he does not 
associate with anyone who currently uses illegal drugs. He testified that he has had no 
contact with his former band members since their last performance in September 2012. If 
true, it raises some unanswered questions about the circumstances of his subsequent use 
of marijuana and how he obtained the drug. He was not specific about the last date of his 
marijuana use at his hearing other than that he did not use marijuana after he submitted 
his SF 86. He gave a date of November 2012 for his last use on his SF 86. There is no 
evidence to counter his claim that the band disbanded or that he has had no contact with 
any of the band members since 2012, however. Concerning his college friends with whom 
he smoked marijuana, Applicant testified that he maintains contact with two friends from 
college, neither of whom uses illegal drugs. AG ¶ 26(b)(2) applies in that Applicant is long  
removed from the undergraduate college environment where his heaviest drug use took 
place, and it has been almost four years since he was in the music scene conducive to his 
recreational use after college. 
 
  Applicant’s present abstinence of three plus years is insufficient in and of itself to 
guarantee against future use of marijuana. He used the drug to relax and feel happy for 
some 17 years, after he married and while working for his current employer, albeit without 
a security clearance. However, it also must be acknowledged that Applicant’s present life 
circumstances are not conducive to illegal drug involvement. He has a young son and 
expects his second child in October 2016. Furthermore, Applicant has executed the 
statement of intent required under AG ¶ 26(b)(4). Applicant understands that any future 
drug abuse would be incompatible with his security clearance obligations. His record of 
exemplary work performance does not alone mitigate his history of extensive marijuana 
use, but it is a significant deterrent to any future illegal drug use. I am persuaded that 
Applicant can be counted on to abstain from any illegal drug involvement in the future. The 
drug involvement concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
 
 7 
2(a).2 In making the overall commonsense determination required under AG ¶ 2(c), I have 
to consider Applicant’s very poor judgment in abusing marijuana, especially after he started 
working for his current employer. His many years of disregard of the laws concerning the 
use of controlled substances bear negative implications for his security worthiness. 
 
Applicant’s candor about his marijuana use on his SF 86 and during his subject 
interview weighs in his favor under the whole-person evaluation. His professionalism, 
dedication, and reliability at work have earned him the respect and trust of his co-workers, 
who have no hesitation in recommending him for security clearance eligibility. While his 
many years of marijuana use are not condoned, it also appears that Applicant has put his 
drug use behind him. 
 
Once a security concern arises, there is a strong presumption against the grant or 
continuation of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). At the same time, security clearance decisions 
are not intended as punishment for past wrongdoing, but rather involve an assessment of 
future risk that one may not properly handle or safeguard classified information. For the 
reasons discussed under Guideline H, supra, it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
                                                 
2The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 8 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
