1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case: 15-00265 
) 
 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
September 16, 2016 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant was alleged to be delinquent on 16 debts. A number of the debts were 
listed in duplicate entries on the SOR. He has made a good-faith effort to address all of 
his delinquent accounts. He no longer has any foreign contacts that are citizens of, or 
residents in, Thailand. He met his burden to establish mitigation under the guidelines for 
both Financial Considerations and Foreign Influence. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On August 25, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 28, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 4, 2016. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
April 4, 2016, scheduling the hearing for May 18, 2016. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
6, which were admitted without objection. (Tr. 13-16, 56.) Applicant testified and offered 
seven exhibits (AE), marked AE A through AE G. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on May 31, 2016. The record was left open for Applicant to submit 
additional exhibits. Applicant presented nine additional exhibits on June 26, 2016, 
marked AE H through AE P. Department Counsel had no objections to AE H through 
AE P, and they were admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
Thailand. Department Counsel provided a five-page summary of the facts, with citations 
to five Government documents pertaining to Thailand, marked HE I. I take 
administrative notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, and not subject to reasonable dispute. They 
include the following: 
 
 Since a military coup in May 2014, an interim military government has ruled 
Thailand. As a result of the coup the United States has suspended aid to Thailand and 
joint exercises with Thailand’s military. In Southeast Asia, which includes Thailand, 
there is a continued risk of terrorism. Terrorist incidents occurred in Thailand in August 
2015, February 2015, and February 2012. Additionally, International groups and U.S. 
officials have criticized Thailand’s overall human rights record. (HE I.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He has worked for a government contractor since 
2005. He served in the Navy from 1993 to 2002, and achieved the pay grade of E-5. He 
is single. (GE 1; AE O; Tr. 23, 27.)  
  
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent in repaying 16 debts. It also alleged 
that Applicant’s fiancée and her son were citizens of Thailand. His fiancée’s mother, 
sisters, and brother were alleged to be citizens and residents of Thailand. In his Answer, 
Applicant denied all of the allegations. (Tr. 8-9.) His debts are documented in the record 
credit reports dated January 31, 2014; December 15, 2014; and April 1, 2016. (GEs 4 
through 6.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and 
exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant attributes his delinquent accounts to providing financial support to a 
former girlfriend during the course of their relationship, and to financially supporting his 
former fiancée.1 He stated, “I made some really bad judgments when it comes to the 
women I was with and never knew - - really knew how bad financially it would hurt me.”  
 
 Applicant hired a credit counselor to help him manage his debt and improve his 
credit score. (Tr. 22.) He provided copies of emails between himself and a credit 
counselor beginning in September 2014 that document his efforts to improve his credit 
score and resolve his debts. (AE G.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent on a charged-off account in the 
amount of $20,772, as stated in subparagraph 1.a. This debt was for a joint credit card 
account that Applicant shared with the ex-girlfriend. It became delinquent in 2012. It was 
discharged by the creditor on December 20, 2014, in the amount of $18,274.47. The 
creditor provided Applicant a 1099-C Cancellation of Debt. It was included in his 2014 
individual income tax return. This debt is resolved. (GE 6; AE D; AE H; Tr. 32-34, 38-
39.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent on a charged-off student loan in the 
amount of $5,795, as stated in subparagraph 1.b. This debt was for an educational loan, 
as were the debts of: $5,253 (subparagraph 1.d); $8,399 (subparagraph 1.m); $7,562 
(subparagraph 1.n); and $2,115 (subparagraph 1.o). All of these debts have been 
placed with the same creditor and have been delinquent since 2009. Applicant applied 
for and received forbearance on these accounts until September 1, 2016. Despite the 
forbearance, he made a $1,420 payment on these debts, and then set up monthly 
payments of $300. He documented his May 29, 2016 payment. He plans to resolve this 
debt in full over the next five years. These debts are being resolved. (AE F; AE I; Tr. 39-
40.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent on a charged-off account in the 
amount of $5,708, as stated in subparagraph 1.c. This debt was for a vehicle he 
purchased for the use of his then fiancée. It was repossessed. Applicant documented 
he settled this debt with the creditor for a total of $1,728.68. This debt is resolved. (AE 
J; Tr. 35-38.)  
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent on a collection account in the amount 
of $3,239, as stated in subparagraph 1.e. This same debt is also identified as delinquent 
in subparagraphs 1.h and 1.k. It had been delinquent since at least 2012. Applicant 
presented a letter from this creditor that indicated this account was “closed” and the 
creditor is no longer collecting on this account. This debt is resolved. (GE 5; AE K; AE 
E; Tr. 40-43, 45.) 
 
                                                 
1 His ex-girlfriend and his former fiancée are two different people. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent on a charged-off account in the 
amount of $435, as stated in subparagraph 1.f. This debt was for a retail store charge 
card and is the same account identified in subparagraph 1.j. Applicant claimed to have 
paid off this debt on September 15, 2015. Applicant presented a letter from this 
collection agent indicating the debt is paid. It is resolved. (AE C; AE L at 3; Tr. 44-46.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent on a credit card account in the 
amount of $15,749, as stated in subparagraph 1.g. This debt is the same as that 
identified in subparagraph 1.p. Applicant presented documentation that he set up a 
payment plan with this creditor. He makes monthly payments of $250. This debt is being 
resolved. (AE M; Tr. 46-48, 50.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant was delinquent on a collection account in the amount 
of $2,197, as stated in subparagraph 1.i. This debt is the same debt as the account 
identified in 1.l. (Tr. 49.) Applicant presented a letter from this creditor indicating that this 
debt has been paid. It is resolved. (AE L.) 
   
 Applicant drives a vehicle that he paid off in full in 2009. He saves money by 
living without air conditioning. He does not purchase luxury items. He pays all of his bills 
using a debit card. He does not use credit cards anymore. He is dedicated to fixing his 
credit. He pledged that he will not help others financially in the future. (Tr. 23-24, 54-55.) 
 
 Additional security concerns were raised under Guideline B because Applicant’s 
former fiancée and her son were citizens of Thailand. His former fiancée’s mother, 
sisters, and brother are citizens and residents of Thailand. Applicant’s former fiancée 
was residing with him from August 2011 to January 28, 2015. However, their 
relationship ended in January 2015. She and her son moved out of Applicant’s home in 
February 2015, and Applicant has not had any contact with her or her family since that 
time. (GE 3; Tr. 28-31.) 
 
 Applicant received the Joint Service Achievement Medal; the Navy Achievement 
Medal; two Good Conduct Medals; the National Defense Service Medal; and the Armed 
Forces Expeditionary Medal. His supervisor, who wrote a letter of support, indicated 
Applicant is a great role model and has an excellent work ethic. He indicated Applicant 
has apprised him of the significant steps he is taking to resolve his past financial 
situation. (AE O; AE P.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
 
6 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 From 2009 to 2014, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he had been 
unable or unwilling to satisfy. The evidence raises both security concerns, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.   
 
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts arose between 2009 and 2014. Since 2014, he has been 
working to address all of his delinquencies as funds would allow and has contacted 
each of his creditors. He has paid three debts: subparagraph 1.c; subparagraph 1.f 
(duplicated in subparagraph 1.j); and subparagraph 1.i (duplicated in subparagraph 1.l). 
He is making payments on: his student loans (identified in subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, 1.m, 
1.n, and 1.o), and subparagraph 1.g (duplicated in subparagraph 1.p). The creditors on 
two debts: subparagraph 1.a and 1.e (duplicated in subparagraphs 1.h and 1.k) have 
forgiven the debts and issued Applicant documentation to confirm their forgiveness, 
despite his efforts to contact them to make a payment plan. While his failure to pay 
these significant debts indicated poor financial judgment in the past, he demonstrated 
recent good-faith efforts to resolve them in reaching out to the creditors to make 
payments. He was unable to follow through with his intent because the debt had legally 
been forgiven, as documented. Given his actions to resolve his debts, his intention to 
continue to make payments on his payment plans, and his stated unwillingness to help 
 
 
7 
 
 
out anyone else financially, it is unlikely that similar delinquencies will recur, such that 
his previous problems do not cast doubt on his trustworthiness. The evidence supports 
the application of AG ¶ 20(a). 
 
 Applicant provided evidence that he has worked with a credit counselor to 
address his debts. There are sufficient indications that his financial problems are slowly 
coming under control through his good-faith efforts to pay and resolve the delinquent 
bills. Both AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d) provide mitigation.  
 
While Applicant has lacked sufficient financial resources to fully repay all of his 
debts, and two of the accounts were forgiven by his creditors, he has made reasonable 
efforts to resolve them all, including contacting the creditors of the forgiven debts to 
attempt to arrange payments. He has reduced his overall debt. The Appeal Board has 
addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.2 
 
 Applicant has been addressing his debts since 2014. There is no evidence in the 
record that would lead me to conclude he will not continue to resolve the remaining 
debts through his mutually agreed upon payment arrangements. He is aware of the 
potential negative implications future financial delinquencies could have on his 
employment. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
                                                 
2 ISCR Case No. 07-06483 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 208) (internal citations and quotation marks omitted). 
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable: 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
From August 2011 to January 2015 Applicant resided with his former fiancée and 
her son. They are both citizens of Thailand. Additionally, her mother, sisters, and 
brother are citizens and residents in Thailand. Thailand is run by an interim military 
government and there is a terrorist presence there. As a result, there is a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion present in 
having foreign relatives in Thailand. The evidence raises the above security concern, 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate that concern.   
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Applicant and his former fiancée ended their relationship in January 2015. 
Applicant has not had contact with her, her son, or her extended family members since 
then. Applicant has severed all ties with them, and there is no indication that such 
contact would reoccur. It is unlikely that Applicant could be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of a these foreign individuals and interests of 
the United States, since the relationship has been terminated. Further, his former 
military service and dedication to his job provide evidence of longstanding relationships 
to the United States, which would cause him to resolve any potential conflict in the 
interest of the United States. All of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. Applicant has been a dedicated employee since 2005. He served honorably 
in the Navy from 1993 to 2002. While he demonstrated poor judgment in financially 
supporting women that abused his credit, he has made a serious commitment to 
rehabilitating his credit issues in the past two years. Further, he is no longer in a 
relationship with a citizen of Thailand and is has removed the foreign influence concerns 
from his life. His recent personal and financial decisions reflect that he currently displays 
the responsibility, judgment, and trustworthiness required to hold a security clearance. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations and Foreign Influence security 
concerns.  
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
