1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 15-00621 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Charles C. Hale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
___________ 
Decision 
___________ 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected, to some extent, by circumstances 
beyond her control. She recently resolved 2 of the 12 statement of reasons (SOR) debts, 
and she has 10 SOR debts left to resolve. She failed to establish a track record of debt 
payment and resolution. She does not understand that she is required to demonstrate 
financial responsibility to be eligible for a clearance. Financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. Access to classified information is denied.      
History of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 28, 2012. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On August 23, 2015, the DOD issued Applicant a 
SOR alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations).1 Applicant 
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
   09/16/2016
 
2 
                                         
 
answered the SOR on September 18, 2015 (Answer), and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on March 3, 2016, and 
reassigned to me on April 21, 2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 18, 2016, 
scheduling the hearing for April 25, 2016. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. 
Government exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 and Applicant’s exhibits (AE) 1 and 2 were 
submitted at hearing. AE 3 was submitted post-hearing. All proffered exhibits were 
admitted into evidence without objection. On May 4, 2016, DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, except for SOR ¶ 1.a, 
which she denied and claimed it was resolved. Concerning the admitted delinquent 
accounts, Applicant promised she would make payments on them as necessary. Her 
SOR and hearing admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the record evidence, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor while 
testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She graduated from 
high school and then attended a technology vocational school in 1984. She was married 
in July 1996, and has been separated since around 2007. She has four adult children, 
ages 34, 33, 27, and 22.  
 
Between April 1996 and April 1998, Applicant was employed as a food service 
worker. She then was unemployed for about four months. She was hired as a teacher’s 
aid between July 1998 and October 1999, and she was unemployed the rest of 1999. 
Applicant worked with a Government agency from December 1999 to May 2002. After a 
two-month unemployment period, Applicant was hired by her current employer, a federal 
contractor, in July 2002. During her periods of unemployment, Applicant received welfare 
and took care of her children and her mother.  
 
In her 2012 SCA, Applicant disclosed no prior security clearance applications or 
having been granted access to classified information. However, during an August 2012 
background interview, and at her hearing, she stated that she first applied for a clearance 
in 2008, and that she was granted access to classified information at the top secret level. 
Her continued employment is not contingent on her eligibility to possess a security 
clearance. There are no allegations or evidence of any rule or security violations. (Tr. 7)  
 
Applicant disclosed in her 2012 SCA that she took a one-week Caribbean vacation 
in May 2008. She testified that a friend paid for her trip expenses, except for her airfare. 
(Tr. 44) She spent her time at the beach, shopping, sightseeing, and at a casino. In June 
2016, Applicant took a vacation cruise to a Central-American country. She claimed that 
her friend paid for most of her expenses, except for her air fare. (Tr. 68) 
 
 
3 
                                         
 
Section 26 (Financial Record) of the 2012 SCA asked Applicant to disclose 
whether during the last seven years she had any financial problems, including delinquent 
or in-collection debts; loan defaults; credit cards or accounts suspended, charged off, or 
cancelled; whether she was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt, or had been 
over 120 days delinquent on any debts; and whether she had filed for bankruptcy 
protection during the preceding seven years. 
 
Applicant answered “no” to all the financial questions and disclosed no prior or 
ongoing financial problems. The subsequent background investigation revealed the 12 
debts alleged in the SOR, totaling less than $6,000, and that she filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection in June 2009, and was discharged of her dischargeable debts in 
October 2009. Applicant’s credit reports and her SOR and hearing admissions 
established all the debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
The status of her SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,310). This is a credit card debt in collection. Applicant claimed she 
disputed the debt over the telephone and was told she did not have to pay it. In her May 
12, 2016 statement, Applicant implied she was disputing the debt as fraudulent. (AE 3) 
She presented no documentary evidence to support any of her claims. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.i and 1.k concern delinquent medical charges for services 
Applicant incurred after she stopped paying her medical insurance in 2012. (Tr. 48) SOR 
¶ 1.j ($79) concerned a debt to a telephone service provider that Applicant paid after her 
hearing. Applicant testified that in April 2016, she called the collection agency for the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k and consolidated all of her SOR delinquent medical debts with that 
collection agency. She averred the collection agency told her she owes a total of $8,000 
for all of her delinquent medical debts. She also claimed she established a $40 monthly 
payment plan. (Tr. 49, 54) Applicant presented no documentary evidence to establish the 
consolidation of the medical debts alleged in the SOR, that she established a payment 
plan, or that she has made payments toward any of her medical debts since she incurred 
them. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l ($790). This is a tuition debt to a private high school. At her hearing, 
Applicant admitted knowing about this debt since 2012. She claimed she owed only $100 
because her daughter had a scholarship at the high school. In her May 2016 statement, 
Applicant claimed she talked to someone at the school and established a $25 monthly 
payment arrangement. She presented no documentary evidence to support her claims of 
contacts with the creditor or of any payments made.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.m. Concerning her 2009 bankruptcy, Applicant explained that she had to 
file because she was financially overwhelmed by the increased expenses resulting from 
her marital separation, her husband’s failure to pay child support, the end of her 
daughter’s child support entitlement, and providing financial support for her ailing mother 
who needed personal care while Applicant was working. She was discharged of credit 
card debts and a personal loan totaling about $20,000. As of June 2015, Applicant’s 
husband owed $82,500 in past-due child support. (AE 2)  
 
4 
                                         
 
Applicant testified that she had to stop paying health insurance (over $400 
monthly) and a debt consolidation plan ($400 monthly) that she had established in 2007-
2008 while she was trying to avoid having to file for bankruptcy protection. Applicant 
claimed she had documentary evidence showing her debt consolidation plan and of 
payments she made pursuant to the plan. (Tr. 21-22) She was granted additional time 
after the hearing to provide the documentary evidence, but she failed to do so. (Tr. 44) 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for her financial problems and indicated her intent to 
pay her delinquent debts. Applicant testified she has a 401K retirement account with 
about $20,000. She was considering taking funds out of her 401K retirement plan to pay 
her debts. Applicant believes that her current financial situation is improving and that she 
is getting back on track doing the things that she needs to do. Applicant started providing 
support for her mother in 2014. Her mother passed away in 2015, and she no longer has 
that financial responsibility. She claimed she was using some of her surplus money to 
pay her delinquent debts. 
 
Applicant’s take-home pay (about $2,400 monthly) is divided between two 
checking accounts. As of the hearing date, she had no money in her savings account. 
The checking accounts have about $700 together.  
 
Applicant presented evidence that in May 2016 she made a partial payment of 
$205 toward a $411 medical debt. She claimed she made another payment “the other 
day” before the hearing, but failed to present documentary evidence of any additional 
payments beyond the May 2016 $205 payment. (AE 1) Except for the payment evidenced 
in AE 1, at her hearing, Applicant failed to present any evidence of any payments made 
or attempts to otherwise resolve the debts alleged in the SOR, or of any contacts with 
creditors. 
 
After the hearing, Applicant submitted evidence of a payment made to the creditor 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. The creditor indicated she would receive credit after the payment 
cleared. Applicant also submitted evidence of a $160 payment to the creditor alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.k. (AE 3) Applicant presented no evidence to show she has participated in 
financial counseling since her 2009 bankruptcy filing, or that she currently follows a 
budget.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The 
U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no one 
has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 
(1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition 
 
5 
                                         
 
is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case can be 
measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified 
information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration 
of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, the 
burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt 
about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. 
at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met 
the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within one’s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack 
of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in her credit reports, SOR 
response, and hearing record. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The 
 
6 
                                         
 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant was released of all her dischargeable debts in 2009. Since then, she 
acquired 12 delinquent accounts that are in collection. Her financial problems are 
frequent, recent, and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. 
  
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by circumstances beyond her control, 
including her marital separation, her husband’s failure to comply with his child support 
obligations, and providing financial support to her ill mother. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s 
documentary evidence failed to establish that Applicant has a track record of financial 
responsibility.  
 
Applicant submitted her SCA in 2012, and she was questioned about her financial 
problems during an August 2012 interview with a government investigator. Applicant 
learned about the Government’s financial concerns as a result of that interview. 
Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to submit documentary evidence of her efforts to contact 
creditors, establish payment play, make payments, or to otherwise resolve her delinquent 
obligations. Applicant received the SOR stating the Government’s financial security 
concerns in August 2015. Notwithstanding, at her hearing Applicant only submitted 
evidence of contact with, and payment of two of the SOR creditors - SOR ¶¶ 1.j ($79) and 
1.k ($160). She promised to resolve the remaining SOR debts in the near future.  
 
 
7 
                                         
 
Applicant’s 2008 Caribbean vacation (just before filing for bankruptcy) and her 
2016 cruise vacation show frivolous spending or spending beyond her financial means in 
light of her failure to address her delinquent debts. Considering Applicant’s past financial 
problems and her failure to address her debts, I have given less weight to her promises 
to pay her debts in the near future. She failed to establish that future delinquent debt is 
unlikely to recur. Applicant’s current financial problems cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. There are no clear indications that her financial 
problem is being resolved and is under control. Her payments of two of her debts do not 
show good faith. Her efforts are insufficient to mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person concept. AG 
¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 2002. She testified she has held a security clearance since 
2008. There are no allegations of rule or security violations.  
 
Applicant was discharged of her dischargeable debts pursuant to a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy proceeding in 2009. Since then, she acquired 12 delinquent debts. She paid 
two of the alleged delinquent debts in April 2016. Ten delinquent debts remain 
outstanding. Applicant failed to show financial responsibility by neglecting her creditors 
and by not making payments to resolve her delinquent debts. Although Applicant’s 
finances were adversely affected by circumstances beyond her control, she failed to 
demonstrate a track record of financial responsibility. Financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:    Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.j, 1.k:    For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.l, 1.m:    Against Applicant  
 
  
 
8 
                                         
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
