 
 
 
 
1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No: 15-04808 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant experienced financial difficulties between 2009 and 2014. He mitigated 
the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial considerations. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2014, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing Investigation Request (e-QIP). On February 29, 2016, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on March 10, 2016, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On June 2, 2016, DOHA assigned 
the case to me. On June 13, 2016, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing setting the case 
for July 12, 2016. The case was heard as scheduled. Department Counsel offered 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through K into evidence without objection. 
He called one witness. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 22, 2016. The 
record closed at the conclusion of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations, except those in ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.i 
through 1.m. He attached exhibits to his Answer. All admissions are incorporated 
herein. 
 
 Applicant is 36 years old and divorced. He has a three-year-old child from a 
former relationship. He is a high school graduate and has a commercial driver’s license. 
He began working for his employer in September 2014. He said he has excellent 
performance evaluations. His employer is aware of the financial security concerns 
underlying this security clearance investigation. (Tr. 15-19.) 
 
 In August 2005 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Later that year, the court 
discharged about $20,000 of delinquent debts, which included many of his wife’s 
medical debts. They did not have medical insurance at the time. Subsequently, 
Applicant accumulated additional delinquent debts as a result of marital issues with his 
wife, who was not paying their bills. (Tr. 19-20, 25-26.) Prior to obtaining his current job, 
he was not paid $8,000 or $9,000 for a job that he anticipated earning. That loss of 
income contributed to some of his financial problems. (Tr. 24.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from October 2014, May 2015, and July 
2016, the SOR alleged the 2005 bankruptcy and 13 delinquent debts, totaling $43,037. 
(GE 2, GE 3, and GE 4.) The debts arose between 2009 and 2014. A summary of the 
status of each debt is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: The Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in 2005 was discharged that year. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: The $7,392 child support debt is resolved and current. Unbeknownst 
to Applicant, his former girlfriend gave birth to a child in 2013. She subsequently 
filed a paternity suit and prevailed. He was required to make up almost two years 
of arrearages. (Tr. 26-30; AE C.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: The $3,746 debt owed to a bank for an automobile repossession was 
resolved in June 2015. He thought his former wife was paying the debt. (Tr. 30-
31; AE D.) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
SOR ¶ 1.d: The $275 debt owed to the collection agency for a cell phone 
company is the same debt alleged in ¶ 1.f for $199. It was paid in March 2016. 
(Tr. 31-32; AE E.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: The $234 gas bill is paid. (Tr. 32; GE 4.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: The $173 cable bill was paid in March 2016. (Tr. 33; GE 4; AE F.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: The $133 cell phone bill was paid in March 2016. (Tr. 33; GE 4; AE 
G.)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.i: The $520 cell phone debt is resolved. Applicant spoke to the carrier 
and told them he never had a phone with the company. He disputed it, and it was 
later removed from his credit report. (Tr. 34; GE 4.) It is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j: The $340 debt owed to an insurance company is resolved. Applicant 
has a current account with the company that is in good standing. (Tr. 34; GE 4; 
AE H.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k: The $178 medical debt was his former wife’s debt. He paid it in May 
2016. (Tr. 34; GE 4; AE I.). 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l: The $90 medical debt was his former wife’s debt. Applicant’s above 
payment covered this debt too. It is paid. (Tr. 35-36; GE 4; AE I.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m: The $79 insurance debt was paid in March 2016. (Tr. 36; GE 4; AE 
J.). 
 
SOR ¶ 1.n: The $2,596 past-due amount owed on an automobile loan with a 
balance of $29,678 is resolved and the account is current. (Tr. 36-38; GE 4; 
Answer: Ex. N.) 
 
 Applicant’s annual salary is between $110,000 and $120,000, depending on his 
work schedule. (Tr. 22.) His net monthly income is $8,800 a month and his regular living 
expenses are about $3,500, leaving him sufficient money for other expenses. (AE K.) 
He said that when he became a lease operator of a truck in 2014, his income increased 
dramatically. (Tr. 39.) He has not participated in financial counseling, but he has 
reviewed his credit report thoroughly and resolved all delinquent debts appearing on it. 
He does not intend to “get behind again.” (Tr. 41.) 
 
 Applicant’s friend testified. He and Applicant work for the same company, and he 
trained Applicant. He has a security clearance. He helped Applicant address his 
financial issues. He said Applicant has “always wanted to pay his debts. He does not 
use credit cards.” (Tr. 44.) He has a high opinion of Applicant. (Tr. 44.) The vice-
president where Applicant is employed stated that Applicant has “performed his job 
 
 
 
 
4 
without incident.” (AE B.) He said that Applicant is a safe driver, and he is pleased to 
have him as an employee. (AE B.)  
(I added a line space here) 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
As documented by CBRs and his admissions, Applicant obtained a Chapter 7 
discharge of his debts in 2005. He experienced additional financial problems between 
2009 and 2014 that he had been unable or unwilling to manage until 2014 when he 
started his current position. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could potentially mitigate 
financial security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
 
 
 
6 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant demonstrated that his indebtedness is unlikely to recur given his 
current position, income and budget. He established mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to the loss of money he was owed for a job 
and marital issues with his former wife. Those were circumstances beyond his control. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude that he responsibly managed his debts or 
obligations while they were accumulating between 2009 and 2014. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) 
has partial application.  
 
Applicant provided evidence to support the application of AG ¶ 20(c). Although 
he has not participated in credit or financial counseling, there are clear indications that 
his financial issues are under control, and all matters alleged in the SOR are resolved. 
He paid or resolved his delinquent debts, including unpaid medical bills for his former 
wife, and he has more than sufficient income to remain solvent and current on his 
financial obligations in the future. His actions in addressing the financial obligations 
exhibited a good-faith effort to resolve debts and established mitigation under AG ¶ 
20(d). Applicant stated that he disputed a cell phone debt with the carrier listed in the 
SOR. Subsequently, the company removed the debt from his credit. There is sufficient 
evidence to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible 36-year-old man, 
who has successfully worked for a defense contractor since 2014. After obtaining this 
position he has earned sufficient money to resolve all outstanding delinquent debts. In 
addition, he has received financial assistance for managing his finances and credit 
issues from a work colleague, who is aware of this investigation. Applicant now regularly 
reviews his credit report and intends to remain debt free. He understands that further 
delinquencies could jeopardize his employment. His financial situation is sufficiently 
stable that it no longer poses a security concern. The evidence leaves me without 
questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n:                  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                               
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
