 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03101 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the personal conduct and sexual 
behavior security concerns raised by him masturbating in public in 2011 and 2012, and 
having inappropriate photographs in his work computer in 2012. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 13, 2011. 
After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant a clearance. On December 14, 2015, the DOD Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security 
concerns under Guideline D (sexual behavior) and Guideline E (personal conduct).1 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 15, 2016, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record, in lieu of a hearing.  
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 24, 
2016, was provided to Applicant by transmittal letter dated February 25, 2016. Applicant 
received the FORM on March 3, 2016. He was allowed 30 days to submit any 
objections to the FORM and to provide material in extenuation, refutation, and 
mitigation. Applicant submitted a two-paragraph letter, dated March 25, 2016, as his 
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on September 20, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d. He failed 
to admit or deny SOR ¶ 1.b, and I consider the allegation denied. He also did not admit 
or deny SOR ¶ 2.a, which alleges the same underlying facts Applicant admitted to under 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d. I considered SOR ¶ 2.a admitted. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a review of the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 64-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from 
high school in 1970, and shortly thereafter enlisted in the U.S. Air Force. He honorably 
served in the Air Force from 1970 until 1976. He attended a community college between 
May 1979 and October 1980, but did not earn a degree. Applicant married his first wife 
in 1976 and divorced in 1989. He married his current wife in 1994, and they have been 
married since. He has an 18-year-old son.  
 
Applicant has been working with his current employer, a defense contractor, 
since May 1978. He has held a secret level DOD security clearance since 1978. There 
is no evidence of any security violations or issues of security concern, except for those 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in 2011. Section 28 (Involvement in 
Non-Criminal Court Actions) of the 2011 SCA asked Applicant to disclose whether in the 
last seven years he had been a party to any public record civil court action. Applicant 
answered “yes,” and disclosed that in May 2005, he was charged with disorderly 
conduct. The charge was later dropped and the case dismissed. Additionally, he 
disclosed that in 2003 he was placed on probation before judgment as a result of a 
traffic violation.  
 
Applicant was interviewed by government investigators in March and April 2013. 
During the interviews, Applicant confirmed his 2003 traffic violation and his disorderly 
conduct charge (dismissed). Applicant disclosed that in March 2012, he was arrested 
for masturbating inside of the company van while parked on a public town road. A 
witness called the police and he was arrested and charged with indecent exposure, lude 
conduct, and disorderly conduct. Applicant pleaded guilty to indecent exposure, and the 
other charges were dropped. He was sentenced to pay a fine and court costs, placed on 
 
3 
 
 
two-year supervised probation (ended in August 2014), and required to receive 
psychological counseling (ended in December 2013).  
 
Applicant explained he masturbated in the company van because he was on a 
work trip. He claimed he was under a lot of stress related to working too hard and 
traveling. He felt overwhelmed because of the many things that were going on in his life. 
He averred he needed to relieve the stress of feeling nervous and agitated, and 
masturbation took care of the problem. Applicant told the investigator he only 
masturbated in public twice. Applicant further disclosed that in the fall of 2011, he 
masturbated at a rest stop on the highway while in his private car. At the time, he was 
driving to a work location. Applicant indicated that he was an active participant and 
deacon of his church and would be embarrassed if other church members became 
aware of these incidents.  
 
Applicant was interviewed by another government investigator in May 2014, who 
was seeking additional information concerning Applicant’s prior arrests and employment 
disciplinary action. The investigator’s notes (summary of the interview) indicate that 
Applicant denied he was masturbating in March 2012, and that he claimed he was 
changing clothes. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he did not recall the 
May 2014 interview, but noted that he had already admitted to masturbating in public 
during two prior government interviews. He does not know why he would not have been 
truthful when he had admitted to masturbating in prior interviews. 
 
Applicant considered his criminal conduct wrong and morally improper. He now 
understands that masturbating in public is against the law and promised to have better 
self-control in the future. Applicant’s probation officer indicated that he has made 
satisfactory adjustments while on probation. (Item 7) 
 
Applicant also disclosed during his March and April 2013 interviews that in the 
fall of 2012, he received a written reprimand for having an inappropriate photograph on 
his work computer. He explained he took a picture of himself naked at a beach using his 
camera. At a later time, he downloaded the pictures in his camera into the office 
computer. He claimed he forgot his naked picture was in the camera, and averred its 
transfer to the government computer was an innocent mistake. 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that during his two-year probation he 
attended court-ordered weekly counseling sessions with a psychologist. He claimed the 
therapy was very effective in helping him control his impulses. He believes that the two 
masturbation incidents were isolated incidents that occurred during a very stressful 
period of his life. 
 
Applicant believes that he is not a security risk. He noted that he has over 40 
years of trustworthy service to his country without any security violations or issues of 
concern. Applicant stated that he takes “this privilege very seriously” and he would 
never under any circumstances allow himself to betray this trust. In his answer to the 
FORM, Applicant emphasized that he had no recurring episodes of public misconduct 
 
4 
 
 
since his arrest in 2012. He noted that the therapy he received during his probation 
period had a substantial impact on his awareness of the severity of the behavior that led 
to his arrest. 
 
Applicant indicated that he plans to retire from his current job at the end of 2016. 
He requested that if his clearance will be revoked, that the revocation be delayed until 
the end of 2016. He believes he has been a dedicated DOD servant for his entire adult 
life and would like to finish his service on a positive note.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant masturbated in public in 2011 and 2012. He pleaded guilty to indecent 
exposure for the 2012 criminal behavior and was placed on two years’ probation. He 
also received a written reprimand from his employer for having an inappropriate 
photograph in his work computer in the fall of 2012.  
 
Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability the following disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . .  
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
6 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 Considering the evidence as a whole, including Applicant’s age, education, 
experience working for a government contractor while possessing a clearance, the 
circumstances surrounding the offenses, and his repeated criminal behavior, I find that 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the Guideline E security concerns.  
 Applicant’s behavior is recent, frequent, and not an isolated incident. He claimed 
that he was stressed out because he was working too hard. He averred that his court 
mandated psychological counseling has been effective to control his impulses. 
However, he presented no documentary evidence from a duly qualified medical 
professional concerning his diagnosis and whether he received a favorable prognosis. 
Absent such evidence, the passage of time so far is insufficient to show Applicant has 
changed his behavior, learned to control the stressors that caused him to commit the 
offenses, and that his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s criminal 
behavior continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. 
  SOR ¶ 1.b alleged that Applicant made a false statement to a government 
investigator during a May 2014 interview when he stated that he was not masturbating 
in public, but just changing his pants when he was arrested in 2012. In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant indicated that he did not recall the interview, but noted that it would not 
make sense for him to be untruthful when he had admitted to masturbating during two 
prior government interviews in March and April 2013. I note that he also pleaded guilty 
to indecent exposure (for masturbating in public), served two years’ probation, and 
participated in court-ordered psychological counseling. Considering the evidence as a 
whole, I find the SOR ¶ 1.b allegation is not substantiated. 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 describes the concern about sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
 
7 
 
 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 provides four disqualifying conditions relating to sexual behavior that 
apply to this case, raise a security concern, and may be disqualifying:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
  The sexual behavior security concerns are based substantially on the same 
sexually-related facts and circumstances alleged under the personal conduct guideline. 
The discussion under the personal conduct guideline is incorporated herein. Appellant’s 
sexual behavior exposed him to criminal charges; made him vulnerable to possible 
coercion, exploitation, and duress; and reflected lack of judgment and discretion. AG ¶¶ 
13(a), (c), and (d) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 14 lists conditions that could mitigate the sexual behavior security 
concerns.  
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and  
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 
8 
 
 
For the same reasons discussed under the personal conduct guideline, 
incorporated herein, I find that none of the above mitigating conditions apply. The 
sexual behavior security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines D and E in my 
whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant receives credit for his years of military service and his years working for 
a defense contractor. Applicant’s personal conduct demonstrates lack of judgment, and 
an unwillingness to abide by the rules and regulations. He failed to mitigate the 
Guidelines D and E security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
