 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01686 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 12, 2014. On 
September 23, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 10, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 25, 2016, 
 
2 
 
and the case was assigned to me on May 2, 2016. On May 12, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for June 9, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but did 
not present the testimony of other witnesses or submit any documentary evidence. I 
kept the record open until July 11, 2016, to enable her to submit documentary evidence. 
She did not submit any additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 
17, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, 
1.f-1.h, and 1.k. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.i, and 1.j. Her admissions in her answer and 
at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since June 2013. She has been employed by defense contractors 
since August 2003.  
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from May 1994 to July 2001 and 
was honorably discharged. She served in the active U.S. Navy Reserve from November 
2001 to November 2002 and was honorably discharged. She held a security clearance 
while in the Navy and as a contractor employee, and she is seeking to continue it. (Tr. 
26.)  
 
 Applicant married in August 2003, separated in 2007, and divorced in June 2013. 
She has two children, ages 17 and 11, who live with her. Her ex-husband is not 
obligated to pay child support. (Tr. 23-24.)  
 
 Applicant attended a university from September 2003 to September 2006 and 
received a bachelor’s degree. Some of her educational expenses were financed through 
the GI Bill, and about $40,000 was financed through student loans. Her husband 
managed the family finances while they were living together, and she testified that she 
thought that he was making the payments on her student loans until her pay was 
garnished for about $8,719 in April 2013. The garnishment triggered an incident report 
and an inquiry into her continued eligibility for access to classified information. (GX 4; 
Tr. 19, 29-33.)  
 
Applicant testified that when she learned that her student loans were delinquent, 
she directed that her federal tax refunds be used to pay the student loans, and she 
thought that the tax refunds had paid off the delinquent loan until she was interviewed 
by a security investigator. (Tr. 20, 40-41.) She did not submit any documentation 
showing that she used her tax refunds to pay the loans.  
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from her security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleges multiple delinquent student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, 1.f-1.h, and 
1.k), two delinquent medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.i), and a charged-off consumer 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.j). Applicant testified that the student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, 
1.g, and 1.h were resolved. (Tr. 40-41.) She did not provide any documentation to 
corroborate her testimony. She admitted that she owes the student loans alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, and 1.k and has no payment plans for them. (Tr. 41-43.) 
 
 Applicant testified that she did not recognize the medical debts for $564 and 
$1,340 alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.i. She has not investigated, resolved, or disputed 
them. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 Applicant testified that her ex-husband agreed to pay the consumer debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.j. She submitted no documentation of an agreement. The creditor bureau 
report from July 2014 reflected that it is her individual debt. (GX 2 at 11.) As of the date 
of the hearing, she had not initiated any contact with the creditor. However, she 
received a letter from the creditor about two weeks before the hearing, but she had not 
responded to it. (Tr. 46-47.) 
 
 Applicant recently withdrew about $18,500 from her retirement account to 
replace her 17-year-old car. She paid $13,500 for the 2013-model car and is holding 
$5,000 in reserve to pay the taxes on the early withdrawal from her retirement account. 
(Tr. 56-57.) 
  
Applicant earns about $95,000 per year. Her monthly take-home pay is about 
$4,950. (Tr. 38-39.) At the hearing, she estimated that her monthly expenses are about 
$2,300. (Tr. 53-57.) If her estimate is accurate, she would have a net monthly remainder 
of about $2,650.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
4 
 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in her answer to the SOR, her testimony at the hearing, 
and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing establish two disqualifying 
conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) 
and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating 
conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of the above mitigated conditions are established. Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are numerous, recent, and were not incurred under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur. Her marital breakup was a circumstance beyond her control, but she 
has not acted responsibly. Her husband’s failure to make the payments on her student 
loans was not beyond her control, because she voluntarily chose to trust him with all the 
family finances. While it is not uncommon or unreasonable for one marital partner to 
manage the family finances, Applicant had a duty to ensure that her student loans were 
 
6 
 
being paid, especially after she and her husband separated in 2007. She testified that 
she used her federal tax refunds to pay some of the student loans, but she failed to 
document her actions, even though she was given a month after the hearing to provide 
documentation. She has taken no action to investigate, resolve, or pay any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. The payment of a student loan not alleged in the SOR by 
involuntary garnishment does not demonstrate the good faith required to establish AG ¶ 
20(d). ISCR Case No. 09-5700 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Navy and has worked for defense 
contractors since August 2003. She held a security clearance in the Navy and has 
retained it throughout her career as a contractor employee. She came to the hearing 
unprepared to respond to the SOR. She claimed that she had documentation showing 
resolution of several student loans, but she failed to provide it.  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  
 
 
7 
 
 The garnishment of Applicant’s pay and the resulting security incident report was 
a warning that her security clearance was in jeopardy, but she has not responded to the 
warning. Her testimony, if supported by documentary evidence, would show a plan and 
significant actions to resolve her delinquent student loans. Inexplicably, she has failed to 
provide documentary evidence even after being given ample time to provide it. She also 
was given ample time to investigate, resolve, or dispute the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.i, 
and 1.j, but she did not take advantage of the opportunity.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
