 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted]1 )  ISCR Case No. 15-02480 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and H (Drug Involvement). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 5, 2014. 
On January 26, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and H. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The adjudicative guidelines are 
                                                          
1 On my own motion, I have corrected the Statement of Reasons to reflect the spelling of Applicant’s first 
name as it appears in her security clearance application and her answer to the SOR. The corrected 
spelling is used in the caption for this decision.  
 
2 
 
codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006), and they replace the guidelines in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 8, 2016, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on April 14, 2016, 
and the case was assigned to me on May 2, 2016. On May 12, 2016, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for June 8, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but did 
not present the testimony of any other witnesses or any documentary evidence. I kept 
the record open until July 11, 2016, to enable her to submit documentary evidence. She 
timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 16, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant did not expressly admit or deny SOR ¶¶ 1.a-
1.d, and I have treated her answer to those allegations as denials. She admitted SOR 
¶¶ 1.f and 2.a. She denied SOR ¶ 1.e and 2.b. Her admissions in her answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old tools and parts attendant employed by a defense 
contractor since January 2014. She graduated from high school in June 2005 and 
served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from August 2005 to August 2011. She received 
an honorable discharge. She was discharged under a Navy “up-or-out” policy, because 
she had not been promoted to petty officer second class (pay grade E-5) by the time 
she completed six years of service. (Tr. 69.) She was unemployed from August 2011 to 
April 2012. She worked as an unarmed security officer from April 2012 to December 
2013, when she was laid off. She was briefly unemployed until she was hired for her 
current job.  
 
 Applicant attended a community college from August 2011 to December 2015 
and obtained a paralegal certificate. Her tuition was paid through the GI Bill, and she 
has no student loans or debts related to her education. (Tr. 28.) 
 
 Applicant married in December 2009 and separated in November 2012. She has 
two children, ages nine and five, who reside with her. (GX 2 at 7.) She testified that she 
left her husband because of his infidelity and financial irresponsibility. (Tr. 26-27.) Her 
husband has two children from other relationships, and his children live with their 
mothers. She has not tried to obtain child support from her husband. (Tr. 41-42.)  
 
 When Applicant submitted her SCA, she disclosed that she used marijuana 
about ten times between April 2004 and April 2013. She answered “no” to the question 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
whether she used marijuana while holding a security clearance. (GX 1 at 34.) She 
testified that she smoked marijuana with a boyfriend in high school. She enlisted in the 
Navy shortly after graduating from high school and did not use marijuana during her 
military service. She used marijuana “maybe once or twice” after she was discharged 
from the Navy. (Tr. 23.) She last used marijuana at a birthday party for her cousin in 
April 2013, while employed as an unarmed security officer. (Tr. 33-35; GX 2 at 7-8.) She 
obtained the marijuana from the same boyfriend who gave her marijuana in high school. 
The boyfriend is the father of her nine-year-old son. She occasionally sees her old 
boyfriend when he visits his son, but she has no social contact with him. She believes 
her old boyfriend has stopped using marijuana, but she is not sure. (Tr. 67.) She 
testified that she does not intend to use marijuana again, because she is subject to 
random urinalysis and cannot afford to lose her job. (Tr. 24, 36.) 
 
In her SCA, Applicant stated that she received a security clearance in November 
2006. (GX 1 at 37.) The SOR alleges that she received her clearance in August 2005. 
The basis for the date alleged in the SOR is not reflected in the record.  
 
 Applicant testified that she thought her security clearance was terminated when 
she was discharged from the Navy. She was unemployed until she began working as an 
unarmed security officer, and this job did not require a clearance. (Tr. 30-31.) 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling about $12,500. The evidence 
concerning the debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, medical debts for $170, $120, and $120. These debts were 
placed for collection in August and September 2012. (AX B at 2.) The $170 debt was 
paid in February 2016. (Attachment to SOR Answer.) In May 2016, Applicant started 
making monthly $50 payments to the collection agency for the two remaining debts and 
other medical debts not alleged in the SOR. (AX A; Tr. 23, 44-46.) She testified that the 
medical debts were incurred for medical treatment for her son when he suffered from 
seizures. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, judgment for deficiency of $3,458 after vehicle repossession. 
This judgment was filed in January 2012 and is not satisfied. Applicant testified that she 
incurred this debt when she cosigned a loan to buy a vehicle for her husband. The 
lender garnished her pay after she was discharged from the Navy, and then obtained a 
judgment for the remaining indebtedness. During a personal subject interview (PSI) in 
October 2014, she told a security investigator that she intended to begin making 
payments on the debt within a few weeks. (GX 2 at 5.) At the hearing, she testified that 
she had not attempted to resolve the debt because she cannot afford it. (Tr. 51.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e, collection account for $8,439. This debt was referred for collection 
in July 2009. Applicant denied this debt in her PSI and her answer to the SOR. She 
testified that she was unable to identify the creditor by using Google, but she had not 
noticed that the contact information for the creditor was listed in the August 2014 credit 
bureau report (CBR). (GX 3 at 6.) After Department Counsel directed her attention to 
 
4 
 
the creditor’s contact information, she promised to “look into it.” (Tr. 52-53.) She did not 
submit any additional information by the time the record closed on July 11, 2016. The 
debt is not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f, cellphone bill for $198, referred for collection. Applicant testified 
that this debt was incurred when she switched carriers. She was entitled to a rebate 
from the new carrier to pay off her old contract, but she did not submit the paperwork 
necessary to obtain the rebate. In her answer to the SOR, she stated that she forgot to 
send in the paperwork. At the hearing, she testified that she thought her husband 
submitted the paperwork. (Tr. 55-56.) As of the date the record closed, she had not 
submitted any evidence that the debt was resolved. 
 
 Applicant’s net monthly income is about $1,875. She estimates that her monthly 
expenses are about $1,790, leaving a net monthly remainder of about $85. (Tr. 59-64.) 
Her expenses include a $390 monthly payment on a new car she purchased in 2014 
after her old car began having electrical problems. (Tr. 62.) She uses a credit card to 
provide financial support to her mother, and she has a balance of about $2,100 on the 
account, on which she makes the minimum payment. (Tr. 58.) She does not receive 
child support from the either of the fathers of her two children. (Tr. 41.) At the time of the 
hearing, she estimated that she had $50 in her checking account and $200 in savings. 
(Tr. 64.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
 
6 
 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See 
ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, her testimony at the hearing, and the CBRs submitted by 
both parties establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are 
potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. Applicant has encountered several 
circumstances largely beyond her control: unemployment, marital separation, a 
financially irresponsible spouse, and unexpected medical expenses for her son. She 
has acted responsibly regarding her medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, but she has not 
moved beyond promises to pay the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f. A promise to pay a 
delinquent debt in the future is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a 
timely manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008). 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not sought financial counseling and 
her financial situation is not under control. 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, but not for the 
remaining debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant questioned the validity of the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, but she has not disputed it with the creditor, collection agency, or 
the credit bureau. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana, with varying frequency, from 
about April 2004 to April 2013 (SOR ¶ 2.a). It also alleges that her marijuana use 
occurred after she was granted a security clearance (SOR ¶ 2.b). 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ 
Drugs are defined in AG ¶ 24(a)(1) as A[d]rugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
Applicant’s disclosures in her SCA, her admissions during his PSI, and her 
testimony at the hearing establish the following disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
At the time Applicant illegally used marijuana, she had been discharged from the 
Navy, unemployed for about seven months, and then employed for about a year in a 
private-sector job that did not require a clearance. Under normal circumstances, her 
clearance would have become inactive. She incorrectly believed that she did not have a 
clearance. An “active” clearance makes the holder eligible for access to classified 
information. A “current” clearance is one in which a person has been determined eligible 
for access to classified information but is not currently eligible without a reinstatement. A 
former military member who held an active clearance has two years to remain in a 
“current” status before moving to an “expired” status. An “expired” clearance is one that 
 
8 
 
has not been used for more than two years, and it cannot be reinstated without a new 
investigation.3 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(a) is established. Applicant’s use of marijuana was more than three 
years ago. She used it only once or twice. She did not believe she had a security 
clearance when she used it. She is now in a position where she needs a clearance and 
is subject to random urinalysis. She has decided that she cannot risk her job by 
smoking marijuana again. 
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) is not fully established. She sees her former boyfriend only when he 
visits his son. Her former boyfriend had stopped smoking marijuana. She has abstained 
for more than three years. However, she has not changed her environment and she has 
not submitted a signed statement of intent. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
3 Information about “active,” “current,” and “expired” security clearances may be found at the following 
website: http://www.veteranstoday.com/2007/06/17u-s-government-security-clearances-get-the-facts/. 
 
9 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and H in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably for six years in the U.S. Navy and held a security 
clearance during her military service. She was candid and sincere at the hearing. She is 
concerned about her ability to support her family and is not willing to jeopardize her job 
by smoking marijuana. On the other hand, she has made discretionary purchases such 
as a new car even though she is in financial distress. She has been on notice since she 
submitted her SCA that her delinquent debts raise security concerns, but she has been 
passive, careless, and inattentive regarding her financial affairs. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by her marijuana use, but she has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised by her delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
