                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  15-02309           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole Smith, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant:   Pro se
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations.
Eligibility to access classified information is granted.
 
Statement of Case
On November 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865 (E.O. 10865), Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on
September 1, 2006.  
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 7, 2015, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on April 1, 2016, and scheduled for hearing on May 26,
2
2016. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4).
Applicant relied on four witnesses (including himself) and six exhibits (AEs A-F). The
transcript (Tr.) was received on June 6, 2016.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with updated debt clarifications on
his student loans and medical debts. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted 14
days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded ten days to respond.
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with documented
clarifications of his student loan accounts. Applicant’s submissions were admitted without
objection as AE G. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated six delinquent debts
exceeding $20,000. Allegedly, each of the debts remain delinquent.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the alleged delinquent
debts with explanations. He claimed he set up a payment plan of $281 a month
(beginning in November 2015) and has brought his account with creditor 1.a into current
status. He claimed his two medical debts (creditors 1.b and 1.c) resulted from his father
needing a kidney transplant, and has set up a payment plan of $500 a month. He claimed
he contacted creditor 1.d about the $24 debt covered by subparagraph and was told the
account could not be located. He claimed he paid the creditor 1.e and 1.f debts in full.
And he claimed he would have paid more on his past-due debts but ran out of money.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 37-year-old inspector of a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted are incorporated herein.
Additional findings will follow. 
Background
Applicant has never married and has no children. He attended electronics
engineering classes at a technical institute between December 2009 and March 2012 but
has not to date obtained a degree or diploma. (GE 1; Tr. 71-72) He is currently taking
classes to complete his Associate’s degree. (Tr. 72) He claimed no military service.
Applicant currently resides with his parents. (Tr. 38)
Applicant has worked for his current employer since March 2014 as a forklift
operator. (GE 1; Tr. 39) He worked for assorted employers between June 2005 and
November 2013.  He reported recurrent periods of unemployment between January 2004
and March 2014. (GE 1; Tr. 37, 40) During these unemployment periods, he survived on
monies earned from low-paying odd jobs. (Tr. 37, 40-41)
3
Applicant’s finances
Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts between 2012 and 2014
while partially employed. (GEs 1-4) Altogether, Applicant accumulated six delinquent
debts exceeding $20,000. Most of these debts represented delinquent student loans
totaling $14,129 (creditor 1.a) and medical debts totaling $6,750 (creditors 1.b and 1.c).
(GEs 2-4 and AEs A, C, and G;Tr. 43) 
Applicant’s student loans with creditor 1.a were dispensed between December
2009 and March 2012, and are comprised of 13 individual student loans totaling $28,156
(loans 1-13). Each of these 13 student loans were Government-subsidized in whole or in
part with Pell Grants and are documented with payment histories. (AEs C and G; Tr. 43-
44) The parts of the loans that were not subsidized (totaling $9,234) remained Applicant’s
personal responsibility and accrued annual interest at varying rates.  For the first two
years of their creation, the loans were deferred. (Tr. 47) By 2015, his deferments had
ended, and he became responsible for making monthly payments on the loans. (Tr. 47) In
December 2015, he completed a payment plan with creditor 1.a covering the individual
loans.  Under the terms of his payment plan, he pays a total of $281 a month on two
separate consolidated loans. (AEs C and G; Tr. 48-49, 61-63)
Applicant’s two medical debts were incurred between January 2011 and January
2012. (GEs 3-4) He attributed the debts to medical expenses associated with his 2013
testing for kidney transplant compatibility with his father. (Tr. 64-67) His father was
diagnosed with diabetes in the mid-2000s that required treatment for kidney disease. (Tr.
GE 2; Tr. 33) His father’s treatments included dialysis which was not fully covered by
insurance and placed ensuing financial strains on his entire family. (Tr. 33-35) While his
father eventually received a kidney transplant after spending six years on the waiting list,
Applicant did not provide a good match and was not accepted as a kidney donor. (Tr. 34-
36) 
Applicant could not recall receiving any hospital billings following his testing
procedures. (Tr. 64-65)  Initially, he understood that the medical procedures performed on
him to ascertain his suitability as a kidney donor were covered by his father’s medical
insurance. (Tr. 58) He later learned in his 2014 interview with an agent of the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) that his testing procedures were not covered. (Tr. 58)  In
his attempted checks with his father’s transplant coordinators following his OPM
interview, he never received any follow-up response. (Tr. 63) So, at this point, it remains
unclear whether (a) Applicant’s medical testing procedures were covered by insurance,
and (b) whether the medical bills belong to Applicant or his father with the same name.
(GEs 3-4; Tr. 60-61)
Relying on only odd jobs between 2007 and 2013, Applicant encountered
difficulties covering the medical expenses as the only working member in his family able
to assume his father’s accrued medical debts. (Tr. 36-37) The accrued expenses totaled
$6,750 and are covered by creditors 1.b and 1.c. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 61-62) Applicant’s
4
remaining debts entail a small school debt of $24 that the creditor (creditor 1.d) could not
locate (GEs 2-4 and AE D) and two utility bills for $543 and $275, respectively, that are
covered by subparagraphs 1,e and 1.f. (GEs 2-4; Tr. 51-52) Credit reports reveal that
these utility accounts were created in 2012 (creditor 1.f) and 2014 (creditor 1.e).
Full satisfaction of Applicant’s student loan debts are documented by his
evidentiary submissions. (AEs C and G) His medical debt history reflects payments
totaling approximately $1,922 between December 2015 and May 2016, leaving a balance
due of $5,125 as of May 6, 2016. (AE B) Under his repayment agreement, Applicant is
committed to making $500 monthly payments to the collection agent of creditors 1.b and
1.c between May 2016 and February 2017 to discharge both debts. (AE B; Tr. 61-63)
Applicant also documented payment of his utility bills that no longer appear on his credit
report. (AEs A and E-F) These remaining debts are fully satisfied.
Character References
Applicant is well-regarded by his employer’s facility security officer (FSO) who is
familiar with Applicant’s financial issues. She credited him with doing all he could do to
resolve his debts and stabilize his finances. (Tr. 76-81) Other colleagues describe
Applicant as a responsible professional who has seized responsibility for his debts. (Tr.
85-95) His sister extolled his efforts to pay the listed debts associated with his father’s
pursuit of a kidney transplant. And she praised his financial commitments to his family to
support their personal needs with the $1,200 monthly remainder he retains. (Tr. 79-80) 
                      Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and any of the
"[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on
the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
5
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
6
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  E. O. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of accruing delinquent
accounts between 2010 and 2015. His debts consist primarily of delinquent student
loans and medical debts associated with testing procedures designed to determine his
donor suitability. His history of delinquent debts warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to recurrent periods of unemployment,
low-paying jobs, and misunderstandings over payment responsibility for the testing
procedures arranged to ascertain Applicant’s suitability as a kidney donor for his father.
His problems merit application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” His financial affairs have
improved considerably in the past two years with his income increases from his current
employment, which have enabled him to fully address his listed debts. 
Over the course of the last two years, Applicant has reached out to his listed
creditors and addressed his debts with both pay-offs and payment plans. His efforts
reflect responsible payment efforts under all of the circumstances considered and
enable him to apply the full benefits of MC ¶ 20(b). His repayment efforts also enable
him to invoke MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” to the facts of his case. Prospects for his fulfilling
the payment conditions of his payment agreement with creditors 1.b and 1.c are good.
7
Based on the evidence presented, Applicant is able to demonstrate the level of
financial progress required to meet the criteria established by the Appeal Board for
assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with responsible
efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd.
Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant’s considerable efforts taken to pay or otherwise resolve his
listed debts with the resources available to him enable him to meet the Appeal Board’s
requirements for demonstrating financial stability. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd.
May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing
ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). 
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant provided character references from
his FSO, co-workers, and sister who know him and vouch for his dependability and
trustworthiness. Applicant’s documented payment efforts are substantial and enable him
to demonstrate the level of trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment required to
meet minimum security clearance eligibility criteria. 
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s delinquent debt
accruals and his substantial repayment efforts, his actions to date in addressing his
finances are sufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline
governing his finances. Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f of Guideline F.
 Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.f:                  For Applicant
Conclusio  n  s                            
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
