 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03527 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E, 
personal conduct, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations, and E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 8, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On February 19, 2016, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
 
2 
 
 
and it was received on March 7, 2016. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
receipt of the FORM. The Government’s documents are identified as Items 1 through 4. 
Applicant provided documents within the time period. Applicant’s documents were 
marked as AE A through P. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, but 
did provide corrections in AE A, regarding biographical information that was incorrect in 
his personal subject interview (Item 3).1 The case was assigned to me on August 26, 
2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He denied SOR ¶¶ 2.a 
and 2.b. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old. He served in the military from 1972 until 1978 and 
received an honorable discharge. He earned an associate’s degree in 1977. Applicant 
had two prior marriages before marrying again in 1981. He and his wife divorced in 
2004 and remarried in 2007. He has one adult child. He has been employed by a 
federal contractor since 2003.2  
 
 The SOR alleges in ¶ 1.a ($125,122), a debt in collection. A credit bureau report 
from March 2015 lists this debt as a second mortgage that has been charged off.3 
Applicant admitted this debt in his answer to the SOR.4 He provided a credit report from 
March 2016 that does not reflect this debt. He also provided an email from his wife that 
appears to be a credit report also from March 2016 that does not list the debt. He did 
not provide any other evidence to document what actions he may have taken to dispute 
or resolve this debt.5  
 
The SOR alleges a debt in ¶ 1.b ($109,000) on an account placed for collection. 
No documents were provided by the Government to substantiate this debt.6  
 
 Applicant provided a confusing answer to the SOR and response to the FORM. I 
was able to decipher some of the facts that I believe Applicant is attempting to provide. 
                                                          
1 AE K consists of multiple documents that Applicant received from the Government. He sent them back 
with his response to the FORM. AE M is the same credit report the Government submitted as Item 4. AE 
P is a copy of the Directive and Applicant’s security clearance application (SCA).  
 
2 Item 2; AE A. 
 
3 Items 1, 4. 
 
4 Item 1. 
 
5 I am unable to determine if this is a copy of a complete credit report. 
 
6 Item 4; AE L, N. 
 
3 
 
 
It appears in 2006, Applicant’s brother deeded Property A to him for $20,000. There is 
no receipt or document showing the monetary transaction. The title of Property A was 
quit claimed to Applicant. A statement from his brother indicates that he sold the house 
to Applicant, transferred the deed of title, but did not transfer the lien, so the loan on the 
property remained in the brother’s name.7 Applicant’s answer to the SOR includes a 
statement from his realtor at the time. The realtor indicated that Applicant and his wife 
purchased Property B and needed the equity in Property A to secure the loan to make 
the purchase. Apparently, Applicant obtained some type of “bridge loan” from the 
mortgage lender in SOR ¶ 1.b, which allowed him to borrow on the equity of Property A. 
It is unclear how Applicant obtained this loan if he was not the owner of the original 
loan, which is his brother. The value of Property A declined due to the housing market 
at the time. Applicant was advised to stop making the mortgage payments on Property 
A.8 At some point, Property A was foreclosed. Applicant indicated this was an illegal 
foreclosure.  
 
 Applicant stated in his response to the FORM that his brother’s original mortgage 
loan on Property A is no longer enforceable because it was a second mortgage and is 
barred from collection under state law. Applicant also notes that the statute of limitations 
has expired on these debts.  
 
A review of the documents provided by Applicant shows he signed a deed of 
trust on Property A for $109,000 with the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b in May 2007, agreeing to 
make monthly payments on this note. It is unknown if this debt was transferred to a 
different lender and its status. Credit reports provided by the Government and by 
Applicant do not reflect this debt, despite Applicant admitting it.9  
 
Applicant completed a SCA in March 2014. Under Section 26 he was asked: 
“Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts-Other than previously listed, have any of the 
following happened? In the last seven years, you had bills or debts turned over to a 
collection agency?” Applicant responded “no.” 10 The Government alleged Applicant 
deliberately failed to disclose the collection accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were in 
collection. There is insufficient evidence to conclude, even if those debts were collection 
accounts that Applicant was aware of that status.11 
                                                          
7 AE B, C, D, E, G, H. 
  
8 It is unknown who provided Applicant the advice to stop making payments on the loan. There is also 
information provided that Applicant was selling Property A to his realtor’s sister before the property was 
foreclosed. 
 
99 Item 4; AE J, N. 
 
10 Item 2. 
 
11 The Government specifically alleged Applicant deliberately did not disclose the accounts were turned 
over to a collection agency.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator on April 3, 2014. During 
his interview he confirmed his “no” responses to financial questions under Section 26. 
The Government alleged Applicant provided false statements to the government 
investigator when he deliberately failed to disclose the information in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b. In his interview, Applicant discussed the real estate transaction that occurred, but 
he indicated to the investigator that he was unaware that he had any delinquent 
accounts on his credit report. There was no evidence that he was aware at that time 
that there were delinquent debts associated with this transaction. Presumably these are 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. There is a great deal of confusion regarding 
these accounts. Applicant indicated to the investigator that his realtor at the time 
advised him that everything would be taken care of. He indicated there were never any 
loan documents in his name and he was unaware of any delinquent accounts. Although 
the March 2015 credit report shows the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was charged off, there is 
insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant falsified information provided to the 
government investigator at that time. He was, however, put on notice during the 
interview and after receiving the SOR that he had a charged off account that needed to 
be resolved.   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.12 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
There is insufficient evidence to conclude the debt is SOR ¶ 1.b is in a collection 
account status. I do not have enough evidence from the Government or the Applicant to 
make a definitive finding. Therefore, I must find in favor of Applicant on this allegation. 
There is evidence that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was charged off and is unresolved. The 
above disqualifying conditions apply to that debt. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide mitigating evidence regarding the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
This debt may be unenforceable because it is a second mortgage and part of a 
foreclosure, but there is insufficient evidence to make that finding. Applicant provided 
some information about the transfer of title on Property A and his brother’s failure to 
resolve the mortgage loan on the debt. There are unresolved questions regarding how 
Applicant used the equity in Property A to obtain a loan to purchase Property B, when 
there was a lien in his brother’s name on Property A. I was not provided sufficient 
evidence to conclude the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a was appropriately disputed and resolved. 
Moreover, Applicant was made aware that this debt was a security concern during his 
background interview, when the SOR issued, and after he reviewed his 2015 credit 
report. I am unable to untangle a convoluted real estate transaction, based on the 
 
7 
 
 
minimal evidence in the record. None of the above mitigating conditions apply to SOR ¶ 
1.a. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other government representative. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
on his SCA that he had debts that were turned over to a collection agency. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant deliberately falsified material facts when 
he was interviewed by a government investigator, by not disclosing the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Therefore, the above disqualifying conditions are not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 63 years old. He honorably served in the military. Applicant was 
involved in a real estate transaction with his brother. It is unclear if this transaction 
involves the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. It is clear from the record that this transaction 
was not completed appropriately. Furthermore, Applicant became aware there was at 
least one large debt in SOR ¶ 1.a that needed to be addressed. Although Applicant 
provided credit reports to show the debt is no longer being reported, he admitted the 
debt, but has not provided evidence regarding its resolution. A debt barred from 
enforcement by state law or the statute of limitations does not equate to acting 
responsibly and exercising good judgment for purposes of determining a security 
clearance. He failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant refuted the Guideline E, personal 
conduct security concerns, but failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
