1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-01774
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Gary Rigney, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s debts do not indicate poor judgment or a lack of trustworthiness. His
current finances are sound and do not present a security concern. His request for
continued access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
On July 5, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his work as
a consultant to a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background
investigation, which included Applicant’s responses to interrogatories from Department
  Authorized by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These3
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
2
of Defense (DOD) adjudicators,  it could not be determined that it was clearly consistent1
with the national interest for Applicant to continue to hold a security clearance.2
On December 23, 2013, DOD adjudicators issued to Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed under the
adjudicative guideline  for financial considerations (Guideline F). On January 6, 2014,3
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on May 13, 2014, and I convened a hearing on
June 18, 2014. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4. Applicant testified and presented
Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - E. All exhibits were admitted without objection. Two
witnesses testified for Applicant. I held the record open after the hearing to receive from
Applicant additional relevant information. The record closed on July 9, 2014, after
Applicant elected not to proffer additional information. DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on June 23, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $84,562 for four
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.d). Applicant denied SOR 1.a, claiming it is a
disputed debt for a defective cell phone returned in 2011. He admitted, with
explanations, the SOR 1.b - 1.d allegations. Based on all available information, I make
the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 74 years old. He has worked in various capacities within the defense
industry since 1962. For most of his career, he has held a security clearance up to top
secret, as well as access to special compartmented information (SCI) and other special
access program (SAP) clearances. He has always handled classified information
properly and has an excellent reputation for professionalism and trustworthiness. His
2011 security clearance application constitutes a new request as a previous clearance
had lapsed in about 2009. He requires a clearance for work as an independent
consultant to a defense contractor, who retained Applicant in June 2011. However, he
has not worked in that position since January 2012, when an interim clearance based
on his July 2011 EQIP was rescinded. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Tr. 6, 24 - 25, 51, 56 - 71)
Applicant and his wife have been married since April 1961. They raised four
children, now between the ages of 44 and 52. Applicant and his wife have lived in the
same house since 1988. In 1967, he earned a master’s degree in mathematics, and in
3
1968, he was hired as an engineer by the Department of the Army, where he worked
until 1984. Thereafter, Applicant worked directly and indirectly for various defense
contractors. He also has consulted for United States Senate committees on legislation
related to defense, space, and intelligence issues. Pending adjudication of this matter,
Applicant’s only employment is as an adjunct professor at a nearby state university.
(Answer; Gx. 1; Ax. A; Tr. 64 - 71)
When Applicant submitted his EQIP, he disclosed a past-due debt for an unpaid
cell phone account. In 2011, Applicant opened a cell phone account and purchased a
new phone. Because the phone did not work, Applicant sent it back within the allotted
time and believed his obligation was ended at that point. However, the cell phone
company demanded $300 for early termination of his contract. Applicant has, at all
times, disputed this debt and does not intend to pay it. The account was listed in a 2011
credit report as being disputed. Applicant also provided information showing he returned
the phone. Applicant has not heard from the cell phone company or any collection
agency in almost four years. (Answer; Gx. 1 - 3; Ax. B; Tr. 34 - 35)
Applicant’s youngest child has a master’s degree and a doctorate. She is a
successful medical professional who taught at a state medical college and now works
for a pharmaceutical company. She financed her graduate studies through student
loans co-signed by Applicant in 2005 and 2007. When Applicant was interviewed by a
Government investigator during his background investigation in July 2011, he was
confronted with a credit report showing, as alleged in SOR 1.c and 1.d, that both
student loans were delinquent. Before his current application for clearance, Applicant
occasionally had been contacted by the student loan creditors when his daughter was
behind on her payments. However, to the best of his knowledge, she made the
necessary payments to bring her student loans up to date. Applicant has had no other
contact with the student loan creditors since 2011. In March 2014, Applicant wrote to
those creditors seeking information about the status of his daughter’s student loans and
offering to pay what he could. There has been no response. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 4; Ax. D;
Tr. 27 - 28, 30)
In 2009, Applicant also co-signed a car loan with his youngest child. However, as
alleged at SOR 1.b, the loan became delinquent when she failed to pay as required.
The car was repossessed in 2007. Applicant assumed it was resold and made inquiries
through his attorney about any remaining deficiency to be paid. There was no response
and Applicant has not heard from the lender in at least four years. In March 2014,
Applicant wrote to the lender seeking information about the debt and offering to pay
what he could. There has been no response. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 4; Ax. C; Tr. 30 - 34)
Pending final adjudication of his clearance, Applicant’s income is limited to his
adjunct professor’s monthly salary of about $1,000, monthly social security benefits for
him and his wife, and income from a reverse mortgage based on the equity in their
home. Before his interim clearance was rescinded in 2012, he was earning in excess of
$100,000 annually. Currently, Applicant and his wife have $3,350 in net monthly
income. They have about $350 remaining after expenses each month. He and his wife
 See Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
4
live a modest and frugal lifestyle, and they have incurred no unpayable debts. Applicant
understands the ramifications of co-signing a loan, but his daughter earns a substantial
living and is able to pay her debts. In hindsight, Applicant acknowledges he may have
spoiled his daughter, who seems to struggle with managing her own finances. (Tr. Gx.
2; Tr. 49 - 51, 53 - 54)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
5
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed at AG
¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations).
I have also concluded that the following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions apply:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
As to SOR 1.a, Applicant established that he has disputed that debt for several
years. His basis for disputing the debt is reasonable. 
Applicant understands that he might be held legally responsible for the debts he
incurred by co-signing his daughter’s loans if his daughter defaults. As to the car
repossession debt alleged at SOR 1.b, he acted reasonably by trying to contact the
lender to determine what the remainder after resale was and if he needed to pay that
debt. But the lender did not respond and, other than listing the debt in his credit report,
took no action against Applicant to collect any remainder after resale. Nor did the lender
respond to Applicant’s inquiry in March 2014. I conclude there is likely no remaining
obligation for his daughter’s car loan.
Applicant also might be legally responsible for his daughter’s student loan debts,
alleged at SOR 1.c and 1.d. However, those creditors have not contacted him in several
years and did so only to get Applicant’s help in getting his daughter to bring the loans
current. As far as Applicant knows, his daughter has done what was needed to keep
those loans current. Recent inquiries by Applicant about those loans have brought no
response.
Applicant’s current finances are sound. He and his wife live well within their
means on social security, reverse mortgage funds, and a modest adjunct professor’s
salary. Applicant has always been willing to make good on his obligations; however, he
was better able to offer substantial payments on his daughter’s debts before 2012,
when his clearance was rescinded. 
Available information reasonably supports a conclusion that the debts alleged
here are not reflective of Applicant’s judgment and trustworthiness. Nor is it likely that
his joint legal responsibility for his adult daughter’s debts would cause him to commit
illegal acts to generate funds with which to resolve those debts. He manages his
personal finances responsibly, and he has an excellent reputation in the workplace
based on his character and technical expertise. I have also assessed the available
information within the context of the whole-person. Witness testimony, a letter of
recommendation from the program manager he supports, and available information
about his lengthy career in the defense industry all show Applicant to have the requisite
integrity and reliability for access to classified information. A fair and commonsense
assessment of all of the foregoing supports a conclusion that the security concerns
raised by the Government’s information are mitigated.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
Based on this record, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
