                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
----------------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 12-02411
 )
 )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding foreign influence and financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
History of Case
On February 25, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) pursuant to Executive
Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DoD adjudicators
could not make the affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether his clearance
should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 1, 2013, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on May 8, 2014.  He timely provided additional materials in response to
the FORM.  In his supplemental response, he furnished a cover letter indicating he did
2
not wish to provide any additional materials. The case was assigned to me on June 9,
2014. 
Besides its three exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of
certain facts with respect to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan). It cited six
source documents, all official U.S. Government publications, pertaining to Afghanistan:
Afghanistan: Post-Taliban Governance, Security and U.S. Policy, CRS Report for
Congress (October 2013); Unclassified Report on Progress Toward Security and
Stability in Afghanistan, U.S. Department of Defense (November 2013); Country Reports
on Terrorism 2012, Chapter 2-Country Reports: South and Central Asia, U.S.
Department of State (May 2013); Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012:
Afghanistan, U.S. Department of State (undated);  Travel Warning: Afghanistan, U.S.
Department of State (August 2013); and Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, U.S.
Department of State (August 2013).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007).
Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well
known. See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause
shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the above-named background
reports addressing the geopolitical situation in Afghanistan. Administrative notice was
extended to the documents themselves, consistent with the provisions of Rule 201 of the
Federal Rules of Evidence. This notice did not foreclose Applicant from challenging the
accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the reports addressing
Afghanistan’s current state. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged to have a mother and two brothers who
are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to
have accumulated 15 delinquent debts exceeding $50,000. Allegedly, these debts
remain unpaid and were either charged off, are in collection, or are unpaid.  
In his response to the SOR, he admitted each of the allegations covered by
Guidelines B and F. He claimed he settled several of the listed debts and would settle
the remaining ones. He explained that he ran his own business before becoming a
linguist for a defense contractor and borrowed money from his family to start his
business.  He claimed his first priority was to pay them back, which he has done, and is
now working on settling his remaining debts.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old contract linguist for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
3
Applicant’s background
Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan to parents with Afghani citizenship
and residency. By virtue of his birth to Afghan parents, Applicant was eligible for Afghan
citizenship himself. Through his parents, he became an Afghan citizen, attended Afghani
primary and secondary schools, and earned a high school diploma in April 1996. (Item 6)
He claims no military service in either Afghanistan or the United States. (Items 6-8)  
In 1982, Applicant and his family fled Afghanistan to escape the Soviet invasion
and settled illegally in Iran between 1982 and 1994. (Item 7) After returning to
Afghanistan in 1994, Applicant was sent back to Iran by his family in 1997 to escape the
Taliban. (Item 7) After a brief stay, he returned to Afghanistan in November 1998. (Item
7) Between December 1998 and June 2001, he was granted refugee status in Turkey
through the United Nations’ (UN) refugee program. (Item 7) While living in Turkey, he did
not work, but drew financial support from the UN’s refugee program. (Item 7) 
Applicant immigrated to the United States from Afghanistan in June 2003 for a
better life, to include freedom of worship, better employment, and educational
opportunities. (Item 8) He married in August 2008 and has two children from this
marriage. (Item 6) He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in April 2009. (Item 6) He has a
U.S. passport, which was issued in April 2011 and expires in April 2012. (Item 7)  
When Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen, his Afghan passport was
canceled and his Afghan citizenship was renounced. (Item 7) His current wife was born
in Afghanistan, holds dual Afghan-Dutch citizenship, and is a U.S. permanent resident.
(Items 6-8) She has expressed interest in becoming a U.S. citizen, but to date, has not
applied for U.S. citizenship.
 
Applicant’s father, previously a citizen and resident of Afghanistan, passed away
in 1990. (Item 8) But Applicant still has immediate family members who are citizens and
residents of Afghanistan: his mother and two brothers. His mother was born in
Afghanistan in 1951. Applicant maintains monthly contact with her by telephone and
mail, but has not seen her in 15 or years. (Item 8) 
Applicant’s mother has no known affiliation with a foreign government or military,
and she has never inquired about his work in the defense industry. (Item 8) Of
Applicant’s two brothers who reside in Afghanistan, one is a college student; while the
other attends high school. (Item 8) Applicant maintains monthly contact with both
brothers by phone and mail. Neither is aware of Applicant’s work in the defense industry,
and neither has inquired about his work. (Item 8) 
Before opening his bakery business in 2011, he annually transmitted funds
between $500 and $600 through Western Union on a regular basis to his mother and
brothers to help them with his living expenses. (Item 7) Since opening his bakery, he has
not sent them any money.   
4
Country information on Afghanistan
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is sometimes referred to as the
crossroads of Central Asia. Since the British relinquished control of Afghanistan in
August 1919, Afghanistan has been an independent state. Between 1919 and 1973,
Afghanistan moved away from its longstanding isolation under a succession of Muslim
rulers: King Amanullah (1919-1929), Nadir Khan (1929-1933), and Mohammad Zahir
Shah (Nadir Khan’s 19-year-old son), who ruled Afghanistan for over 40 years (1933-
1973). See Background Note: Afghanistan, at 1-2, U.S. Department of State (November
2011).
Prime Minister Sardar Mohammad Daoud (between 1953 and 1963) mounted a
military coup in 1973 and seized power amid charges of corruption and malfeasance
against Zahir Shah and his royal family. (Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 2)
Daoud proceeded to abolish the monarchy, abrogate the constitution, and declare
Afghanistan a republic. His economic and social reforms contributed little, however, to
stabilizing political conditions in the country.   
Following a Soviet-supported overthrow and assassination of Daoud in April 1978,
a Marxist government was formed with the backing of the Soviets. See Background
Note: Afghanistan, supra; Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra. Sur
Muhammad Taraki was installed as the country’s president of the revolutionary council.
Opposition to the Taraki government increased as many members of Afghan elites,
religious establishments, and intelligentsia were imprisoned, tortured, or murdered. A
revolt against the Marxist government occurred in the summer of 1978 and quickly
spread into a countrywide insurgency.  (Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 3)
Soviet invasion
Seeking to take advantage of the unrest following the April 1978 coup, the Soviet
Union quickly signed a bilateral treaty of friendship and cooperation with the new Afghan
regime and increased its military assistance to the regime. See Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra; Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra. Faced with a
deteriorating security situation, the Soviets invaded Afghanistan in December 1979,
killed the Afghan ruler, and, backed by 120,000 Soviet troops, installed Babrak Karmal
(an exiled leader of the Parcham faction) as the country’s prime minister.  (Background
Note: Afghanistan, supra)
Afghan freedom fighters (mujahideen) who opposed the Karmal communist
regime, armed with increased weapons and training assistance from the U.S. and its
allies, collaborated with other Peshawar-based guerilla groups in the 1980s to destabilize
the Karmal regime. See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra. The resistance
movement eventually led to an agreement known as the Geneva Accords (signed by the
front-line states of Pakistan and Afghanistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union).
The agreement served to ensure that Soviet forces withdrew from the country in
accordance with their expressed commitments in February 1989. (Id.)
5
Ascendency of the Taliban  
By the mid-1990s, the Taliban had risen to power in reaction to the anarchy and
increase of warlords in the aftermath of the withdrawal of Soviet forces.  (Background
Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 3-4)  Many of the Taliban had been educated in madrassas
in Pakistan with roots in rural Pashtun areas of the country. See Country Specific
Information: Afghanistan, supra  Beginning with its capture of Kandahar in 1994, the
Taliban mounted an aggressive expansion of its control throughout Afghanistan. By the
end of 1998, its forces occupied almost 90 percent of the country, and reduced its
opposition largely to a small sections of the northeast and the Panshir valley. (id.)   
Bolstered by its imposition of an extreme interpretation of Islam on the entire
country, the Taliban committed massive human rights violations (particularly directed at
women and children), and committed serious atrocities against minority populations. See
Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 4. From the mid-1990s, the Taliban provided
sanctuary to Osama bin Laden, and provided a base of operations for his and other
terrorist organizations. (Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra)  Bin Laden and
his Al-Qaida group are known to have provided financial and political support to the
Taliban, and acknowledged their responsibility for the September 11, 2001 terrorist
attacks against the United States.   (id.) 
Beginning in October 2001 (following the Taliban’s refusal to expel bin Laden), the
United States and its coalition partners initiated a military campaign, targeting terrorist
facilities and Taliban military and political assets within Afghanistan. U.S. military and
anti-Taliban forces routed the Taliban and caused their rapid disintegration. After the fall
of Kabul in November 2001, a UN-sponsored conference was created to restore stability
and governance in Afghanistan. See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
From this conference emerged a Transitional Authority headed by President Hamid
Karzai. This authority (renamed the Transitional Islamic State of Afghanistan) was
charged with the responsibility of drafting a constitution. (id.)
While the core insurgent faction in Afghanistan remains the Taliban movement,
other militant factions present security challenges to the United States and the allied
government of Afghanistan.  One militant faction cited by U.S. officials as a particularly
potent threat to Afghan security is the “Haqqani Network,” which the Obama
Administration reported to Congress in September 2012 as an organization that meets
the criteria for FTO [Foreign Terrorist Organization] designation. See Afghanistan: Post-
Taliban Governance, Security and U.S. Policy, supra, at 15-17; Administrative Notice,
supra, at 2)  Other groups designated by the Administration as FTOs include a Pakistani
group, known as the Pakistani Taliban, that supports the Afghan Taliban from both sides
of the Afghan-Pakistani border and another Pakistani group known as the Lakshar-e-
Taryyiba (LET) that is increasingly active inside Afghanistan. (id.)   
A new constitution was drafted and ratified by a constitutional loyal jirga on
January 4, 2004. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 4-5; Country Specific
Information: Afghanistan, supra. The Afghan constitution provides for indirect election of
6
the National Assembly’s upper house by the provincial councils and by reserved
presidential appointments. On December 4, 2004, the country was renamed the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan.  (id.) Hamid Karzai was sworn in as Afghanistan’s President on
December 7, 2004. (id.) He presided over the new government’s first convened
parliament in late 2005. Presidential and provincial elections in Afghanistan for 2010
were  coordinated by the Afghanistan Independent Election Commission (IEC), with
assistance from the UN. (id.) Challenged presidential election results in 2010 have not
been widely disseminated.  See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
Political conditions in Afghanistan
A new democratic government assumed control of Afghanistan in 2004 following a
popular election. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra. While the national
government has continued to expand its authority, it has been hampered in its ability to
deliver necessary social services and remains dependent on U.S.-led assistance. See
Unclassified Report on Progress Toward Security and Stability in Afghanistan, supra.
With its international community support at work, its ability to secure its borders and
maintain internal order is increasing. Although the Taliban-led insurgency in Afghanistan
has lost ground in some areas, it remains resilient and capable of challenging U.S. and
NATO goals. See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
International  terrorists, fueled by Taliban and Al Qaida support, continue to assert
power and intimidation within the country. See Afghanistan: Post-Taliban Governance,
Security and U.S. Policy, supra, at 13-14.  Safety and security remain key concerns
because these terrorist organizations continue to target U.S. and Afghan interests by
suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, car-jackings, assaults, and hostage-
taking. See Country Reports on Terrorism 2010, supra, at 9-10; Country Specific
Information, Afghanistan, supra, at 2-3. Risks of terrorist activity remain extremely high at
the present time. See Administrative Notice, supra, at 2-4
Human rights conditions in Afghanistan remain poor by all reported accounts.
State Department reports confirm active insurgent activity in Afghanistan.  See  Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012: Afghanistan, supra, at 1-3. No section of
Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence. See Travel Warnings, Afghanistan, supra.
Kabul, in particular, has experienced increased militant attacks in recent years, including
rocket attacks, vehicle-borne IEDs, and suicide bombings. (id.)  Foreigners throughout
the country continue to be targeted for violent attacks and kidnappings: some motivated
by terrorism, and others by common criminal activity.  See Country Specific Information:
Afghanistan, supra.
To date, Afghanistan has still not been able to build effective, honest, and loyal
provincial and district institutions and lacks a coherent tribal engagement strategy for
unifying the country. Besides being subject to Afghan laws, Afghan-Americans may also
be subject to other laws that impose special obligations on Afghan citizens. See Country
Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra, at 6. U.S. citizens who are also Afghan
nationals do not require visas for entry into Afghanistan. 
7
Likewise, for U.S. passport holders born in Afghanistan, a visa is not required for
entry. For these individuals, the Embassy of Afghanistan issues a letter confirming
nationality for entry into Afghanistan. (id., at 2) The Afghan drug trade remains a major
source of revenue for corrupt officials, the Taliban, and other insurgent groups who
conduct operations in the country. See id. at 8-9; Country Reports on Terrorism 2012,
Chapter 2-Country Reports: South and Central Asia, supra.
U.S.-Afghanistan relations
Since the fall of the Taliban, the United States has supported the creation of a
broad-based government in Afghanistan, and has made a long-term commitment to help
Afghanistan reconstitute and rebuild following years of war and unstable governments.
See U.S. Relations with Afghanistan, at 1-2, U.S. Department of State (September
2013). At the July 2012 Tokyo Conference, the United States and other international
partners committed to continue providing development assistance to Afghanistan
through the 2014 transition and the ensuing transformational decade. (id.) Through the
Tokyo Mutual Accountability framework, the United States and other international donors
committed to providing Afghanistan $16 billion in aid through 2015 and continuing
assistance at levels commensurate with the last decade through 2017. 
The United States and its coalition partners in the international community
currently provide important humanitarian assistance, capacity-building, security
protection, counter-narcotic programs, and infrastructure projects. The United States has
also brought important political influence to bear on the establishment of durable
democratic principles that promote the rule of law and encourage transparent and
accountable forms of government. See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
Efforts are currently underway to improve Afghanistan’s business climate (inclusive of
measures designed to strengthen the country’s regulatory and legal framework) to attract
foreign trade and investment.  (U.S. Relations with Afghanistan, supra)
The United States also supports the Afghanistan government’s commitment to the
protection of women’s rights, human rights, and religious tolerance. (U.S. Relations with
Afghanistan, supra) Educational advancements by 2009 reflect increased female
enrollment of 37 percent of the student population in Afghan schools and similar
advances in the number of female teachers. (Country Specific Information: Afghanistan,
supra) 
Applicant’s finances
Following his immigration from the United States in June 2003, Applicant was
unemployed for seven months (i.e., from June 2003 to December 2003).  He used these
first few months to integrate himself into American society with learning skills designed to
acclimate him to American life and customs. During this time, he received financial
support from various U.S. agencies until he was able to find work.
8
Between 2004 and 2009, Applicant worked for a bakery and made decent wages.
(Item 8) While employed, he purchased two vehicles: one (a new Nissan Rouge) he
purchased in 2007 for $30,737. (Item 8) After his employer reduced his wages (from
$4,500 a month to $3,000 a month), Applicant fell behind in his payments. By the time
the vehicle was repossessed in 2010, he had paid approximately $17,000 on his car loan
and was about $6,000 behind in his payments. (Items 8 and 9).  After the vehicle was
sold at public auction, Applicant was left with a $6,000 deficiency balance according to
his credit reports. With accumulated interest, the deficiency has grown on the loan
balance to about $12,464. (Items 8 and 9) 
In June 2009, Applicant purchased a second vehicle (a Ford Mustang), this one
for his stepson. (Item 8) He paid over $30,000 for the vehicle and financed his purchase
with a local lender. When the stepson failed to make any payments on the vehicle as
promised, Applicant fell behind on the car loan. (Items 8, 10, and 11) In May 2010, the
vehicle was repossessed, leaving a deficiency balance of $17,080 after the sale of the
vehicle. Applicant has never made any payments on the loan and disputes the balance
owing. (Item 8) He claims he was never notified of any due residual payments. (Item 8) 
Besides the two repossessions, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent
debts between 2009 and 2010. Most of them were consumer or medical-related. (Items
8, 10, and 11) Between 2005 and 2007, he opened a number of consumer accounts that
he failed to maintain after his income was reduced in the 2009 time-frame. His
delinquent debts entail consumer accounts with the following creditors: medical debts
with creditors 1.a-1.c and 1.k ($156, $270, $2,621,and $2,510, respectively); consumer
debts with creditors 1.d-1.g and 1.l-1.o ($1,649, $178, $1,493, $926, $274, $1,892, $321,
and $439, respectively); and car loans with creditors 1.h and 1.i ($12,464 and $17,080,
respectively).
Applicant attributed his financial problems to losing his job three years ago.
Because Applicant is the only income earner in his household, his loss of work placed
additional strains on his family’s budget. (Item 7) However, since 2009, Applicant has
maintained full-time jobs for all but about nine months (i.e., October 2011 through June
2012). During this period of sustained full-time employment, he experienced only one
reported work reduction (i.e., in 2010).  
In 2011, Applicant financed his start-up bakery business with funds he received
from his sale of three cars, loans from his father-in-law ($25,000) and $5,000 to $6,000
in loaned funds from a friend. (Item 7, at 10) He earned approximately $1,800 a month
from this business (netting $1,666 a month) for the few months of his business
operations and reported monthly expenses of $2,700. (Items 6 and 7) He reported a
negative monthly remainder of almost $1,100. (Item 6)
Applicant presented no evidence of credit counseling or debt consolidation
initiatives. (Item 7) He provided no evidence either of individual payment plans approved
by any of the creditors listed in the SOR.
9
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide any endorsements or personnel evaluations. Records do
not document any security violations or reprimands since joining his defense contractor
in 2012. (Items 6-8) His deployments placed him in combat zones in Afghanistan.
Policies
The AGs for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (effective
September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by administrative judges in the
decision-making process covering DOHA cases. These Guidelines require the
administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating
Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be
granted, continued or denied. The Guidelines do not require the administrative judge to
assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
10
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.” (AG B ¶ 6)
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.” (AG F ¶ 18)
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue
an Applicant's request for a security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
11
Analysis
Born and raised in Afghanistan, Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2003
and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2009. He received his formal education in
Afghanistan and is currently married with two minor children, both with U.S. residence
and citizenship status. Applicant is a contract interpreter assigned to a deployed U.S.
Army unit. 
Security concerns focus on Applicant’s mother and two brothers, who are citizens
and residents of Afghanistan and his contacts with these family members. Other security
concerns center on Applicant’s accumulated delinquent debts, none of which he has
recently addressed.
Foreign Influence concerns
By virtue of the Afghan citizenship and residency status of Applicant’s immediate
family members in Afghanistan and the frequent contacts he maintains with them,
Applicant manifests close working relationships with his family and an abiding interest in
their welfare. Potential heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition (DC)
¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend,
or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,”
of the AGs for foreign influence apply to Applicant’s situation.
To be sure, none of Applicant’s family members residing in Afghanistan are
employed by the Afghan government or have any known relationships with Afghan
government or military officials. As a result, DC ¶ 7(b), “connection to a foreign person,
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information,” has no
application to Applicant’s situation. Still, the citizenship and residence status of
Applicant’s mother and brothers in Afghanistan impose heightened risks because of the
political and economic instability that currently pervades the country. Despite their
improved bilateral trade and security relations, Afghanistan’s unsettling political and
economic conditions cannot be fully reconciled with U.S. security interests.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general. What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be
weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing in the supplied
materials and country information about Afghanistan. Quite clearly, the geopolitical aims
and policies of the particular foreign regime operating in Afghanistan does matter. The
Appeal Board has been clear and consistent in its holdings that the nature of the foreign
government, the intelligence-gathering history of that government, and the presence of
12
terrorist activity in the country are material to a foreign influence case.  See ISCR Case
No. 07-07266 (App. Bd. Dec. June 27, 2008); ISCR Case No. 02-26130 (App. Bd. Dec.
Dec. 7, 2006). 
Afghanistan’s bilateral relations with the United States over the past half-century
have been uneven and sometimes contentious. Afghanistan has extensive terrorist
networks operating within its borders. Extremist groups operating within Afghanistan
continue to target Americans and other western interests, as well as high-level
Afghanistan government officials and members of minority, indigenous, and religious
groups. Despite increased efforts by Afghan security forces, al-Qaida terrorists, Afghan
militants, foreign insurgents, and Pakistani militant groups that support the Afghan
Taliban from both sides of the Afghan-Pakistani border are increasingly active in
Afghanistan and plan attacks against the United States and its allies in Afghanistan.
Applicant’s communications with his mother and brothers in Afghanistan are
frequent. Although Applicant has not seen his mother in 15 years, there is a rebuttable
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, his immediate family
members. ISCR Case No. 01-03120, at 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 2002). Having  immediate
family members residing in Afghanistan is not alone disqualifying. However, in
Applicant’s case, his having immediate family members residing in a heightened-risk
country like Afghanistan is enough to create the potential for foreign influence and an
ensuing compromise of classified information.  See, generally, ISCR Case No. 03-02382,
at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 2001).
Based on his case-specific circumstances, both MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the United
States,” and MC ¶  8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the United States, that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in
favor of the U.S. interest,” are potentially applicable to Applicant’s situation. His
circumstances, though, do not warrant any more than minimal application. See infra. 
Applicant has enjoyed U.S. citizenship only since 2009 and maintains close
relationships, bound by presumed ties of affection, with his mother and two younger
brothers in Afghanistan. Until recently, he provided financial support to his family
members, and can be expected to resume his payments when his finances permit.
Because so little is known about his mother and brothers in Afghanistan, his frequent
contacts with them cannot be minimized. Simply not enough is known about Applicant’s
family members in Afghanistan to facilitate safe predictions about how he would likely
respond were his family members to be placed in a pressure situation.
13
MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation,” has little applicability based on Applicant’s own reported contacts with his
family members in Afghanistan. None of the other mitigating conditions covered by
Guideline B are applicable to Applicant’s situation. None of Applicant’s foreign contacts
with his mother and brothers in Afghanistan can be considered casual or infrequent. And
there is no proof of any prior self-reporting of his family contacts in Afghanistan to
warrant any meaningful consideration.  
Whole-person assessment cannot minimize Applicant’s exposure to conflicts of
interests with his Afghan family members. In Applicant’s case, the potential risk of
coercion, pressure, or influence being brought to bear on him and his immediate family
members in Afghanistan are still too substantial to absolve him of security concerns.
Although his linguist contributions to the military unit he has been assigned to during his
deployments have been considerable and worthy of respect and appreciation, they are
not enough to overcome the heightened risks associated with his close relationships with
his family members residing in Afghanistan. 
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's relations with
his mother and brothers residing in Afghanistan are insufficiently mitigated to permit safe
predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence
attributable to his familial relationships in Afghanistan. Neither his own citizenship and
residence in the United States nor those of his mother and brothers in Afghanistan are
safely insulated from risks of coercion, pressure, or influence by Afghan authorities or
terrorists. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraph 1.a of Guideline B.
Financial concerns
Security concerns are also raised under the financial considerations guideline.
Applicant’s accumulation of a number of delinquent debts and his failure to mount any
meaningful effort to resolve the 15 debts listed in the SOR warrant the application of two
of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs for financial considerations: ¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and ¶ 19(c)  “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”  
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant claims to have paid several of the listed debts,
but provided no documentation to validate his claims. Nor did he furnish any
documentation of his pursuing financial counseling, establishing payment plans with his
creditors, or addressing his remaining charged-off and collection accounts. Without any
evidence of counseling and sustained payments on his remaining debts, Applicant may
not take advantage of MC ¶ 20(c) “the person has received or is receiving counseling for
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.” 
14
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are explicit in financial cases (as here) and bring
into play security concerns covered by the financial considerations guideline. 
Based on the limited information available in this administrative record, it appears
that Applicant has not been in a financial position to make any concerted progress in
addressing most of his debts to date. Under these exhibited circumstances, MC ¶ 20(b)
of the financial considerations guideline, “the conditions that resulted in the behavior
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the
individual acted responsibility,” has some applicability to Applicant’s inability to resolve
his debt issues. MC ¶ 20(b) cannot be fully applied, however, due to the lack of sufficient
information from Applicant on the origination, payment history, and attempted repayment
efforts since receiving the SOR.   
Gainfully employed on a full-time basis for most of the time since 2009 and no
cited unemployment periods since June 2012, Applicant could reasonably be expected
to have initiated more timely and material repayment efforts with the resources available
to him from his deployment assignments in 2012. Without any sizeable payment track
record to look to, it is still too soon to mitigate his historical difficulties with his finances,
given the lack of any significant repayment progress he has been able to demonstrate to
date with most of his listed creditors.
Whole-person assessment of Applicant’s financial problems is hampered by the
limited amount of information supplied in this administrative record.  Applicant is able to
show some extenuating circumstances associated with his period of unemployment in
2011 and 2012. And his linguist services on deployments with the U.S. Army are
respected and worthy of considerable appreciation.
Applicant’s lack of demonstrated corrective steps in addressing his incurred debts
with the available income sources available to him reflect questionable resolve and
accountability. Taken together, Applicant’s lack of corrective steps to improve his
finances reflect continuing lapses in his overall judgment and still leaves doubts about
the stability of his finances at the present time. These doubts cannot be reconciled with
minimum requirements for retaining the Government’s confidence in his financial
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. 
Applicant fails to mitigate security concerns related to his outstanding debt
delinquencies and judgment lapses associated therein. Unfavorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the allegations covered by the financial considerations guideline.
15
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE):         AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a:         Against Applicant
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):    AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas  2a-2o:        Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security
clearance.   Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
