 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-03431 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Phillip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 29, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2014. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on June 19, 2014, 
scheduling the hearing for July 15, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
2 
Applicant testified but he did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 23, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
her current employer since 2000. He is applying for eligibility to hold a public trust 
position. He is a high school graduate and he attended some college courses, but he 
did not obtain a degree. He has never married and he has no children.1 
  
 The SOR alleges an unpaid $8,464 judgment (SOR ¶ 1.b) and three delinquent 
debts to financial institutions for $16,203 (SOR ¶ 1.a); $7,104 (SOR ¶ 1.c); and $351 
(SOR ¶ 1.d). The $7,104 debt was transferred to a collection company who obtained the 
$8,464 judgment. Applicant established that he paid the $351 debt. He admitted owing 
the two remaining debts.2 
 
 Applicant was close friends with a married couple who ran into difficult times in 
the early 2000s. Applicant took cash advances from credit card accounts and loaned 
the couple about $25,000 between 2002 and 2010. He estimated that they repaid about 
$2,000 to $3,000. Applicant’s finances suffered while he assisted his friends. The 
husband promised to repay the loans, but he passed away in 2011. Applicant received 
nothing from the estate. The wife has never repaid any of the money, and she 
essentially told Applicant that unless she wins the lottery, he will never be repaid.3 
 
 Applicant was promoted to his current position in 2010. He used the extra salary 
from the promotion to pay or settle several accounts that were not alleged in the SOR, 
including three accounts whose balances at one time totaled more than $25,000. The 
balance of the $351 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was more than $15,000 at one point. 
The December 2011 credit report listed the debt with a high credit of $21,013, a past-
due amount of $702, and a balance of $8,728. The debt was paid in full in February 
2014.4 
 
 Applicant and his sister live in a house that they own with a mortgage. She had 
significant medical problems and she was out of work for more than a year. She was 
unable to pay her share of the mortgage loan. Applicant has been paying the entire 
mortgage loan for some time, which has hindered his efforts to pay his debts. She has 
returned to work. He credibly stated that he intends to pay his delinquent debts. He has 
not received formal financial counseling.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17, 27, 41; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 17, 37-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5.  
 
3 Tr. at 17-20, 32, 38-40; GE 2-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 20-23, 27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-5. 
 
5 Tr. at 21-24, 27-32, 41-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay his 
financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that Applicant owes a bank $7,104. SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a 
judgment of $8,464 awarded to the collection company that received the debt from the 
bank. The two allegations allege the same debt. When the same conduct is alleged 
twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 
3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.c is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
5 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant permitted his finances to suffer while he helped two married friends in 
need. The husband promised to repay the loans, but he passed away in 2011. The wife 
does not appear to be willing or able to repay the loans. Applicant was promoted in 
2010, and he has been repaying his debts. He paid or settled three debts with balances 
totaling more than $25,000. He paid the $351 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, which at one 
point had a balance of more than $15,000. His sister developed significant medical 
problems, which hindered his repayment plans. She is back to work, and he credibly 
testified that he will pay his two remaining delinquent debts.  
 
  A trustworthiness adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a procedure 
designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. See ISCR 
Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as a matter 
of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only 
establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
  I find that Applicant made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. There are clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under control. They 
occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are 
applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are partially applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s stable work history, the factors that led to his financial 
problems, and the steps he has taken to remedy those problems. As indicated above, 
an applicant is not required to establish that he has paid every debt listed in the SOR. 
All that is required is that an applicant establish a plan to resolve the financial problems 
and take significant actions to implement the plan. I find that Applicant has established a 
plan to resolve his financial problems and he has taken significant action to implement 
that plan.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
