 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-05922 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Phillip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant stopped paying her mortgage after the bank told her that she would not 
qualify for a deed-back or short sale of the property if the mortgage was current. Up to 
that point, she was current on her mortgage, and had a history of financial responsibility. 
She continues to work with the bank to divest herself of the property. There is no 
evidence that she currently has a financial problem. Considering the circumstances of 
this particular case, Applicant’s delinquent mortgage does not show she lacks judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
January 19, 2012. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued her a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) 
on March 20, 2014.1 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on April 9, 2014, and 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
May 9, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of 
hearing on May 21, 2014, scheduling a hearing for June 10, 2014.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered six exhibits (GE 1 through 6). Applicant 
testified, and presented no exhibits. However, she submitted a six-page document 
attached to her Answer that was made part of the record. All exhibits were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 18, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted the SOR factual allegation. Applicant’s 
admission is hereby incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough review of all 
the evidence, including her testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the 
following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 70-year-old information technology specialist employed by a 
defense contractor. Applicant married in 1987, and she has three grown-up daughters. 
She completed her bachelor’s degree in economics in 1964. Applicant worked for her 
current employer, a defense contractor, since February 2006. As a defense contractor 
employee, she worked for five other government agencies, and possessed a top secret 
security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) from 2008 
to 2010. She currently holds a public trust position. Except for the SOR allegations, 
there is no evidence of any past or present security concerns. 
 
In 2004, Applicant and her spouse purchased a real state property with the intent 
to use it as a vacation home and rental property. They vacationed in the property three 
times between 2004 and 2007, and then rented the property. After the lease ended, the 
property was empty for some time and it was broken into, items were stolen, and 
vandalized.  
 
While the house was empty, the neighbors were stealing the water and 
electricity. Applicant refurbished the property and rented it again, but the problems 
continued. The neighborhood went into decay with criminal activity, drugs, and gang 
violence. The property manager refused to visit the neighborhood after he was 
threatened, and complaints filed with the local authorities went unanswered. Applicant 
placed the house on the market for rent and for sale in 2008-2009, but the renters have 
been run-off by the criminals, and she received no purchased offers. She considers that 
the property is not marketable because of the criminal activity in the area. She has 
received no offers since the house was placed on the market in 2008. 
 
Applicant consulted with an attorney and has been attempting to divest herself of 
the property by working with the mortgage holder (bank) to perform a short sale of the 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
property or to give the deed back to the bank. She has been having difficulty 
communicating with the bank because of the language barrier. Around June 2013, the 
bank informed Applicant that they could not consider a short sale or deed-back unless 
the mortgage was in arrears. Applicant stopped making payments on the mortgage. 
Applicant’s mortgage is currently over $18,600 past due, with a total loan balance of 
$238,000. As of her hearing date, she was still in negotiations with the bank seeking a 
short sale or a deed-back. 
 
A review of Applicant’s three credit reports from 2012 and 2014 showed no other 
delinquencies or financial problems. She testified that the only other time they were 
delinquent on the vacation property mortgage was when the bank stopped taking 
electronic payments without notifying them of the change in 2011-2012. They were in 
arrears for a period, but brought the mortgage back to current with one lump sum 
payment. 
 
Applicant and her husband have held positions of responsibility and steady 
employment for over 40 years. They raised five children who are also responsible, 
college educated, and gainfully employed. Their credit positions have always been 
excellent, and both volunteer and generously support charities. They currently have little 
debt, and they appear to be in a solid financial situation. There is no evidence of 
financial problems or irresponsibility, except for the sole SOR allegation. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
 
4 
 
 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
In June 2013, Applicant stopped making payments on her mortgage to qualify for 
a short sale or return the deed back to the bank. Financial considerations disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
5 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Financial considerations mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20(a) through (d) apply. 
Applicant purchased the property in good faith in 2004, and she and her husband had 
the financial means to do so. Except for the period when the bank stopped accepting 
electronic payments, the mortgage was current from 2004 to June 2013, until she was 
told by the bank that she would not qualify for a short sale or deed-back while the 
mortgage was current. 
 
 Applicant acted responsibly on her efforts to refurbish the property after it was 
vandalized in 2008, and in her efforts to either rent or sell the property since then. The 
change of circumstances surrounding the property - the neighborhood going into decay 
with criminal activity, drugs, and gang violence - were circumstances beyond Applicant’s 
control and unpredictable. Applicant’s property manager was threatened and now 
refuses to enter the neighborhood. Her complaints to the local authorities have been 
unanswered. She has continued to work with the mortgage holder to divest herself of 
the property, and she is in current negotiations with the bank. Applicant’s only financial 
problem occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt 
on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. She acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶¶ 20(e) and (f) are not raised by the facts in this case and do not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant has worked for a defense contractor since 2006. She held a top secret 
clearance with access to SCI during two years while working for a government agency. 
She currently holds a position of trust. Except for the SOR allegation, there is no other 
evidence of financial problems or any other security concerns.  
 
Applicant stopped paying her mortgage at the bank’s suggestion to qualify for a 
deed-back or short sale of the property. Up to that point, she had established a history 
of financial responsibility. She continues to work with the bank to divest her property. 
There is no evidence that she currently has a financial problem. Under the particular 
 
6 
 
 
circumstance of this case, Applicant’s delinquent mortgage does not show she lacks 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
