KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A party is required to raise claims of error with specificity.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-05005.a1
DATE: 07/22/2014
DATE: July 22, 2014
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-05005
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Corey Williams, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 9, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case
be decided on the written record.  On May 1, 2014, after the close of the record, Defense Office of
2
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Shari Dam denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge made the following findings: Applicant is 31 years old.  He is divorced with no
children.  After leaving the military in the late 2000's, he was unemployed for about six months.
Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating between 2003 and 2011.  At one point Applicant
had 11 delinquent debts totaling $28,560.  To date, he has resolved about $2,928 of the delinquent
debt.  Six of his debts remain unresolved.  His net monthly income is $5,623 and expenses are
$1,536.  He has monthly payments of $1,156 on three debts, leaving about $2,931 remaining.
Applicant has not participated in credit counseling.  He does not have a solid plan or budget for
resolving his debts. 
Applicant indicated that many accounts became delinquent as a consequence of
unemployment, separation from, and eventual divorce from his wife.  He also attributed his situation
to his long military deployments, during which his wife opened credit card accounts without his
knowledge.   Applicant assumes full responsibility for his delinquent debts and admits that he should
have paid them off sooner, and it was his fault for having a slack attitude.  He indicated he would
pay all his debts and would never put this country at risk.         
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant’s delinquent debts began in 2003
and continue to date.  Six of them remain unresolved.  He failed to demonstrate that such problems
are unlikely to continue, recur, or be resolved, calling into question his reliability and
trustworthiness.  His unemployment, divorce and the actions of his wife during his deployments may
have been circumstances beyond his control, but he did not provide evidence that he attempted to
responsibly address or manage the delinquent debts when he became aware of them in 2012.
Applicant did not provide evidence that he participated in credit or financial counseling.  For over
two years, he has been on notice that his delinquent debts could jeopardize his security clearance.
Despite that knowledge, he has taken minimal steps to resolve his financial obligations or establish
a credible plan for managing them.  His lack of action on these matters raises questions about his
trustworthiness, reliability and judgment.
Applicant argues that the Judge did not properly consider all the evidence in the case, and
states that he submitted documents that were not considered.  He asserts that he presented proof of
attempts to settle, repay, or validly dispute each and every debt listed on the SOR.  He maintains that
the Judge’s failure to consider all the evidence resulted in a failure to consider the mitigating
conditions in proper fashion.  Applicant’s arguments fail to establish error on the part of the Judge.
 
A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless he or she
specifically states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009).
Applicant fails to overcome these presumptions.  Moreover, Applicant does not specify the
3
documents he claims were overlooked by the Judge.  There is no presumption of error below.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-0339 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2001).   Applicants are required to raise claims
of error with specificity.  See ISCR Case No. 10-06437 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 11, 2013).  In the present
case, Applicant’s claims of error lack the requisite detail to meet the burden of establishing error.
The evidentiary record in support of mitigation in this case is not extensive.  Applicant’s claim that
there is evidence establishing that he is making attempts to settle, repay or honestly dispute each and
every debt alleged in the SOR is not supported by the record.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant
failed to establish that he had taken timely and meaningful steps to address his delinquent debts is
sustainable.
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s appeal brief, in part, argues for an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.
In this case, the Judge made sustainable findings that Applicant had a significant history of
not meeting financial obligations   She noted that despite Applicant’s resolution of some of the
debts, he still had a substantial amount of  indebtedness.  The Judge noted that two years after
Government investigators indicated their concern with the state of his finances, Applicant was still
without an established plan to resolve the remaining arrearages.  In light of the foregoing, the Judge
could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were still ongoing.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 05-07747 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2007).  A review of the Judge’s decision reveals that,
regarding Guideline F, the Judge listed the potentially applicable mitigating conditions and then
discussed several components of those factors in her analysis.  The Judge offered a narrative
explanation as to why the disqualifying conduct under Guideline F was not mitigated.  The Board
concludes that the Judge appropriately weighed the Guideline F mitigating conditions against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct. 
In support of his appeal, Applicant points to numerous decisions by the Hearing Office which
he argues support his request for a favorable determination.  The Board gives due consideration to
those cases. However, each case “must be decided upon its own merits.”  Directive, Enclosure 2
¶2(b).  Moreover, one of the Hearing Office cases that Applicant cites was reversed on appeal.
Nothing in the decisions cited by Applicant demonstrates error on the part of the Judge in this case.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett      
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
