 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00736 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 11, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Appellant answered the SOR on March 13, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 3, 
2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 11, 2014. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 12, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. He offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through F, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 20, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR with explanations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old. He holds two bachelor’s degrees and three master’s 
degrees. He married in 1998, separated in 2011 and divorced in 2012. He has three 
children from the marriage ages 14, 13 and 9.1 He is co-owner of a company. He served 
as the company’s facility security officer (FSO) from 2004 to 2009. 
 
Applicant has held a security clearance since 2003. In May 2009, while 
processing his application for access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI), 
Applicant disclosed that he used marijuana one time in July 2008. The agency 
processing his application discontinued the process and denied him access to SCI. 
Applicant successfully appealed, and in October 2009 he was granted access.2 
 
In conjunction with his security clearance processing, Applicant was interviewed 
on January 19, 2010, and March 16, 2010, as part of a polygraph examination. Based 
on information provided during the interview, on June 18, 2010, Applicant was denied 
access to SCI. He appealed the decision and in November 2011 the decision to deny 
him access to SCI was sustained.3  
 
During the March 2010 interview, Applicant disclosed that his company received 
between $5,000 and $15,000 in overpayments from clients over seven years. These 
payments occurred most often in amounts between $500 and $1,500. Rather than 
refund the monies to the client the company kept them. He attributed it to confusing 
invoice practices of the firm’s primary client, a large corporation.4 Applicant indicated he 
felt somewhat justified in not attempting to repay the overpayments because 
“sometimes our clients screw us, and this is our way of making it back.” He clarified his 
statement by explaining that he felt he lost billable work to his client due to the client 
refusing to pay unauthorized overtime hours. He estimated his clients withheld between 
                                                          
1 Tr. 37, 70-71. 
 
2 Tr. 39-40; GE 1, 10, 11. This information was not alleged in the SOR and will not considered for 
disqualifying purposes, but will be considered when analyzing Applicant’s credibility and the whole 
person. 
 
3 GE 2, 3, 4, 5.  
 
4 Tr. 44-46. 
 
 
3 
 
 
$2,000 and $10,000 that he felt his employees had rightfully earned during the time the 
company had been in operation. He felt slightly guilty for not attempting to repay the 
overages, but let the overpayments go unaddressed when it would be “more effort to fix 
it than to leave it alone.”5 He admitted that he told the polygraph examiner what is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, that is his company retained money from their client for 
overpayments rather than refund it. At his hearing, Applicant could not remember if he 
made the above statements when interviewed.6 He explained that he did not do it for 
personal gain or wrongfully. He felt guilty about it because it did not line up with his 
moral code. He indicated his accountant told him to retain the money. He explained that 
due to complex accounting practices it was difficult to return money. He felt his 
company was being unjustly enriched by the overpayments, but he could not get the 
client to respond, and he could not find someone to take it.7 He admitted that his 
company could have drafted a check for the overage and given it to the client, but the 
client would have likely come back with other charges.8  
 
Applicant explained that when he was participating in the polygraph he “was 
basically spitting out guilt.”9 Whatever came to his mind that he could “spit out” he did. 10 
He relinquished accounting responsibilities in 2010. Applicant provided information 
about his personal finances to show he is solvent and donates to charity and did not 
need to receive extra money for personal gain.11 I find Applicant, as co-owner of his 
company knowingly and wrongfully retained approximately $5,000 to $15,000 from 
billing overpayments made by his company and did not refund them to his client. 
 
During the March 2010 interview, Applicant disclosed that while serving as the 
company’s FSO he advised one of his employees to falsify her drug use history on her 
security clearance application because he believed she would be denied an interim 
security clearance if she was truthful.12 Applicant had earlier gone through an 
experience where his application for access to SCI was denied due to a one-time drug 
use. He appealed the denial and was granted access. He disclosed that his own 
experience helped him arrive at a decision to advise his employee to omit her drug 
use.13 
                                                          
5 GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. 44-51, 70-90; GE 4, 6, 11; AE F. 
 
7 Tr. 44-51, 79-90; GE 6; AE E. 
 
8 Tr. 44-51, 79-90. 
 
9 Tr. 49. 
 
10 Tr. 49. 
 
11 AE D. 
 
12 Tr. 51-57. 
 
13 GE 4, 6.  
 
4 
 
 
During the hearing, Applicant admitted he told the polygraph examiner what is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, that is when he was the FSO he told an employee to falsify her 
security clearance application by not disclosing her prior drug use. He testified that he 
did not advise the employee to falsify her security clearance application, but stated that 
he lied to the polygraph examiner when he said he did. He explained that at the time of 
the polygraph “I believed what I said was truthful, but it was not.” He stated that he told 
the employee to be truthful.14  
 
 Applicant provided a copy of the employee’s security clearance application that 
shows she did in fact disclose her prior drug use. Applicant typed on the copy of the 
page of the application that he had contacted the employee and she verified that he told 
her to tell the truth. On his typewritten statement he wrote:  
 
My best explanation for what I said during the polygraph is that I falsely 
remembered what happened, since I really was pretty sure that it was 
[employee] who I had told that to (which you can hear on the tape). 
However, it would seem that while my first inclination might have been for 
her not to say anything, in fact, I took the correct course of action and told 
her to disclose things, and even helped her draft a paragraph explaining 
her actions.15  
 
Applicant did not provide independent information from the employee verifying the 
veracity of his statement.16 
 
 Applicant was asked at the hearing the following: 
 
Administrative Judge: So if I hear you right, what you’re saying is when 
you’re under pressure, you say false things.  
 
Applicant: At the time, yes, I mean, I’ve grown a lot as an individual, I 
think.17 
 
I find Applicant advised one of his employees to falsify her drug-use history on 
her security clearance application because he believed she would be denied a security 
clearance if she was truthful.  
 
Applicant disclosed during his interview that while serving as his company’s FSO, 
he failed to follow security manual procedures when he indoctrinated employees into 
access to classified materials before properly verifying their citizenship status.   
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
14 Tr. 51-57, 90-100; GE 6, 11. 
 
15 Tr. 51-57; AE B. 
 
16 GE 6, 11. 
 
17 Tr. 52. 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant stated that the only formal training he received as his company’s FSO 
was a two-hour online course given by the Department of Homeland Security. If he had 
questions he sought guidance from the Defense Security Service (DSS). Over the 
course of his tenure as FSO he reviewed approximately 300 security clearance 
applications.18 
 
 Applicant stated that when he sought guidance from the DSS he would 
sometimes get conflicting advice. He also noted that there were always exceptions to 
the National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM). He explained 
that due to differing advice, he found it difficult to know what the correct procedure was. 
He admitted he told the polygraph examiner that he failed to follow security manual 
procedure when he indoctrinated employees into access to classified material before 
properly verifying their U.S. citizenship status. He explained that there was not a simple 
rule of law when addressing this issue. He indicated that his basic assumption was that 
verification was left to the discretion of the FSO. He also stated that “acceptable proof of 
citizenship is somewhat murky and left to the discretion of the FSO, to some extent.”19 
 
 The NISPOM states: “All documents submitted as evidence of birth in the U.S. 
shall be original or certified documents.”20 It also required: “It must bear the raised, 
impressed, or multicolored seal of the registrar’s office. The only exception is if a State 
or other jurisdiction does not issue such seals as a matter of policy.”21 Applicant stated 
the employee would fax him the original and later send the original. So he eventually 
received the right documentation. He permitted access after he received the fax, which 
violates the NISPOM. He believed as the FSO he had a certain amount of discretion. 
He stated he was hyper vigilant in complying with the letter of the law and he received 
guidance from DSS on the matter.22  
 
Applicant was specifically asked: “Did you allow access to classified information 
to people before properly verifying their U.S. citizenship status?” His response was: 
“according to me, yes[, a]ccording to the letter of the law, very possibly not.”23 I find 
while serving as the FSO, Applicant failed to follow security manual procedures when 
he permitted employees access to classified information before properly verifying their 
U.S. citizenship status.  
 
                                                          
18 Tr. 90. 
 
19 Tr. 57-63; GE 6, 11, 12. 
 
20 NISPOM § 2.208. 
 
21 NISPOM § 2-208. 
 
22 Tr.57-63; GE 6, 11. 
 
23 Tr. 61. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant explained the reason he provided false information to the polygraph 
examiner was because he was trying to make sure he did the right thing. He explained 
that he experienced anxiety in his attempt to be honest. He stated he had the extreme 
desire to be honest and in doing so he provided false information without having an 
opportunity to explain. In his appeal letter, Applicant stated that he felt the polygraph 
examiner was in a hurry and “running out of time and pushed to get through the test, 
resulting in her not getting a complete understanding of all events, due to time 
constraints.”24 He further stated: “I write this, not to say that all the information gathered 
was false, rather to point out that some information is out of context or represents only 
part of the story, often with important information missing.”25  
 
 Applicant provided character letters. They describe him as a remarkable person; 
a rule follower; an ethical person; and a person who always does the right thing. He is 
considered reliable, honest, thoughtful, meticulous, professional, idealistic and 
pragmatic.26 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
                                                          
24 GE 5. 
 
25 Tr. 40-41, 63-70; GE 5.  
 
26 AE E. I have also considered AE C, but have not specifically commented on it to maintain Applicant’s 
privacy. 
 
7 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following potentially apply:  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, support a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information.  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating the person 
may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not 
limited to consideration of. . . (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate 
 
8 
 
 
behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
and 
 
(e) personal conduct, concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
As co-owner of a company Applicant knowingly and wrongfully retained 
approximately $5,000 to $15,000 from billing overpayments received by his company. 
While serving as the company’s FSO, Applicant advised one of his employees to falsify 
her drug-use history on her security application. Also while serving as the FSO, 
Applicant failed to follow the security manual procedure and permitted employees 
access to classified information before properly verifying their U.S. citizenship. 
Applicant’s conduct exhibits a pattern of dishonesty, questionable judgment, and a 
failure to comply with rules and regulations creating. It also creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, and duress. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant denied the factual content in the SOR allegations and provided 
explanations for his behavior. He admitted that sometimes when his firm was overpaid, 
despite his attempts to return the money to the client, it was too difficult and it was not 
refunded. His explanation that he was lying to the polygraph examiner regarding 
providing advice as the FSO to his employee about disclosing her drug use is not 
believable. He has acknowledged he permitted employees access to classified 
information before verifying their citizenship in violation of the NISPOM. Applicant’s 
behavior was not minor or infrequent. It did not happen under unique circumstances, 
and I am not convinced it is unlikely to recur. His behavior casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply.  
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant has acknowledged that he experiences anxiety when under pressure. 
He no longer is involved in the accounting practices of his company. He no longer 
serves as the company’s FSO. I find AG ¶¶ 17(d) and (e) partially apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.c. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a highly-educated 39 year old. He is co-owner of a company and 
was its FSO. His actions in failing to comply with the NISPOM and failure to refund 
money to his clients raise concerns. His advice to his employee to lie on her security 
clearance application is also a concern. His explanations that his statements made to a 
polygraph examiner were untruthful and therefore are mitigating are contradictory. 
Despite removing himself from the accounting practices of his company and serving as 
the FSO, Applicant’s personal conduct continues to raise serious security concerns that 
he has failed to mitigate. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions 
and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the personal conduct guideline.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
