 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-05907 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) describes one delinquent mortgage 
account that is past due in the amount of $21,207, and it has an unpaid balance of 
$120,225. He failed to provide sufficient documentation of progress resolving his 
financial problems. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 4) On March 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
or continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
Applicant provided an undated response to the SOR allegations and waived his 
right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated April 29, 2014, was provided to him on May 3, 2014.1 Applicant did not respond to 
the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 30, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted SOR ¶ 1.a without providing any 
extenuating or mitigating information. (Item 3) Applicant’s admission is accepted as a 
finding of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old material control specialist, who has worked for the 
same defense contractor from 1979 to the present. In 1981, he married, and he does 
not have any children. He earned an associate’s degree in 2000. He has never served 
in the military. There is no evidence of security violations, unemployment, criminal 
conduct, use of illegal drugs, or alcohol abuse.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
When Applicant completed his February 13, 2012 SF 86, he did not disclose any 
delinquent debts or financial problems. The file does not contain any financial 
interrogatories, a personal financial statement, a budget, or an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) summary of Applicant’s interview.   
 
Applicant’s SOR and 2012 and 2014 credit reports describe one delinquent 
mortgage account that is past due in the amount of $21,207, and it has an unpaid 
balance of $120,225. (Items 1, 5 at 4, and 6 at 15; FORM at 3) His last act on this 
account was in March 2011. (Item 6 at 15) His monthly payment was $821. (Item 5 at 4) 
Applicant accepted responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, and he admitted it was past 
due in the amount of $21,207. (Item 3) 
  
Applicant’s FORM noted the absence of corroborating documentation and other 
mitigating information and explained that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the 
FORM “in which to submit a documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated April 29, 2014, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated May 3, 2014. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 
30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s February 13, 2012 SF 
86 is the primary source for the facts in the Statement of Facts. (Item 4) 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate.” (FORM at 4-5) He did not 
respond to the FORM.               
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all availabl e, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports and SOR response. Applicant admitted responsibility for one delinquent 
mortgage account that is past due in the amount of $21,207, and it has an unpaid 
balance of $120,225. This debt has been delinquent for more than three years. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or he relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions. Applicant did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances. He did not provide sufficient information about his finances to establish 
his inability to pay his creditors.  
 
Applicant did not provide any of the following documentation relating to the 
creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a: (1) proof of payments such as checking account statements, 
photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any 
payments to the creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to establish 
maintenance of contact with the creditor;4 (3) a credible debt dispute; (4) attempts to 
negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was 
attempting to resolve this debt; (5) evidence of financial counseling; or (6) other 
evidence of progress or resolution of this SOR debt. There is insufficient evidence that 
his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not occur in the 
future.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 59-year-old material control specialist, who has worked for the same defense 
                                            
4“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or he maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
contractor from 1979 to the present. In 1981, he married. He earned an associate’s 
degree in 2000. He has never served in the military. There is no evidence of security 
violations, unemployment, criminal conduct, use of illegal drugs, or alcohol abuse. The 
stability of his employment and marriage are indications of his reliability and 
trustworthiness. He contributes to his company and the DOD.    
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant’s 
delinquent mortgage account is past due in the amount of $21,207, and it has an unpaid 
balance of $120,225. He was well aware of his financial problems, as he received notice 
when he received the SOR and FORM. He did not provide correspondence written to or 
received from the creditors showing that he attempted to settle or make any payments 
to resolve this delinquent debt. He could have made greater progress documenting 
resolution this debt. His failure to provide more corroborating documentation shows lack 
of financial responsibility and lack of judgment and raises unmitigated questions about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See 
AG ¶ 18. More documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate security 
concerns. 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations concerns are 
not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant is not eligible for access to 
classified information at this time.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
