 
1 
 
 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )   ISCR Case No. 12-02751  
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
  
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns related to foreign influence and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) and Guideline E (personal conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In 
his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted four of the five allegations under Guideline B, 
and two of the six allegations under Guideline E. He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge of the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On June 
11, 2014, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, and I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on July 2, 2014. I admitted four Government exhibits (GE 1-4) and one Applicant exhibit 
(AE A). DOHA received the transcript on July 9, 2014.  
 
 
                                                          
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by Executive Order 10865, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all security clearance adjudications or trustworthiness 
determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Administrative Notice 
I take administrative notice of facts related to Iran, included in 16 U.S. Government 
documents provided by Department Counsel. The facts are limited to matters of general 
knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute, and are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
 
Amendment to SOR 
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform to the 
evidence Applicant presented. (Tr. 73) I granted Department Counsel’s motion to add 
the following allegation under Guideline B, paragraph 1: 
 
e. Your mother is a dual U.S.-Iranian citizen who resides in Iran for six 
months each year. 
 
Clarification of Answer 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a contradictory response to allegation 2.b, 
under Guideline E, regarding whether or not he had voted in Denmark. At the hearing, 
he stated that his intention was to deny the allegation.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 46 years old, was born in Iran. He left Iran in about 1984 because of 
the Iran-Iraq war and his objections to the regime. He and his family moved to Denmark, 
where he claimed refugee status. He completed high school, and earned a college 
degree in chemistry. In his 2010 security interview, he said he became a Danish citizen 
in about 1994, but in his 2012 security interview, he said he became a Danish citizen in 
2000. In his 2010 security interview, he said he moved to the United States in about 
1999, but in his 2012 security interview, he said he moved to the United States in 2003. 
In both his 2010 security clearance applications, Applicant listed himself as a dual citizen 
of Denmark and the United States. However, in his 2012 security clearance application, 
he denied ever being a dual citizen or holding a foreign passport. Applicant has a Danish 
passport issued in 2008, and valid until 2018, which he has surrendered to his facility 
security officer. Foreign preference concerns and denial of his dual citizenship status are 
not alleged in the SOR. Applicant does not have business, financial, or property interests 
in Denmark. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in September 2008. (GE 1, 2, 3, 4; Tr. 
75) 
 
In his three security clearance applications, Applicant stated he performed repair 
work and electronic security for information technology companies in the United States 
from 2001 to 2006. Applicant began employment with his current company in 2006, as a 
 
3 
 
 
service technician. He testified he received his first security clearance in 2012. (GE 1; Tr. 
37-40, 47) 
 
Guideline B 
 
Applicant married in 2009. His wife was born in Iran, and is a citizen of Iran. She 
lives in the United States, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2014. She is a 
homemaker. They have a three-year-old daughter who was born in the United States. 
(GE 1, 2; AE A)  
 
Applicant's parents were born in Iran. His father, who died in 2010, served in the 
Iranian army, but Applicant is unaware of his rank. He was a U.S. citizen. His mother is a 
citizen of Iran and the United States. She receives a pension based on his father’s 
military service. In his security clearance applications, Applicant listed that his mother 
lives in the United States. He testified that she rotates her residence among Applicant 
and his siblings. He stated in his 2011 application that he talks with his mother by 
telephone daily; in his 2012 security interview, he said he visits with her about twice per 
week. (GE 1; Tr. 15, 18, 62-67, 72-73) 
 
Applicant did not disclose in his security clearance applications that his mother 
also lives about six months per year in Iran. She has been living in both the United 
States and Iran for the past 15 years. Applicant testified that his mother must live in her 
house in Iran for part of the year to avoid the government seizing her home. When she is 
in Iran, Applicant talks with his mother every week by telephone. After his father died, 
Applicant had a one-fourth ownership right in the home where his mother resides when 
she is in Iran. However, he and his siblings have transferred their interests to their 
mother. Applicant no longer has any property interests in Iran.2 (GE 1; Tr. 15, 18, 62-67, 
72-73)  
 
Applicant has three siblings. One brother and one sister live in the United States, 
and both are dual citizens of Iran and the United States. His brother owns a retail store 
and his sister is a homemaker. He has daily telephone contact and frequent personal 
contact because they live near each other. His second sister is a citizen of Iran and the 
United Kingdom (U.K.). She is a homemaker, and has lived in Iran for the past five years. 
Her husband was born in Iran, and holds dual citizenship in Iran and the U.K. He is an 
architecture professor, employed by a private university. Applicant does not speak with 
his brother-in-law. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 21-30, 50, 68-69, 72) 
 
Applicant said in his December 2011 security clearance application, and at his 
January 2012 security interview, that he talked with his sister in Iran weekly by 
telephone. In his August 2013 interrogatory response, Applicant wrote that he was in 
touch with his sister in Iran “every 2 weeks” by cell phone. However, at the hearing, he 
testified that since January 2012, he has not had frequent contact with her. He said he 
has not spoken to her more than twice since he married in October 2009 because they 
                                                          
2 The record contains no evidence regarding Applicant's U.S. financial assets. 
 
4 
 
 
have “family issues” related to his marriage. He testified that he last spoke to her six 
months before the hearing, and last saw her in person when she visited the United 
States, and resided with their brother. Applicant stated it was “five, six years ago. . . I 
think about 2008 or 2009 she came here.” However, when asked why he told the 
investigator that he last saw her in 2011, he said that the 2011 date was correct. (GE 1, 
2; Tr. 21-30, 50) 
 
Applicant's parents-in-law live in Iran. His father-in-law works for a private furniture 
company, and his mother-in-law is a homemaker. Since Applicant married in 2009, his 
in-laws have come to the United States twice to visit Applicant's family. When they visit, 
they reside with Applicant. Applicant's mother-in-law last stayed with them about eight 
months before the hearing. About two years ago, Applicant's wife visited Iran with their 
daughter. She stayed with her parents for about three months. Currently, she is in touch 
with her parents by telephone every day. Applicant's talks with them every two weeks. 
(Tr. 29-36)  
 
Applicant maintains contact with a friend who is a citizen and resident of Iran. 
They were friends from the time Applicant was 11 to 16 years old, when he lived in Iran. 
They did not keep in touch for approximately 25 years after Applicant left Iran. His friend 
works delivering pizza. Applicant found his friend’s name on a social media site, and they 
were in touch 10 to 20 times. They have not had recent contact because his friend has 
difficulty accessing the internet. (GE 2; Tr. 46-50) 
 
Guideline E 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant:  
 
• Deliberately failed to list his residence in Denmark from 2001 to 2003 in 
his March and July 2010 security clearance applications, and instead 
listed a U.S. residence (allegations 2.c and 2.e);  
• Deliberately failed to disclose that he worked in Denmark from 2001 to 
2003 when he completed his March and July 2010 applications, and his 
2012 application, and instead listed employment in the United States for 
that time period (allegations 2.a, 2.d, and 2.f); 
• Deliberately failed to disclose in his 2012 application that he voted in a 
presidential election in Denmark (allegation 2.b).  
 
In his 2010 and 2011 security clearance applications, Applicant stated he lived in 
the United States from 2001 to 2003. However, during his 2012 security interview, he 
informed the investigator that he resided in Denmark from 2001 to 2003. He told the 
investigator he did not list his Danish residence because he did not know if he could 
enter foreign addresses on the application. In all three security clearance applications 
Applicant listed the foreign address of his high school in Denmark, and foreign 
addresses of his relatives in Iran. (GE 2) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 At his 2012 interview, Applicant also disclosed that he worked in Denmark from 
2001 to 2003, contrary to the information he listed on his security clearance applications 
stating that he worked in the United States between 2001 and 2003. He told the 
investigator he worked full-time in Denmark for an emergency response agency, and 
also worked several part-time jobs simultaneously. He said he did not disclose the jobs 
in Denmark because he did not know if he could list overseas employment in the 
applications. (GE 2) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that he did not enter the information correctly in 
the security clearance applications because he had difficulty inputting information 
regarding the dates and addresses of his foreign activities. (GE 1, 3, 4; Tr.19-20, 40-42, 
58-62, 69-70) He explained,  
 
And they couldn't accept the, like a zip code, which college I go to in 
Denmark, which city I was. And the, I have it in, Danish is very different 
with the U.S. That's why I couldn't fill out, put all the information in. (Tr. 20) 
 
Applicant also testified,  
 
I couldn't do it in the e-Q [security clearance application]. The form, it 
couldn't have said. That's what I keep telling. It don't accept it. I get an 
error message all the time. (Tr. 58) 
 
He testified he was also unable to enter information in the comment section of the 
application. He asked for assistance from his facility security officer (FSO) and the help 
desk. He completed new applications several times. (GE 1, 3, 4; Tr.19-20, 40-42, 61) 
 
At his 2010 security interview, Applicant told the investigator that he went to a 
Danish embassy in the United States in 2008 and voted in a Danish presidential election. 
However, in his 2011 security clearance application, Applicant stated that he had never 
voted in a foreign election. At the hearing, he also denied voting in a Danish election, 
and telling the investigator at his interview that he had done so. In August 2013, 
Applicant was provided with a copy of the reports of his security interviews to review and 
correct any inaccuracies. He signed a notarized affirmation that the report was accurate. 
(GE 2; Tr. 51, 70)  
 
Administrative Notice: Iran 
 
Iran is a theocratic Islamic republic dominated by Shia Muslim clergy, with 
ultimate political authority vested in a religious leader. The United States broke 
diplomatic relations with Iran in April 1980. The government of Iran is hostile to the 
United States. In 2013, the United States affirmed its 1984 designation of Iran as a state 
sponsor of terrorism. 
 
Long-standing U.S. concerns about Iran include its efforts to acquire nuclear 
weapons and weapons of mass destruction; support for militants opposed to the Middle 
 
6 
 
 
East peace process; and its human rights abuses, such as arbitrary arrest and 
detention; cruel or degrading punishment, including amputation and flogging; life-
threatening conditions in prison facilities; impunity of security forces; denial of fair trial; 
sometimes executions without due process; and severe restrictions on free speech. 
 
 In 2013, Iranian security forces engaged in arbitrary interference with privacy, 
family, home, and correspondence. They monitored citizens’ social activities, telephone 
conversations, internet communications, and mail. They often charged citizens with 
national security crimes based on private letters and emails. Foreign visitors may be 
placed under surveillance, or their hotel rooms and personal possessions searched. 
 
Iran has continued to provide arms, financing, training, and facilitation to Iraqi 
Shi’a fighters supporting the Asad regime’s crackdown in Syria, which has resulted in 
more than 100,000 civilian deaths.  
 
 Iran’s intelligence operations against the United States, including cyber-
intelligence capabilities, have dramatically increased in depth and complexity during the 
past several years. Iran has aggressive programs for collecting U.S. dual-use 
technologies and advanced materials development, especially in the area of 
nanotechnology. 
 
Iran does not recognize dual citizenship. Iranian-born, naturalized U.S. citizens 
are considered solely Iranian citizens by the Iranian authorities and must present an 
Iranian passport to enter Iran. The State Department’s warning of November 2013 
states that U.S. citizens of Iranian origin should consider the risk of being targeted by 
authorities before planning travel to Iran.  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense determination 
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B and E. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
                                                          
3 Directive. 6.3. 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 
 
 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses 
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the 
national interests as her or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access in favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 7 of Guideline B, I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, 
especially the following: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Family ties to residents or citizens of a foreign country do not automatically 
disqualify an applicant from obtaining a security clearance; such ties are only 
disqualifying if they create security concerns such as a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation or a potential conflict of interest.  
 
The country in question also must be considered.7 In particular, the nature of a 
country’s government, its relationship with the United States, its human rights record, 
and terrorist activity in the country are all relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s family members are vulnerable to coercion.8 Iran and the United States have 
had a hostile relationship. It has been designated as a state sponsor of terrorism since 
1984. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country at issue is associated with a risk of terrorism. In addition, Iran engages in 
human rights abuses such as arbitrary arrest and detention, cruel punishments 
including amputation and flogging; impunity of security forces; denial of fair trial; severe 
restrictions on free speech; arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, and 
correspondence. Citizens’ telephone, internet, and postal communications are 
monitored. Dual U.S-Iranian citizens who travel to Iran must exercise particular vigilance 
during travel. Foreign visitors may be placed under surveillance, or their hotel rooms 
and personal possessions searched.  
  
 Applicant’s testimony and the record evidence indicate that he has frequent 
contact and ties of affection to his family members who are dual U.S.-Iranian citizens—
his wife, brother, sister, and mother—and to those who remain in Iran—his wife’s 
parents. Applicant has also had a close relationship with his sister in Iran, and as 
recently as August 2013, they were in touch every two weeks. Applicant's ties and 
contacts with his foreign family represent a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, and a 
potential conflict of interest between his ties to his family and the requirement to protect 
classified information. He shares a home with his wife who, along with U.S. citizenship, 
maintains Iranian citizenship. She sometimes visits Iran, and stayed for three months in 
2012. Applicant's mother sometimes lives with him during her six-month stays in the 
United States. AG ¶ 7(a), (b) and (d) apply. 
 
 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 3 (App. Bd., Sep 26, 2006) (the nature of the foreign government 
involved must be evaluated in foreign influence cases). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
9 
 
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and, 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
Applicant provided conflicting information about his contacts with his sister in 
Iran. He said in his 2012 interview that he had weekly contact with her by telephone. As 
recently as August 2013, Applicant stated in his interrogatory response that he talks 
with her by cell phone every two weeks. But at the hearing, he said he has only talked 
with her twice since 2009. Applicant's contradictory statements undermine his credibility.  
 
Applicant is in close contact with his brother and sister in the United States, and 
his mother, who all retain their Iranian citizenship. His mother lives with him at times 
when she is residing in the United States, and when she is in Iran, they maintain 
frequent telephone contact. Applicant's friend in Iran, with whom he had a relationship 
many years ago, and has had only sporadic contact within the last few years, does not 
represent a security concern. I find for Applicant on SOR allegation 1.d. 
 
Applicant's wife keeps in daily touch with her parents, Iranian citizen-residents, 
and Applicant talks with them a few times per month. When they visit the United States, 
they reside with Applicant and his family. Given that terrorist groups operate in Iran, that 
it targets intelligence operations against the United States, has aggressive programs to 
collect U.S. sensitive technologies, and monitors its citizens and foreign visitors, I 
cannot confidently conclude that Applicant could not be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of foreign family members and the interests of the United 
States. Finally, Applicant's U.S. citizenship, residence, and employment over 
approximately 15 years represent substantial ties to the United States. However, on 
balance, they do not outweigh his relationship to family members who live in Iran and/or 
are citizens of Iran. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (c) do not apply, and Applicant receives only partial 
mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b).  
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure 
to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, 
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
The Government alleges that Applicant intentionally failed to disclose that he 
resided and worked in Denmark from 2001 to 2003, and that he voted in a foreign 
election in 2008. Applicant testified that he did not intend to conceal these facts: the 
omission resulted from his difficulty entering the foreign residence and employment 
information. He denies telling the investigator in 2010 that he voted in a Danish election. 
 
Applicant's explanations about his omissions are not credible. At his 2012 
interview, he stated he did not enter his Danish residences and employment because 
he did not know if he could enter foreign addresses and employment on the application. 
At the hearing, he testified he was unable to enter the foreign information because of 
technical difficulties with the electronic application. Applicant may have had problems 
with his electronic applications. However, the fact that he was able to enter the address 
of his high school in Denmark, and foreign addresses of his relatives in Iran, on his 
security clearance applications undermines his explanation that he did not know if he 
could enter such information or was unable to do so. I conclude that Applicant 
knowingly decided not to disclose that he resided and worked in Denmark for two years.  
 
In 2010, Applicant informed the investigator at his security interview that he voted 
in a Danish election, at an embassy in the United States. In 2013, he reviewed the 
report of his interview, and affirmed that it accurately stated the information he provided. 
His 2014 denial that he voted is not credible. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions are relevant to Applicant's 
falsifications about his foreign activities: 
 
11 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant's falsifications are unmitigated. From 2010, when he first stated he 
lived and worked only in the United States between 2001 and 2003, until 2012, when he 
disclosed the true facts about his residence and employment in Denmark, he did not 
disclose the falsifications to his supervisor or facility security officer. Only during the 
2012 interview did he reveal that he had not, in fact, been living or working in the United 
States from 2001 to 2003. He also denied that he voted in a foreign election, when he 
had admitted that fact to an investigator in 2010. Applicant's falsifications cannot be 
considered minor. He decided to provide false information to the government not once 
but on three separate applications over a period of approximately two years. Such 
actions undermine the security clearance process and raise doubts about Applicant's 
reliability and judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guideline, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 
12 
 
 
 Clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”9 Here, 
Applicant’s loyalty is not in question. In evaluating the facts in light of the whole-person 
concept, I considered Applicant's ties to the United States: the U.S. citizenship of 
Applicant and his wife, his daughter’s birth in the United States, his mother’s and 
siblings’ U.S. citizenship, and his service to the Government through a federal defense 
contractor. 
 
 However, Applicant’s close family ties to Iranian citizens and residents, 
evidenced by his frequent contacts, raise serious security concerns, especially because 
they involve a country hostile to the United States, which is a state sponsor of terrorism. 
Applicant's failure to be forthright with the Government about his foreign residence, 
employment, voting, and the frequency of his contacts with his sister in Iran, undermine 
his credibility, judgment, and trustworthiness.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated security concerns. 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
raised. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.e   Against Applicant  
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a – 2.f  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 See Exec. Or. 10865 §7. 
