 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 12-06663 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s trustworthiness concerns under 
Guidelines J, criminal conduct; H, drug involvement; G, alcohol consumption; and E, 
personal conduct. He mitigated the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
denied. 
 
On February 25, 2014, Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines J, H, G, E and F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 14, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2014. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 29, 2014. The case was held as scheduled on 
June 25, 2014. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted 
into the record without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through 
H, which were admitted into the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 3, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 5.a, 5.b, 5.e and 
5.f. I incorporated his admissions into the findings of facts. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He is divorced and has no children. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 1996. He was employed with the same company for 14 years until 
he was laid off in 2009.1  
 
 Applicant had some financial problems after he was laid off and depleted his 
savings and 401(k) account to pay his bills. He was unemployed for nine months. He 
had some temporary jobs for extended periods, but then would be unemployed again. 
He received unemployment benefits and was unaware that he was required to pay 
taxes on them. He testified that he failed to file his federal income tax returns. He stated 
he has a habit of not filing his federal income tax returns on time. He was not paying 
attention to his taxes until 2012, when he completed his Electronic Investigations 
Processing Questionnaire (e-QIP). He stated he had to ask the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) how much he owed. He did not start paying his late taxes until he got a 
steady job. Applicant arranged a payment plan with the IRS and began making 
payments in December 2013. He has paid both tax debts alleged in SOR ¶ 5.a ($1,700) 
and ¶ 5.b ($1,800).2 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 5.c is for a past-due mortgage ($8,419). Because of 
Applicant’s unemployment he fell behind with his mortgage payments. He used about 
$13,000 to $16,000 from his 401(k) account to make payments. He sought legal advice 
and was told to stop making his monthly mortgage payments. He did not make any 
payments for about 30 months. He has a loan modification with the mortgage lender 
that began in May 2014. He is required to make three consistent monthly payments of 
$545 before the loan will be modified. Applicant has made two payments. He has no 
indication of what the modification payments will be. He intends to satisfactorily 
complete the trial period.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 17-18. 
 
2 Tr. 27-35; GE 2 § D; AE A, B. 
 
3 Tr. 35-39; AE C, D. 
 
3 
 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 5.d ($40) occurred when Applicant’s automatic payment to his 
credit card stopped due to lack of funds. Applicant has paid the debt.4 The debt in SOR 
¶ 5.e ($269) was also an automatic payment that stopped when Applicant’s account did 
not have funds to make the payment. The debt is paid.5 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 5.f ($159) was for a cell phone. Applicant was required to 
have a cell phone and was told there would be no charges if he returned it within 30 
days. He returned it, and they charged him for the phone. He disputed the debt with the 
company and was told it was resolved. The charge continued to appear on his credit 
report as delinquent. To resolve it, Applicant paid the debt.6 
 
 In April 1991, Applicant was arrested and later found guilty of driving while 
impaired and was sentenced to probation for 12 months, and his driver’s license was 
suspended. In August 1992, he was arrested and later found guilty for operating a 
vehicle under the influence of alcohol and was sentenced to 30 days house arrest, 
probation for 12 months, fined $720, community service, attendance at Alcoholics 
Anonymous, and his driver’s license was suspended for two years.7  
 
In August 1994, Applicant was arrested and charged with assault or battery on 
an officer, a third degree felony and obstruct without violence. He was placed in a pre-
trial intervention program, which included three years’ probation, 25 hours of community 
service, and court costs. Applicant violated his probation when he was charged in June 
1995 with fraudulent use of a credit card. His pre-trial intervention program was 
revoked. Adjudication was withheld, and he was placed on probation for three years. He 
was required to perform 100 hours of community service, and pay restitution and court 
costs.8  
 
In March 1997, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while 
intoxicated. He was found guilty and sentenced to 30 days in jail, required to serve 21 
days, one year probation, court costs, and his driver’s license was revoked for ten 
years.9  
 
In December 1998, Applicant was arrested for domestic battery. The charge was 
later dropped. In January 2004, Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana. 
Adjudication of the charge was withheld upon payment of the fines imposed. In January 
                                                          
4 Tr. 40-41; AE E. 
 
5 Tr. 41; AE F. 
 
6 Tr. 41-44; AE G. 
 
7 GE 3. 
 
8 GE 3. 
 
9 Tr. 78; GE 3. 
 
4 
 
 
2013, Applicant was cited for failing to report an accident and careless driving. He 
received a fine.10  
 
From 1990 to at least September 8, 2013, Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency. In March 2005, he used Oxycodone about once a day without a valid 
prescription. He used his girlfriend’s prescription. From 1994 to July 2002, he used 
cocaine about ten times. He stated he did not like it, but used it because of peer 
pressure. He did not purchase it for himself, but on one occasion contributed money to 
purchase it. He stated he was always using alcohol when he consumed illegal drugs.11  
 
From January to December 2001, Applicant illegally used gamma-gydroxybutyric 
acid (GBH) for his personal consumption.12 Applicant heard it was a mood enhancer. 
He stated he used it to help him refrain from drinking too much alcohol. He stated it 
helped for a few months, but was very unstable. He produced it from different 
substances he purchased over the Internet. He was about 29 years old when he 
manufactured the substance in his home. The substance would induce a deep sleep, 
and Applicant became concerned that it was too difficult to monitor. He participated in 
this endeavor due to peer pressure.13  
 
Applicant stated he no longer uses marijuana. He had no idea how many times 
over 23 years he used marijuana. He experimented with other drugs, but thought 
marijuana was safe. He was a heavy user in his 30s. He stated he would not get stoned 
before work.14  
 
Applicant continued to use marijuana after he completed his e-QIP on January 
31, 2012, and again after he was interviewed by a DOD investigator on March 23, 2012, 
during which his use of illegal drugs was discussed.15  
 
Applicant has consumed alcohol from 1989 to at least April 2014, at times in 
excess. Applicant uses alcohol to make him more social. He stated that he used 
marijuana because he believed it helps him to drink less alcohol. He believed marijuana 
curbed his alcohol urge. He does not think there is anything that will help him stop 
drinking alcohol. He participated in AA as part of a criminal sentence, but does not 
                                                          
10 Tr. 75-78; GE 2 § B, GE 3. 
 
11 Tr. 46-53; GE 3. 
 
12 Tr. 55-56. Applicant explained that the substance included floor stripper and lye in certain amounts. 
When combined the chemicals would react and the substance would be edible. He would mix it with 
grape juice and drink it. 
 
13 Tr. 53-59. 
 
14 Tr. 46, 59-68. 
 
15 Tr. 65-71. 
 
5 
 
 
attend now. He does not plan on abstaining from alcohol consumption. He last had 
alcohol in April 2014.16  
 
Government Interrogatories asked Applicant if he used marijuana from January 
12, 2013, to September 8, 2013? He answered he used “1 gram with dinner per day.”17 
He indicated that he decided to stop using marijuana on September 8, 2013. He wrote: 
“I have no plans for future use.” At his hearing, Applicant testified his last use of 
marijuana was April 2014. He testified he does not intend to use marijuana in the 
future.18  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
16 Tr. 46-47, 71-74, 79-82. 
 
17 GE 2 § A page 6. 
 
18 Tr. 74, 79-82. 
 
6 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that he failed to pay for a significant 
period of time. I find the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
7 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant was unemployed and had difficulty paying his bills. He had two tax 
liens against him for failing to pay his taxes. He only recently resolved his numerous 
delinquent debts, so AG ¶ 20(a) only partially applies. Applicant’s financial problems 
were the result of his unemployment. Once he began working he paid his delinquent 
debts and was able to obtain a loan modification for his mortgage. He used his savings 
and his 401(k) account to pay his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) applies because the conditions that 
caused his financial problems were beyond his control and he acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. He has made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts. AG 
¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 
and conclude the following have been raised: 
 
 
8 
 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(b) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;  
 
 Applicant has a long history of using marijuana from 1990 to April 2014. He has 
used cocaine. He has used Oxycodone without a valid prescription, and he illegally 
processed and manufactured GBH for his own use. He completed his e-QIP on January 
31, 2012. He completed Government Interrogatories in October 2013 where he 
admitted to using marijuana daily with dinner from January 2013 to September 2013. At 
that time, he stated his intention to not use marijuana in the future, but continued to do 
so even after receiving the SOR. All of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 
26. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 
9 
 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under criminal conduct AG ¶ 31 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant has numerous criminal arrests and convictions. I find the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under AG ¶ 
32, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; and 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 I find none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 and the 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
 
10 
 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 Applicant has consumed alcohol from 1989 to at least April 2014, at times to 
excess and to the point of intoxication. He has been arrested and convicted of driving 
while impaired, operating under the influence of alcohol, and driving while intoxicated. 
He indicated he used marijuana to help him curb his alcohol consumption. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and the following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
 Applicant continues to consume alcohol and make poor decisions. He stated he 
used marijuana to help him curtail his urge to drink alcohol. He failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to establish actions he is taking to overcome his problem. He failed 
to provide evidence that he responsibly uses alcohol or has established a pattern of 
abstinence. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and specifically considered the following: 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
 
11 
 
 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal , professional, or community standing. 
Applicant continued to use marijuana after completing his e-QIP and following an 
interview with a DOD investigator where his illegal drug use was discussed. I find 
Applicant’s personal conduct raises the above disqualifying conditions.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur, and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant did not provide an explanation for his continued use of marijuana after 
he was placed on notice it was a concern. Despite stating in his Government 
Interrogatory that he did not intend to use marijuana in the future, he continued to do so, 
including after he received the SOR, which stated drug involvement was a concern. His 
conduct involves questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, which raises questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect sensitive information. None of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to sensitive information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
12 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J, H, G, E, and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He had financial problems when he was unemployed 
and has paid his delinquent debts. He has a long history of illegal drug abuse and 
criminal conduct. He continued to use illegal drugs after completing his e-QIP and 
answering Government Interrogatories, despite stating he would not use them in the 
future. Applicant has a history of untrustworthy and unreliable conduct. He repeatedly 
broke the law and exercised poor judgment. The evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, but failed to mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns arising Guideline J, criminal conduct, Guideline H, drug 
involvement, Guideline G, alcohol consumption, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   Against Applicant  
   
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
13 
 
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a-4.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
   
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
