1
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-00275
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on October 17, 2011. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 6, 2014, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
Item 5.2
2
Applicant received the SOR on February 24, 2014. He submitted a notarized,
written response to the SOR allegations dated March 1, 2014, and he requested a
decision on the written record in lieu of a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on April 18, 2014. Applicant received the FORM, and he had
30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted a response dated June 5, 2014. DOHA
assigned this case to me on July 15, 2014. The Government submitted eight exhibits,
which have been marked as Items 1-8 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s
response to the SOR has been marked and admitted as Item 4, and the SOR has been
marked as Item 1. His written response to the FORM is admitted into the record as
Applicant Exhibit A (AE A).
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.d
and 1.j of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He
denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.e -1.i of the SOR.  Applicant stated that he did not1
recognize the debt in SOR allegation ¶ 1.f, which is treated as a denial. He also
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 32 old, works as a help desk administrator for a DOD
contractor. He began his current employment in July 2011. As required by his job, he
works overseas in a dangerous area. Applicant served in the National Guard as a
reservist for more than 10 years. He received an honorable discharge in March 2011.
While in the National Guard, Applicant served in Iraq between February 2003 until
February 2004. Upon returning from his deployment, Applicant was unable to find
employment for eight months. He worked steadily from October 2004 until April 2010,
when he voluntarily left his job for religious and family reasons. He remained
unemployed until July 2011, a total of 15 months.2
Item 1; Items 6-8.3
Item 6.4
Item 6; Item 8.5
Item 5; Item 7; Item 8; AE A.6
Item 5; Item 7; AE A.7
3
Applicant attended college, but did not graduate. He is single. He has two sons,
ages 11 and 6. His sons do not live with him; however, he is obligated to pay child
support for each child. He pays $469 a month for his oldest son and $369 a month for
his younger son. When he met with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
security clearance investigator in November 2011, Applicant acknowledged that he was
behind in his child support payments. The October 2011 credit report indicated that he
owed $7,796 and $6,892 in child support for each of his sons. The April 2013 credit
report showed that Applicant had paid his child support arrearage and is now current on
his child support payments.3
Applicant provided a personal financial statement with his answers to the April
2013 interrogatories. His net monthly income totals $7,650, and his monthly expenses
total $2,867, including $838 in monthly child support payments. He has a monthly
remainder of $4,783 available to pay his debts.   4
Applicant denied any knowledge of the $1,042 debt in SOR allegation 1.f and
admitted the $1,110 education loan debt in SOR allegation 1.e. The April 2013 credit
report reflects that the creditor for the 1.f $1,042 education debt submitted a claim with
the government for payment of this loan and that the high credit for the 1.e debt was
$1,042 with a new balance due to the Department of Education of $1,110. I find that the
two debts are the same.5
SOR allegations 1.a ($2,253), 1.b ($143), and 1.c ($600) related to debts owed to
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) for education loans. Applicant contacted the VA
and made arrangements to pay these debts. For each loan, he agreed to pay $190,
$25, and $50 a month respectively, until the loans are paid. He provided documentation
showing that he made his first payments on June 4, 2014. The smallest debt will be paid
by October 2014, and the remaining two debts will be paid by June 2015.6
The October 2011 credit report reflects that Applicant disputed the account
information for the debt in SOR allegation 1.j ($8,595). He contacted the creditor, and
the creditor agreed that he owed $5,214. He arranged to repay his debt at the rate of
approximately $652 a month for eight months. He made his first payment on May 23,
2014, and he will continue to make a payment on the 23  of each until the debt is paidrd
in full at the end of January 2015. He did not provide any documentation showing his
payment or the agreement.7
AE A.8
Items 6-8.9
AE A.10
AE A.11
4
Applicant contacted the creditor for the $9,359 education debt in the summer of
2013. Because the loan is in default, the creditor required him to participate in a
voluntary repayment program for 10 months beginning May 29, 2014. At the end of this
program, his application for loan rehabilitation will be considered. Applicant made the
first two payments at the end of May 2014, as required. He did not provide proof of
payment, but he has provided a copy of the agreement and voluntary payment plan.8
Concerning, the remaining four debts, Applicant indicated in his answers to
interrogatories that he had paid these debts. The debts in SOR allegations 1.g ($1,733),
1.h ($732) and 1.i ($337) are listed on the October 2011 credit report. None of these
debts are listed on the April 2013 credit report. Applicant indicated that he also paid the
$1,110 education loan debt, but the credit report does not show his payment, and he did
not provide documentary proof.9
Applicant submitted a letter dated June 3, 2014 from his point of contact at his
work station. This individual, a first lieutenant in the U.S. Army, verified that Applicant
made the necessary arrangements to pay his debts and that he is working diligently to
pay the outstanding balances on his debts. The lieutenant also described Applicant as a
hard worker and a valued member of his team, who is a “paragon of knowledge and
customer service” and a dedicated worker.10
Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from a major, a lieutenant
colonel, and a brigadier general, each praising his work skills and dedication to his job
and the mission. He also provided three letters complimenting his work and skills on a
particular project.   11
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
5
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
6
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant developed significant financial problems during periods of
unemployment. At the time the SOR was issued, he had not resolved many of his debts.
These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
¶ 20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s last voluntary period of unemployment created significant financial
difficulties for him. After he returned to work full-time in July 2011, he focused his debt
repayment efforts on his substantial child support arrearage, which he fully resolved by
April 2013. He also resolved several smaller debts. More recently, he has contacted his
remaining creditors and developed payment plans for these debts. His actions reflect a
good-faith effort by him to repay his debts. Although he has not received financial
counseling, his debts are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable,
and 20(d) is fully applicable.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
7
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F,
the Appeal Board provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See d
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
ea determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
8
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
began taking responsibility for his debts after he began his current employment. He
reasonably chose to pay his child support arrearage first. He is now current on this
obligation. Although he did not provide documentation showing payment, his statement
that he has paid several smaller debts is accepted as it is supported by the 2013 credit
report, the lieutenant’s letter, and his showing of payments to the VA. These efforts
establish a meaningful track record of debt payment. 
Even though he is working thousands of miles from home, he diligently pursued
his creditors and made arrangements to pay his remaining debts through a reasonable
and credible payment plan. His command confirmed that he has made these contacts
and that he is working towards a resolution of his debts. He has sufficient income to pay
the agreed upon payments, to resolve his outstanding debts quickly, and to pay his
customary living expenses. While he did not pay all his overdue debts by the time the
SOR was issued, he has not ignored his debts. He has taken affirmative action to pay or
resolve most of the delinquent debts raising security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(6).) Of
course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid: it is whether his financial
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. While some
debts remain unpaid, they are insufficient to raise security concerns. (See AG &
2(a)(1).) His superiors praise his work skills and performance, which supports granting
him a security clearance. The letters of recommendation are not a major determining
factor in this decision.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
