 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 12-08877 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 2, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant submitted an undated and incomplete SOR answer. On February 28, 
2014, the DOD CAF contacted him by e-mail seeking clarification of his answer. On 
March 3, 2014, Applicant replied by e-mail denying both allegations with explanations. 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 4, 2014. The case was 
assigned to me on April 9, 2014. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 17, 2014, 
scheduling the hearing for May 13, 2014. On April 24, 2014, DOHA issued an 
amended notice of hearing rescheduling the case for May 15, 2014. The hearing was 
held as rescheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
GE 4, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which were received into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were received 
into evidence without objection.  
 
I held the record open until June 4, 2014, to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents. Applicant submitted AE C through AE NN, which were 
received into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on May 23, 2014. The record closed on June 4, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, with explanations. Applicant’s answers 
and explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old senior director of professional services, who has 
been employed by a defense contractor since June 1983. He has held a security 
clearance since 2001 that was upgraded to a top secret security clearance in 2007. 
(GE 1, Tr. 14-18.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1974. He was awarded an 
associate’s degree in computer electronics in May 1982. (GE 1, Tr. 18-19.) Applicant 
married in April 1978. He and his wife have three adult children. His middle son, age 
32, lives at home and is financially “semi”  dependent on Applicant for support. His 
other two children are independent. (GE 1, Tr. 21-22.) 
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Air Force from November 1974 to January 1980, 
and was honorably discharged as a sergeant (pay-grade E-4). His wife also served in 
the Air Force from September 1976 to August 1979, and was honorably discharged as 
a senior airman (pay-grade E-4). (AE D, AE E, Tr. 20-21.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges two mortgage foreclosure deficiency balances of 
$54,168 and $54,121. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a (Property A) and 1.b (Property B)). These two 
deficiency balances arose from two homes he purchased in 2008 as investment 
properties to subsidize his retirement income. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, Tr. 23-26.)  
 
3 
 
 
 
            At the time Applicant purchased these properties in 2008, he and his wife 
conducted a financial analysis regarding the feasibility of purchasing them taking into 
account his income and various possible tenant scenarios. (Tr. 26-28.) Property A was 
Section 8 housing with rent guaranteed; however, rent was capped at a specified 
amount. After Applicant purchased the properties, local authorities determined 
Property A was in a flood plain. This determination resulted in a significant insurance 
increase changing Property A from a profitable investment to a losing investment. 
Applicant now had a negative $225 monthly deficit that he was required to absorb as a 
result of the rent cap. (Tr. 28-29, AE T, AE U.) At about the time Applicant 
experienced a negative cash flow on Property A, he also began having problems 
keeping paying tenants in Property B. Properties A and B became unaffordable 
liabilities in a relatively short period of time. (Tr. 29-33, 45-56, 76-80, 87-89.)  
   
  When Applicant realized that he could no longer afford to keep his two 
investment properties, he attempted: (1) to sell the properties through short sale or 
execute a deed in lieu of foreclosure; (2) tried to renegotiate his mortgages with the 
bank; (3) attempted to list his properties with a local realtor; (4) tried to sell the 
properties himself; (5) attempted to increase rent on his Section 8 home; and (6) listed 
properties with the Veteran’s Administration. All of these efforts were unsuccessful 
and are well documented in the record. (Tr. 41-42, 57-63, 72-73, 80-85, GE 2, GE 4, 
AE A, AE C, AE L, AE M, AE N, AE X, AE Y, AE Z, AE AA, AE BB, AE CC, AE DD, 
AE EE, AE JJ.) 
 
  No longer able to afford these two investment properties, Applicant consulted 
with an attorney regarding options and received counseling regarding the foreclosure 
process. Following that advice, Applicant stopped making mortgage payments on the 
Properties A and B in early 2011. The bank initiated foreclosure proceedings and 
auctioned them off. The bank subsequently issued a Form 1099-A for both properties 
also in 2011. Applicant made numerous attempts to contact the bank to secure a Form 
1099-C on both properties, but was unable to do so. The bank did, however, issue 
Applicant a letter dated May 15, 2014 stating that both mortgage accounts had a zero 
balance and that he had no further obligation on the two loans. Additionally, his May 
2014 credit report reflects zero balances on both mortgage accounts. The delinquent 
mortgage accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b are resolved. (Tr. 42-45, 56, 65-
72, 86-87, 89-94, GE 2, AE A, AE C, AE K, AE L, AE O, AE P, AE V, AE W.) 
 
  While owning Properties A and B, Applicant’s wife was diagnosed with sleep 
apnea in 2010 and during a hospital procedure in December 2010 to correct her sleep 
apnea, she contracted Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). 
Applicant’s wife spent most of 2011 convalescing and to this day has not fully 
recovered and must limit her activities. Also, during this time-frame, Applicant’s 
mother-in-law became ill, was placed in hospice, and died in early 2012. His father-in-
law passed away shortly after that. These events impacted Applicant’s situation, 
particularly in light of the fact that his wife was primarily responsible for managing 
Properties A and B. Her illness and family problems not only affected her ability to 
 
4 
 
 
manage the properties, but also affected her ability to work and earn income. (Tr. 61-
63, 96-97, AE A, AE C, AE Q, AE R, AE S.)  
 
Applicant’s budget reflects that his finances are under control, that he lives 
within his means, has regained financial responsibility, and has a net monthly 
remainder of $1,926. His bank accounts are in good standing with adequate funds and 
he has a 401k account with a $409,051 balance as of May 2011. (Tr. 33-41, 85, GE 2 
AE G, AE K, AE GG, AE HH, AE II, AE KK, AE LL, AE MM, AE NN.)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant has worked for his company for 31 years. During those 31 years, 
Applicant’s job title changed as a result of receiving numerous promotions. In 
December 2011, he was awarded a bonus payment as a reward for contributing to his 
company’s growth and success. (GE 2, AE F.) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
 
5 
 
 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant could not have anticipated 
the extent and duration of the housing market crash as well as the increased costs of 
retaining his two properties. Additionally, he could not have foreseen that his wife 
would have contracted MRSA following a surgery to correct her sleep apnea.  To 
Applicant’s credit, he acted responsibly and remained in contact with his creditor 
during this entire process.1  
 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. Applicant’s budget does, however, demonstrate 
that he is living within his means and has regained financial responsibility. Applicant 
produced ample documentation to warrant full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2 Applicant 
has resolved his two SOR debts.  AG ¶ 20(e) is not relevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s service as a defense contractor weighs in his favor. He is a law-
abiding citizen and is a productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-day 
expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debts have been fully mitigated. After 
having had an opportunity to observe Applicant, assess his credibility, and consider 
                                                          
 
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
the steps he has taken to regain financial responsibility, he has done all that could be 
expected.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s service as a defense 
contractor, his efforts to resolve his financial situation, his past military service, his 
potential for future service as a defense contractor, the mature and responsible 
manner in which he dealt with his adverse situation, and his testimony and demeanor. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns. 
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
