 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00142 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s connections to his wife’s relatives in Belarus are outweighed by his 
connections to family members in the United States. He has established deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. His many years working 
for the United States in imminent danger areas show that he can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. Foreign influence security concerns 
are mitigated. The personal conduct security concerns resulting from his falsifications of 
security clearance applications and false statements to investigators are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
November 1, 2012. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons 
(SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) and 
Guideline E (personal conduct) on January 14, 2013.1 Applicant answered the SOR on 
August 2, 2013, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The scheduling of the hearing was delayed because Applicant was working 
overseas and unavailable. The case was assigned to me on May 21, 2014, after 
Applicant requested an expedited hearing. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on May 28, 2014, scheduling a hearing for June 
13, 2014. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 19. GE 19 is a 
request for me to take administrative notice of facts concerning the government of 
Belarus. GE 19 was considered and attached to the record, but not admitted into 
evidence. Applicant did not object, and I took administrative notice concerning the 
government of Belarus as outlined in the Government’s request for administrative 
notice, incorporated herein. 
 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted 
exhibits (AE) 1 (comprised of Tabs A through JJ) and AE 2 (an extract of the Federal 
Rules of Evidence). AE 2 was considered and attached to the record, but not admitted 
into evidence. All remaining Government and Applicant’s exhibits were admitted. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 23, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c, and denied all 
remaining SOR allegations. His admission is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, and having observed 
Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old linguist employed by a government contractor. He was 
born and raised in Egypt by Egyptian parents. He attended an Egyptian university for a 
period of two years. He received a “career certificate” for completing a one-year study 
from 1990-1991, and another “career certificate” for completing another one-year study 
from 1991-1992. The career certificates made no reference to Applicant having 
completed an associate’s or a bachelor’s degree, or the equivalent thereof. He 
presented no documentary evidence to show he attended any other Egyptian university 
before or after 1990-1992, or that he received an associate’s or a bachelor’s degree 
from any Egyptian university. Applicant testified that his college education was funded 
by his father. After college, he worked for his father in the family business.   
 
Applicant married his first wife, a U.S. citizen by birth, in 1995, and that same 
year he immigrated with her to the United States. He has a 13-year-old daughter of this 
marriage. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2000, and he formally 
renounced his Egyptian citizenship and surrendered his Egyptian passport in January 
2005. Applicant attended college in the United States during 1997-1998, but did not 
complete a degree. 
 
In May 2005, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. The filing listed 
total assets of $9,450 and total liabilities of over $94,000, which included a $50,000 
promissory note from 1994 (a loan from his then father-in-law), 10 credit accounts 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
totaling over $39,600, with the remainder $4,372 encompassing debts to utilities, 
medical providers, and an insurance company. The larger credit accounts included 
credit card debts for $8,000; $6,773; $7,846; $11,144; and $1,055. Applicant provided 
the list of creditors and collection notices to his bankruptcy attorney to be included in the 
bankruptcy filing. He also appeared in court with his attorney. He claimed that although 
he signed the bankruptcy petition, he never read it, and that he was not fully aware of 
the total of his bankruptcy liabilities. 
 
Applicant explained that his debt became unmanageable while going through a 
contentious divorce from 2001 to 2005. He used his credit to pay for his day-to-day 
living expenses and his divorce legal fees. He testified he filed for bankruptcy protection 
because he was going through a stressful period, the roughest time in his life, and he 
could not fulfill his financial obligations. He claimed to be embarrassed about his past 
financial situation and having to file bankruptcy. (Tr. 127) 
 
Although separated from his then wife, Applicant lived with his in-laws, wife, and 
daughter while the divorce was pending from 2001 to 2004. In 2004, he moved to 
another state to live with his mother and brother who immigrated to the United States in 
2001. His divorce became final in 2006. Applicant claimed that he paid back $22,000 of 
the promissory note. However, he failed to submit documentary evidence of any 
payments made. In his 2005 bankruptcy filing, Applicant swore he owed the $50,000 
promissory note.  
 
Applicant married his current wife (W) in April 2006, and they have a three-year-
old daughter. His wife was born, raised, and educated in Belarus. She completed a 
bachelor’s degree in Belarus, and entered the United States in 2003, at age 21, under a 
work visa. She later was granted asylum for religious beliefs because she was being 
discriminated by authorities in Belarus. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen by 
marriage in June 2013. She attended college in the United States and is now a 
registered nurse. She has three different jobs and works long hours while Applicant is 
deployed. She works as a nurse in a hospital, as a hospice nurse, and as a visiting 
nurse for the elderly. Applicant and his wife work hard to fulfill their dream and own a 
home in the United States. 
 
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army in August 2006, at age 34, for a period of 
three years. He testified that he joined the Army because he felt obligated to the United 
States for all the privileges and benefits he received after immigrating to the United 
States. He believes it was his responsibility to volunteer for military service to repay the 
United States for all the benefits that he has received. 
 
While on active duty, Applicant served three tours in Iraq in imminent danger pay 
areas. He and his unit were constantly under hostile fire. He completed his enlistment in 
April 2009, and received an honorable discharge. Applicant said he was discharged as 
a sergeant (E-5). However, his Certificate of Release or Discharge From Active Duty 
(DD 214) shows that he was an E-4 at the time of his discharge.  
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
After his discharge from the Army, Applicant worked as a linguist for several 
defense contractors providing services to deployed U.S. personnel in Iraq, Kuwait, and 
recently in Afghanistan. He testified that since 2009, he has been consistently deployed 
to dangerous areas where he has risked his life in support of U.S. personnel. In April 
2010, he was terminated from his job with a government contractor because he 
allegedly violated a company policy prohibiting harassment in the workplace. (SOR ¶ 
2.k) Applicant admitted that he was terminated, but denied any misconduct. Email 
exchanges and telephone calls between the alleged victim and Applicant showed they 
continued a close friendship even after he was terminated. She encouraged, supported, 
and offered to assist Applicant in contesting his termination. (AE M, N) 
 
Applicant has been deployed to Afghanistan from January 2012 to present. He 
was wounded in Afghanistan as a result of a roadside bomb that damaged the military 
vehicle he was riding. During the last two years, he has returned to the United States 
twice for short periods to visit his family and to appear at his security clearance hearing. 
 
Applicant’s wife testified that her family came to Belarus from the Ukraine. Her 
father is deceased. Her mother is a citizen of Belarus who has been residing in the 
United States with Applicant’s wife for close to three years. Her mother worked 24 years 
for the government of Belarus and recently retired. She is entitled to a $200 pension 
from the government of Belarus. Applicant’s mother-in-law is 64 years old. She came to 
the United States to help care for Applicant’s daughter while Applicant is deployed and 
his wife is working. She is currently a green card holder, and has not visited Belarus 
since she entered the United States. According to Applicant’s wife, her mother has no 
intention to return to Belarus, and is learning English to apply for U.S. citizenship. Her 
mother has no access to her pension because she has to be present in Belarus to 
withdraw the money from the bank. Applicant and his wife are supporting his mother-in-
law. His wife testified that her mother has no interest in the pension and is willing to 
forfeit it to stay in the United States.  
 
Applicant’s brother-in-law is 38 years old. He works the family farm with his wife 
and two children. The evidence of the size and market value of the family farm, or 
whether Applicant’s wife would have a future interest in the property is unclear. 
Applicant’s wife has monthly contact with her brother via the internet or the telephone. 
Her mother has frequent contact with him and his family. Applicant testified he has no 
contact with his brother-in-law because of the language barrier and his many 
deployments.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified both his August 2006 (SOR ¶ 2.a) and 
his May 2008 (SOR ¶ 2.c) SCAs when he failed to disclose in response to Section 8 
(Citizenship, Item d, Dual Citizenship) that he had been a dual citizen of Egypt and the 
United States from July 2000 (when he became a naturalized U.S. citizen) until January 
2005 (Egyptian government’s acceptance of Applicant’s citizenship renunciation). In his 
responses to both SCAs, Applicant answered “not applicable,” and failed to disclose 
that he had been a dual citizen of Egypt and the United States from July 2000 to 
January 2005. Applicant explained that he believed that he had renounced his Egyptian 
citizenship when he became a U.S. citizen in 2000. (Tr. 116) 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Applicant disclosed on both SCAs (2006 and 2008) that he was born, educated, 
and married in Egypt. He also disclosed that his immediate family members were 
citizens and residents of Egypt, and that he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 
2000. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s omission was not 
deliberate or made with the intent to mislead the Government. He had otherwise 
provided sufficient information for the Government to conclude that he had been a dual 
citizen of Egypt and the United States.  
 
SOR ¶ 2.b alleges that Applicant falsified his August 2006 SCA when he failed to 
disclose in response to Section 18 (Foreign Countries You Have Visited During the Last 
Seven Years), that he visited Egypt from March to June 2001, and from September to 
October 2001. Applicant explained that he had provided the agency a handwritten SCA 
(AE HH) in which he disclosed his two 2001 trips to Egypt. Apparently, that information 
was omitted when the agency transcribed the handwritten SCA to the computerized 
SCA version. (GE 5) Applicant claimed that he was not allowed sufficient time to review 
the finalized SCA (GE 5) before he signed it. 
 
Applicant disclosed in his May 2008 SCA (GE 4) both 2001 trips to Egypt. In May 
2009 and January 2012, Applicant completed Counterintelligence and Security 
Screening Questionnaires (GE 6 and GE 7), in which he disclosed his 2001 trips to 
Egypt. Applicant’s more recent SCAs (from April 2009 (GE 3) forward) did not require 
disclosure of travel to foreign countries beyond the preceding seven years. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his April 2009 SCA (SOR ¶ 2.d), his 
December 2011 SCA (SOR ¶ 2.g), and his November 2012 SCA (SOR ¶ 2.j) when he 
disclosed in response to Section 26 (Financial Record) that he had filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection in 2005, but deliberately minimized the true value of his liabilities 
by claiming that they were $12,000, when in fact his bankruptcy liabilities were over 
$94,000.  
 
Similarly, SOR ¶¶ 2.e and 2.h alleged that Applicant made false statements to 
government investigators during interviews in May 2009 and in January 2012 
(respectively) when he deliberately minimized his 2005 bankruptcy liabilities by falsely 
stating that they totaled $12,000, when in fact his bankruptcy liabilities totaled over 
$94,000.  
 
Applicant claimed he made an honest mistake when he stated in his 2009, 2011 
and 2012 SCAs, and to the investigators in 2009 and 2012, that his 2005 bankruptcy 
liabilities totaled $12,000. He claimed that at the time he submitted his SCAs, he 
believed his credit debt totaled around $12,000 and that is the amount he disclosed. He 
also claimed he never read or was provided a copy of his bankruptcy filing, and that he 
was never aware of the total of his bankruptcy liabilities. 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his December 2011 SCA (SOR ¶ 2.f) 
and his November 2012 SCA (SOR ¶ 2.i) when he stated in response to Section 12 
(Where You Went to School) that he attended an Egyptian university from 1986 to 1990 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and received a bachelor’s degree. At his hearing, Applicant claimed that he believed he 
had earned an associate’s degree from an Egyptian university after two years of 
studies. In his handwritten SCA submitted in 2005-2006 (AE HH), Applicant stated that 
he attended an Egyptian university from 1986 to 1990, and that he received an 
associate’s degree in May 1990.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant claimed he attended an Egyptian university part-time 
from 1986 to 1992, because he was working for his father. In response to questions 
during cross-examination, Applicant claimed he attended an Egyptian university full-time 
for a period, and completed 40-50 college credits. Applicant’s documentary evidence 
shows that he attended an Egyptian university from 1990 to 1991, and was awarded a 
“career certificate” for completing studies for one year. He attended the same university 
from 1991 to 1992, and he was awarded another “career certificate” for completing 
studies for one year. (GE 16) Applicant failed to present any documentary evidence to 
show that he attended an Egyptian university from 1986 to 1990, or that he received an 
associate’s degree in May 1990. He presented no documentary evidence to show he 
was ever awarded an associate’s degree or a bachelor’s degree from any Egyptian 
universities.  
 
Applicant submitted numerous statements from U.S. personnel who served with 
him in imminent danger areas. He is considered to be competent, dependable, and a 
dedicated professional. In their opinion, Appellant is trustworthy, and played a crucial 
role in the efficiency and success of the operations in which he participated. He is 
considered to be committed to the United States, and displayed courage and 
determination under enemy fire. His references would welcome the opportunity to serve 
with Applicant again. Additionally, Applicant submitted Army training certificates, a 
certificate of appreciation from a foreign commander working with U.S. personnel, an 
Army Commendation Medal for meritorious service performed in Iraq, and a civilian 
performance evaluation indicating he exceeded expectations. 
 
Policies 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
  Applicant’s mother-in-law, 64, retired from her job for an agency in the 
government of Belarus and is entitled to a $200 pension. She is a citizen of Belarus, but 
has been residing in the United States for close to three years. She is a legal resident 
alien in the United States. According to Applicant’s wife, her mother intends to apply for 
U.S. citizenship, she is not interested in her Belarusian pension, and she does not 
intend to return to Belarus. She is living with Applicant, helping raise her granddaughter, 
and she is being financially supported by Applicant and his wife. Applicant’s brother-in-
law is a citizen and resident of Belarus. Applicant has limited contact with his brother-in-
law. 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.2  
 
Applicant, directly or through his wife, has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and obligation with his in-laws. These contacts create a risk of 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that 
Belarusian agents, criminals, or terrorists operating in Belarus may exploit the 
opportunity to obtain sensitive or classified information about the United States. With its 
negative human rights record, its government’s illegal arms sales, and its relations with 
state sponsors of terrorism, it is conceivable that Applicant or his wife’s family members 
could be subject to coercion. (See, Administrative Notice Support Documents) 
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the Government. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
                                            
2  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant left Egypt in 1995, at age 25, to be with his U.S.-born wife and her 
family in the United States. He has lived in the United States for close to 20 years. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2000, and renounced his Egyptian citizenship in 
2005. He served three years in the U.S. Army. After his honorable discharge, he has 
worked well for government contractors in support of deployed U.S. personnel. In the 
service, and while working for government contractors, Applicant risked his life while 
deployed with U.S. personnel in imminent danger areas. 
 
Applicant has a strong affection and sense of obligation to his wife, two 
daughters, and his brother, all of whom are living in the United States. Because his 
mother-in-law is living in the United States, the security concerns are less. It is unlikely 
that the government of Belarus will be able to use her to manipulate or coerce 
Applicant. However, his brother-in-law may be at risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant is not able to fully meet his 
burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his relatives, 
friends, and associates who are Belarusian citizens and living in Belarus] could create a 
risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(a) has limited applicability and does not 
mitigate the foreign influence concerns. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his wife and her family and 
friends living in Belarus. Although there is no evidence that Belarusian government 
agents, criminal elements, or terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or his 
wife’s family living in Belarus, because of his work for the United States he is 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
nevertheless potentially vulnerable to threats and coercion made against his wife’s 
family living in Belarus.  
 
I find that Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
U.S.” He served in the Army and has worked for government contractors since 2009. 
Applicant’s wife and his two daughters are U.S. citizens living in the United States. His 
mother-in-law is a U.S. resident. Applicant’s financial interests are in the United States. 
He credibly testified that his loyalty is to the United States. He was deployed to Iraq in 
support of U.S. personnel in that country. Additionally, as a government contractor 
employee, he provided valuable services to U.S. personnel deployed to dangerous 
areas. Applicant’s actions show that “[he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his mother-in-law, and his brother-in-law living 
in Belarus, are outweighed by his connections to his sibling, family members, and 
friends living in the United States. He has established deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States. Furthermore, his military service and 
work for Government contractors under dangerous circumstances have established that 
he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. The 
mitigating information taken together is sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence 
security concerns under Guideline B. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  The personal conduct security concerns are based on the following alleged 
falsifications:  
 
  1. Applicant’s failure to disclose on his 2006 and 2008 SCAs that he was a dual 
citizen of Egypt and the United States from about 2000 to 2005 (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.c).  
 
  Applicant disclosed on both SCAs that he was born, educated, and married in 
Egypt. He also disclosed that his immediate family members were citizens and 
residents of Egypt, and that he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2000. He also 
believed he had renounced his Egyptian citizenship when he became a U.S. citizen in 
2000. In light of the evidence as a whole, I find that Applicant’s omission was not 
deliberate or made with the intent to mislead the Government. Moreover, he had 
otherwise provided sufficient information for the Government to conclude that he had 
been a dual citizen of Egypt and the United States for a period. 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
  2. Applicant’s failure to disclose on his 2006 SCA that he traveled to Egypt twice 
in 2001. (SOR ¶ 2.b) 
 
In 2005-2006, Applicant provided the Government agency a handwritten SCA 
(AE HH) in which he disclosed his two 2001 trips to Egypt. Apparently, that information 
was omitted when the agency transcribed the handwritten SCA into the computerized 
SCA version. (GE 5) Applicant disclosed in his May 2008 SCA (GE 4) both 2001 trips to 
Egypt. Additionally, in May 2009 and January 2012, Applicant completed 
Counterintelligence and Security Screening Questionnaires (GE 6 and GE 7), in which 
he disclosed his 2001 trips to Egypt. In light of the evidence as a whole, I find that 
Applicant’s omission was not deliberate or made with the intent to mislead the 
Government. 
 
 3. Applicant’s deliberately minimized the true value of his 2005 bankruptcy 
liabilities on his 2009, 2011, and 2012 SCAs, and to Government investigators, when 
he stated that his liabilities were $12,000 when in fact his bankruptcy liabilities totaled 
over $94,000. (SOR ¶¶ 2.d, 2.e, 2.g, 2.h, and 2.j)  
 
  Applicant claimed he did not intend to minimize his liabilities, to falsify his SCAs, 
or to make any false statements. He claimed that he believed his credit liabilities were 
around $12,000, and because that was the figure he remembered that was what he 
stated. Applicant’s claims of honest mistake lack credibility. He was aware of his own 
delinquent debts because he incurred them, and because he was receiving the 
creditors’ delinquent notices. He gathered all of his delinquent credit information and 
provided it to his bankruptcy attorney for him to prepare the bankruptcy documents and 
file the petition. Applicant also appeared in court in front of a bankruptcy judge with his 
attorney. Among his bankruptcy petition liabilities, Applicant listed a $50,000 promissory 
note to his first wife’s parents, and 10 credit accounts totaling over $39,600. I find that 
he deliberately falsified his SCAs and made false statements to investigators when he 
minimized his 2005 bankruptcy liabilities.  
 
  4. Applicant’s statements in his 2011 and 2012 SCAs (SOR ¶¶ 2.f and 2.i) 
claiming that he attended an Egyptian university from 1986 to 1990, and received a 
bachelor’s degree.  
 
  Applicant’s documentary evidence shows he attended an Egyptian university 
from 1990 to 1991 and received a “career certificate” for that year. He attended the 
same Egyptian university from 1991 to 1992 and received another “career certificate.” 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show he attended any Egyptian 
university from 1986 to 1990, or that he was awarded an associate’s or a bachelor’s 
degree in 1990 or thereafter. At his hearing, Applicant made several contradictory 
statements attempting to explain the period he attended the Egyptian university, and the 
certificates he received. I find that he deliberately falsified his SCAs when he 
misrepresented the years he attended college and stated he was awarded an Egyptian 
college degree. 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  5. In April 2010, Applicant was terminated from his job with a government 
contractor because he allegedly violated a company policy prohibiting harassment in the 
workplace. (SOR ¶ 2.k)  
 
  Applicant admitted that he was terminated, but denied any misconduct. 
Considering the record as a whole, particularly the email exchanges between the 
alleged victim and Applicant after the alleged incident happened, I find that the record 
evidence is insufficient to establish that Applicant violated company policy by harassing 
a female coworker. 
 
 Applicant’s falsifications trigger the applicability of the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the mitigating conditions 
fully apply. Applicant made no effort to correct his false statements as outlined in SOR 
¶¶ 2.d-2.j. His false statements were relevant and material to the security clearance 
process. Applicant’s falsifications raise serious questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and 
ultimately on his ability to protect classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines B and E in my whole-person 
analysis. I considered Applicant’s service in the Army and his good work for government 
contractors while deployed to imminent danger areas in support of U.S. interests. I find 
that Applicant’s favorable evidence is sufficient to mitigate the Guideline B concerns 
raised by his contacts with Belarusian family members. 
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns. He made false statements on issues relevant and material to the security 
clearance process. I have carefully assessed Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity at his 
hearing, and I find his explanations concerning the falsifications in SOR ¶¶ 2.d-2.j are 
not credible. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts 
and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has not 
carried his burden of persuasion and the personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.c:      For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2 Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c, and 2.k:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.d-2.j:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
