 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00292 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Nathaniel J. Webb, III, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established his eligibility for access to classified information. He has 
reformed his past behavior and the circumstances that contributed to his past conduct 
have substantially changed. Together, these significant changes mitigate the security 
concerns raised by his past criminal conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD), in accordance with DOD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). Applicant 
timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish his eligibility for access 
to classified information (Answer).  
 
On April 3, 2014, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to 
proceed with a hearing in the case. On April 15, 2014, a notice of hearing was issued 
setting the hearing for May 15, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. Department 
Counsel offered exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 6, which were admitted into evidence without 
 
2 
 
 
objection. Applicant testified and called his estranged wife as a witness. The hearing 
transcript (Tr.) was received on May 28, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his late forties. He served in the U.S. military from 1985 to 1990. 
He held a top secret clearance while in the military. Currently, Applicant is an electrician 
for a defense contractor and has been working for his present employer since 2008. He 
recently completed on-the-job training, was promoted to a supervisory position, and is 
on track for greater responsibility and leadership. He also has a part-time job driving a 
taxi to help his children pay for their educational and other living expenses.1  
 
 Applicant admits he had issues with alcohol in the past. He began drinking and 
abusing alcohol when he joined the military. His excessive alcohol use led to driving 
under the influence (DUI) convictions in 1990 and 1997. He attended and successfully 
completed all required alcohol safety courses following the 1997 conviction. He has not 
been diagnosed with alcohol abuse or dependence. He has not been cited or arrested 
for DUI since the 1997 incident. He now drinks occasionally, but has not consumed 
alcohol in several months because he does not have the desire to drink.2 
 
 Applicant recognizes he made poor decisions in the past due to his alcohol use. 
After the 1997 incident, he made a promise to himself and his family never to be 
involved in another alcohol-related incident. His estranged wife, who disapproves of 
alcohol use in general, testified that some of Applicant’s past problems were, in part, 
caused by his alcohol use. She continues to see him regularly and has not seen any 
sign that he currently has an alcohol problem.3 
 
Applicant and his wife of over 20 years are currently separated. They have three 
children, ranging in age from 19 to 23. Their married life together was described by his 
estranged wife as “rocky.”4 They argued regularly and separated repeatedly over the 
course of the marriage. At times, the police were called. Applicant was arrested on 
domestic-related charges in 2004, 2006, 2009, 2010, and 2012. All the charges were 
dropped or dismissed, except for convictions in 2004 for violating a protective order and 
2006 for assault.5  
 
Applicant’s wife testified at hearing that, whlie they lived together, she was, at 
times, the aggressor and would call police as a way to provide them the necessary time 
apart. She explained that in 2004 she secured a temporary protective order (TPO) 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-31, 41-43, 54; Gx. 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 15-16, 37-39; Answer; Gx. 2, Gx. 4 – 5.  
 
3 Tr. at 38-39, 56-59, Gx. 5.  
 
4 Tr. at 55, 61.  
 
5 Tr. at 60-61; Answer; Gx. 1 – 4.  
 
3 
 
 
because Applicant’s attempts to reconcile following their latest argument bordered on 
harassment. She secured the TPO as a means to separate from her husband. Applicant 
failed to abide by the TPO and returned to the family home before the 72-hour 
temporary order expired. Applicant’s wife testified that no violence or other aggravating 
circumstances were involved when the TPO was violated. She allowed Applicant to 
return to the family home when the TPO expired. She did not seek a permanent order of 
protection and one was not issued. She adamantly denies that Applicant physically 
abused her or their children.6 
 
Applicant and his wife have lived apart since 2010. Applicant was arrested in 
2012 for trespassing when he went to his wife’s home to speak with their daughter. His 
daughter did not want to speak with him and he refused to leave. His wife was upset 
because he had not asked permission to come over to her new home. She called the 
police, and Applicant was arrested and charged with trespassing. The charge was later 
dropped. Applicant has not been involved in any further domestic-related incidents.7  
 
Applicant voluntarily disclosed his domestic-related criminal charges on his 
security clearance application and discussed them fully during the ensuing background 
investigation. His relationship with his wife has normalized. They remain separated, but 
speak on a regular basis regarding their children and other issues. He is actively 
involved with his church. He has a healthy and supportive relationship with his children.8 
Applicant’s wife testified that, in her opinion, Applicant is a “good person. He does good, 
he works hard, and he really tries. Just together we weren’t really good. But he is a 
really good person.”9 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 47-51, 60-67. No police report or other evidence was offered that contradicts the information 
provided by Applicant and his estranged spouse regarding any of the domestic-related incidents. The 
testimony of a spouse or partner, who is allegedly the victim of domestic violence, denying abuse by the 
alleged perpetrator is normally viewed with understandable skepticism. However, in this case, Applicant’s 
wife does not have any underlying bias or motive to fabricate. She is not financially or otherwise 
dependent on Applicant. She separated from Applicant, moved into her own home, and has been living 
on her own for the past four years. Furthermore, her testimony did not mirror Applicant’s testimony word-
for-word, which would raise a suggestion of coaching or undue influence. Additionally, her demeanor and 
manner of speech is reflective of a strong-willed individual who is unafraid to tell the truth. For all the 
following reasons, I found her testimony denying physical abuse credible. 
 
7 Tr. at 53-61, 67-69; Gx. 4.  
 
8 Tr. at 55-56, 67-69; Answer. 
 
9 Tr. at 55. 
 
4 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.10 However, as the Appeal Board has unequivocally 
held, there is no per se rule in security clearance cases requiring disqualification. A 
judge must decide each case based on its own merits.11 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.12 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
10 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”).  
 
11 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
12 See, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations require 
administrative judges to make predictive judgments about an individual’s ability and willingness to protect 
and safeguard classified information). See also, ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (The “Adjudicative 
Guidelines are designed to predict. The prediction in nonsecurity violation cases is made by identifying 
and then evaluating behaviors or circumstances that have an articulable nexus to the ability or willingness 
to safeguard classified information.”) (emphasis in original). 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern regarding criminal conduct is explained at AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal offenses raise this security concern, and trigger application of 
the following Guideline J disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
AG ¶ 31(c): allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
 The guideline also sets forth a number of conditions that may mitigate the 
criminal conduct concern. I have considered all the listed mitigating conditions and only 
the following warrant full discussion: 
 
AG ¶ 31(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 31(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but 
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s past criminal conduct was, in part, a byproduct of his excessive 
alcohol use and volatile marriage. Applicant demonstrated, through his words and the 
absence of any alcohol-related offenses over the past 17 years, that it is unlikely he will 
again be involved with such an offense. Although only two years have passed since his 
last domestic-related incident, the family dynamics that, in part, contributed to his 
conduct have substantially changed.13 Applicant and his wife have now been 
permanently separated for a significant period of time. Over the past two years, 
Applicant has come to terms with their separation and now has a healthy, respectful 
relationship with his wife and family. Also, over the past two years, Applicant’s 
employment record has been good. He was recently promoted to a supervisory role, 
                                                          
13 Recognition that Applicant’s family circumstances played a role in his past conduct does not excuse or 
condone his conduct. Applicant understands that his past conduct was wholly inappropriate and 
demonstrated, over the past two years, that he will not reengage in such inexcusable conduct.  
 
6 
 
 
and is on track for a larger leadership role with his employer. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(d) 
apply.14  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).15 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline J 
and highlight some additional whole-person factors. Applicant served in the U.S. military 
and held a top secret clearance for five years without issue. He has worked as a 
defense contractor for the past six years and proven to his employer that he possess 
the necessary qualities to be entrusted with a supervisory position. He secured part-
time work to help his adult children pay for their education and living expenses. He 
voluntarily disclosed the adverse information regarding his past criminal conduct. He 
has overcome his past issues with alcohol and now has a healthy and respectful 
relationship with his wife and children. These whole-person factors, coupled with the 
mitigation conditions noted above, mitigate the security concerns raised by his past 
criminal conduct. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:         For Applicant 
 
                                                          
14 I also considered AG ¶ 31(c), because no evidence was presented to substantiate SOR ¶ 1.b, alleging 
that Applicant was arrested on a domestic-related charge in 1992. Additionally, no evidence was 
presented that Applicant actually committed the domestic-related offenses for which he was arrested in 
2009 and 2010, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h. However, the lack of evidence as to these three 
allegations is not case dispositive, nor mitigates Applicant’s overall criminal conduct. Instead, as more 
fully explained herein, Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct concern by demonstrating true reform.  
 
15 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
