 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01296 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 7, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. Applicant answered the 
 
2 
 
 
SOR on February 26, 2014, and requested a hearing on April 10, 2014. On May 19, 
2014, the case was assigned to me. On June 4, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for June 24, 
2014. The hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
3, while Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B. The record of 
the proceeding was left open until July 23, 2014, for Applicant to submit additional 
matters. He timely submitted documents that were marked as AE C through L. All 
proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The transcript (Tr.) of 
the hearing was received on July 7, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 63-year-old project engineer who works for a defense contractor. 
He has worked for his current employer since August 1978. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in January 1987 and a master’s degree in business administration in May 1991. 
He has been married four times, most recently in April 2004. He has four children, ages 
25, 30, 35, and 44, and a stepchild, age 34. He has held a security clearance without 
incident since about 1979.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had three delinquent student loans totaling 
$67,853 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each 
allegation. His admissions are incorporated as findings as fact.2 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant also stated: 
 
I do admit that I have not paid off these student loans in which I am the co-
signer for my son [name omitted]. He is the primary signer on these loans. 
In the past, I have helped him out in making payments. Once he moved 
away, I was less inclined to continue doing that for him, particularly since 
he has been avoiding me. I want him to step up and take responsibility for 
these loans. It has been more of a matter of principle to me with this issue. 
Up to this point, I have not been willing to let him off the hook. I 
understand that this has affected my credit rating, and now potentially my 
security clearance. Therefore, I have to start addressing this in the near 
term. I have the financial ability to start making payments, or to settle the 
debt by using some of my 401K funds. I am not pleased with this, but am 
considering the latter, just to get the burden of this off my shoulder. . . .3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 21-23, 28-37, 58-60; GE 1.  
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 3. 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
3 
 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that the defaulted student loans were incurred 
for his son’s college education between 2004 and 2008. His son lived at home while 
attending college and was awarded a bachelor’s degree in 2008. The combined 
payments on the three student loans were a little less than $400 per month. After 
completing college, his son had irregular employment and made some payments on the 
student loans. If his son missed payments, Applicant would make them. Applicant 
indicated that he covered about 10 payments for his son. In 2010, Applicant was putting 
pressure on his son to come up with a plan for getting his financial affairs in order. 
Applicant left for a vacation and told his son that he wanted to see the plan when he 
returned. While Applicant was gone, his son had moved out of the house. Applicant has 
not seen him since then. Applicant’s daughter told him that his son was paying his 
debts. Applicant had not heard anything from the student loan creditor and thought 
those loans were being paid. His son, however, defaulted on those loans in 2011.4 
 
At the hearing, Applicant indicated that, while he continued to hope that his son 
would accept responsibly for the student loans, he finally realized that he needed to 
take action to resolve them. He indicated that he was in negotiations with the bank and 
expected to reach a settlement agreement in the near future.5 
 
In his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided documentation showing the 
three delinquent student loans were resolved. On July 11, 2014, the creditor sent 
Applicant a letter agreeing to accept $25,300 as settlement in full for the three student 
loans. In that letter, Applicant was also advised that he might receive an Internal 
Revenue Service 1099 Form indicating that he would be responsible for paying taxes on 
any difference between the principle balance of the loans and amount paid. On July 19, 
2014, Applicant mailed the creditor three cashier’s checks totaling $25,300. Applicant 
indicated that the creditor preferred to settle these accounts with lump-sum payments 
rather than through installment payments.6 
 
Applicant has not defaulted on any other debts. His annual salary is about 
$125,000. His wife is employed as the chief administrative officer of a medical facility 
and earns about $95,000 per year. They own a home, which has a 15-year mortgage. 
They have about seven years remaining on that mortgage. Their monthly mortgage 
payment is about $2,500. He estimated that his and his wife’s net monthly remainder 
(monthly income minus expenses and debt payments) was about $2,000 to $3,000.7 
 
Applicant’s work evaluations for 2012 and 2013 indicated that he was a 
“successful contributor.” The Chief Financial Officer at the company stated that 
                                                          
4 Tr. 23-25, 37-46, 57-58, 61-63; GE 2. 
5 Tr. 23-25, 27-28, 54-56, 61-63, 68-70. 
6  AE F-L. 
7 Tr. 46-54; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant was scrupulously honest, conscientious, trusted, and honorable. In 2013, 
Applicant received a community impact volunteer award for his contributions to those 
less fortunate in the community.8 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
                                                          
8 Tr. 58- 60; AE A-E.  
 
5 
 
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
 Applicant cosigned three student loans on which his son defaulted. Following that 
default, Applicant did not make any payments on those loans for an extended period. 
This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant’s son was primarily responsible for paying the delinquent student loans. 
When his son failed to make those payments, Applicant became responsible for those 
payments. Applicant initially decided not to make the payments on those loans with the 
hope that his son would make a turnaround and accept responsibly for them. Applicant’s 
decision in that regard was not a condition beyond his control.  
 
When Applicant finally realized that his son would not accept responsibly for the 
student loans and that these delinquent debts were placing his security clearance in 
jeopardy, he entered into a settlement arrangement with the creditor and resolved these 
debts. Those delinquent debts arose under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. 
Applicant’s financial situation is stable. The alleged debts do not cast doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) 
apply. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has worked for the same employer for over 35 years. He is a valued 
employee. He has held a security clearance for many years without incident. These 
debts were unresolved because Applicant was trying to have his son take responsibility 
for his educational debts. When he finally concluded that his son would not accept 
responsibly for those debts, Applicant resolved them.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
