 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01295 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On April 10, 2014, Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On May 19, 2014, the case was assigned 
to me. On June 4, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for June 23, 2014. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, while Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G. The 
record of the proceeding was left open until July 7, 2014, for Applicant to submit 
additional matters. He timely submitted documents that were marked as AE H through 
K. All proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The transcript 
(Tr.) of the hearing was received on July 1, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old software engineer who works for a defense contractor. 
He has been employed in his current job since August 2012. He holds a master’s 
degree. He has never been married, but was engaged to be married at the time of the 
hearing. He has no children. From about August 2000 to May 2006, he held a security 
clearance.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had two delinquent student loans totaling 
$24,613 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.b) and that he failed to file his federal income tax returns for 
2009, 2010, and 2011 as required (SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.e). In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted each allegation with explanations. His admissions are incorporated 
as findings as fact.2 
 
From August 2000 to May 2006, Applicant worked as a systems engineer for a 
major defense contractor. In January 2006, he started graduate school. He voluntarily 
left his job in May 2006 to attend graduate school full time and was unemployed until 
December 2006. He earned a master’s degree in May 2007 and continued graduate 
studies until May 2009. As a graduate student, he worked as a teaching assistant at his 
university from January 2007 to May 2008.3 
 
In May 2008, Applicant became self-employed as a programmer of computer 
games and cell phone applications (apps). During 2009, his business was still getting 
started, and he had no income that year. At that time, he was living on withdrawals from 
his retirement account. He testified that he had no excuse for failing to file his 2009 
federal income tax return on time.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5-6, 38-40; GE 1, 2; AE J. Although Applicant has been employed in the same position since 
August 2012, his employer has changed. He started working in that position as a temporary employee for 
a contractor and later switched to a permanent employee of his current company.  
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 32-33, 40; GE 1.  
4 Tr. 31-34, 50; GE 1; AE C, D.  
 
3 
 
 
In about February 2010, Applicant decided his business as a computer 
programmer was not prospering and switched to working as a mathematics tutor. He 
was able to generate income as a private math tutor and also took a position working 
part time in that same role at a community college. When it came time to file his 2010 
federal income tax return, he realized that he did not have good records of his earnings 
and did not know how to file an income tax return as a self-employed individual. He 
indicated that he was more concerned about filing an inaccurate tax return than filing a 
late one. He further stated that he failed to file timely his 2010 federal income tax return 
because of the complexities of such a filing. In 2011, he realized that he was not 
earning enough to pay his student loans and other debts and needed a better job. At 
that time, he again changed jobs by assuming a position as an adjunct mathematics 
instructor at the community college but continued working part time as a private tutor. 
He also incurred capital loses in 2011 and needed information from his previous year’s 
income tax return, which he did not possess and resulted in him failing to file his 2011 
federal income tax return as required.5 
 
In August 2012, Applicant obtained his current software engineer position in 
which he earned more money. Upon obtaining that position, he filed his federal income 
tax returns for 2009, 2010, and 2011. He owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) back 
taxes of $1,920 for 2009, $2,595 for 2010, and $320 for 2011. He proposed a 
repayment plan to the IRS for his back taxes that was approved. He completed making 
payments on that plan in early 2013. Shortly after obtaining his current position, he also 
entered into a rehabilitation agreement to remove his student loans from default status. 
He was required to make monthly payments of $254 on the student loans, but regularly 
paid about double that amount each month. In May 2014, the student loans were 
removed from default status and transferred to another creditor for further processing. 
He has continued paying the new creditor $500 per month. He provided a letter showing 
that he consulted with a certified public accountant regarding his student loans and 
federal income tax returns.6 
 
In 2011, Applicant’s home was foreclosed. The foreclosure sale covered the 
primary mortgage; however, a second mortgage of about $93,000 remains unresolved. 
The second mortgage was not alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s friend who is attorney is 
assisting him in negotiating a settlement of the second mortgage. At the time of the 
hearing, both parties have exchanged settlement offers, but no agreement had been 
reached. Applicant testified that, besides the alleged debts and the foreclosed home, he 
had no other delinquent debts. He currently earns about $75,000 per year.7 
                                                          
5 Tr. 25-26, 34-36, 50-51; GE 1, 2, 3. State income tax return filings are not an issue in this case. 
6 Tr. 23-32, 36-38; GE 1, 2; AE A-G. 
7 Tr. 40-46, 49, 51-52; GE 1, 2, 3. The non-alleged debt will not be considered in applying the 
disqualifying conditions. It may be considered to assess an applicant’s credibility; to decide whether a 
particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of 
the whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006). 
 
4 
 
 
In his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided character reference letters. 
Supervisors described him as responsible, honest, truthful, an exceptional worker, and 
an asset to the company. His mother recounted his educational achievements and 
indicated he “is a man of great integrity.”8 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
                                                          
8 AE H-K. 
 
5 
 
 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for 2009, 2010, and 2011 as 
required. Two of his student loans became delinquent in 2011 and remained in that 
status for an extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant admitted that he had no excuse for failing to file his 2009 federal income 
tax return as required. He filed his 2010 and 2011 federal income tax returns late because 
he was not prepared adequately to file those returns as a self-employed individual. He 
also struggled financially as a graduate student and was unable to pay some of his 
student loans and his home mortgage loans.  
 
Since obtaining his current job in August 2012, Applicant has consulted with an 
accountant, filed his delinquent federal income tax returns, paid his back taxes, and 
rehabilitated his student loans. He has resolved the alleged financial problems. The 
second mortgage on his foreclosed home remains unresolved. An attorney is assisting 
him in negotiating a settlement of the second mortgage. Both parties have exchanged 
settlement offers on the second mortgage, but no agreement was reached at the time of 
the hearing. Nonetheless, Applicant has shown that he is determined to resolve his 
outstanding debt and will continue to take appropriate steps to do so.  
 
Applicant did not establish that his failure to file his federal income tax returns in a 
timely manner were due to circumstances beyond his control. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do 
not apply. He did establish, however, that he has taken appropriate action in resolving the 
alleged financial problems. He presented sufficient evidence to show that his financial 
problems are under control, are being resolved, and are unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant encountered financial problems as a graduate student. He has taken 
responsible steps to resolve his financial problems. His financial situation is stable and 
improving. He has established that he is a valued, reliable, and trustworthy employee.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
