 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:   ) 
  ) 
       )  ADP Case No. 13-01305  
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position   ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the record evidence, I conclude that Applicant mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns under foreign preference, but failed to mitigate concerns 
raised under the guideline for foreign influence. His request for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 4, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and 
C (foreign preference) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In his Answer to the SOR, 
signed May 5, 2014, Applicant admitted four of the six SOR allegations listed under 
foreign influence, as well as the single allegation regarding foreign preference. He also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on June 25, 2014. At the hearing on 
                                                 
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by Executive Order 10865, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications or public trust position determinations in 
which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
July 9, 2014, I admitted one Government exhibit (GE 1), and seven Applicant exhibits 
(AE A-G). DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on July 17, 2014.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Applicant attached six documents to his Answer to the SOR. For administrative 
convenience, I severed the attachments and admitted them as AE A through F. 
 
I take administrative notice of facts related to Russia and Ukraine, included in 14 
U.S. Government documents provided by Department Counsel, and marked as HE II. 
The facts are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable 
dispute, and are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old, and was born in the area that is currently Ukraine. 
When Applicant was born in 1961, the area was part of the Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics (U.S.S.R; Soviet Union). Applicant attended college and graduate school in 
the Soviet Union. He received a master’s degree in 1983, and a doctorate in 1987, 
both in the field of biochemistry. While in college, Applicant received mandatory military 
training, consisting of a half-day of classes per week, for “two or three” years. He held 
the rank of sub-lieutenant, but did not perform military service in the Soviet army.2 He 
does not maintain contact with the classmates with whom he received military training. 
(GE 1; Tr. 17-20, 27-33, 44) 
 
Applicant and his wife married in 1986. In 1989, at the age of 28, Applicant 
moved to the United States for post-doctoral study. He received a master’s degree from 
a U.S. university in 2005. He believed the opportunities for a scientist were better in the 
United States than Russia, and he decided to remain in the United States. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2009. He also holds Russian citizenship. Since 1995, 
Applicant has been a researcher at a university, a lab director, a production manager at 
a research company, and a research and development scientist. This is Applicant's first 
application for access to sensitive information. (GE 1; Tr. 20-22, 27) 
 
Applicant's wife is 51 years old, and was born in the Soviet Union. She is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, and currently works as a laboratory technician at a university. 
She is aware that Applicant is applying for access to sensitive information. She 
maintains her Russian citizenship. Applicant's son, 25 years old, was born in Russia. 
He works in the United States for a consulting company. He holds both U.S. and 
                                                 
2 Applicant provided documentation that appears to be part of his Russian passport. It is dated June 10, 
2009, and shows that he has been “released from liability for military service.” (AE F) 
 
 
3 
Russian citizenship. Applicant's wife and son hold Russian passports. Applicant 
testified that his son’s passport is expired, but he was unsure if his wife’s Russian 
passport remains valid. It has been several years since his wife traveled to Russia. (GE 
1; Tr. 27-33, 43, 47, 54) 
 
Applicant's parents were born in the Soviet Union. Before they passed away, 
they lived in what is now Ukraine. (GE 1; Tr. 33) Applicant's father-in-law, a physicist, is 
also deceased. His mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Russia. She is 75, and 
has been retired for several years. She was formerly a scientist. She and Applicant 
worked at the same scientific institute in the Soviet Union, and Applicant met his wife 
through her. Applicant's mother-in-law travels to the United States to see her daughter 
and Applicant “once in a couple of years.” In his e-QIP, Applicant stated he is in contact 
with his mother-in-law weekly by telephone or through electronic methods. However, at 
the hearing, he testified he has contact with her “a couple of times a year perhaps.” His 
wife keeps in touch with her mother about once per week by telephone or over the 
internet via Skype. (GE 1; Tr. 28-33, 46-47) 
 
In his 2013 e-QIP, Applicant listed travel to Russia and Ukraine in June 2009 to 
visit his mother-in-law, other family, and friends. He also traveled to Ukraine in 
September 2010, November 2010, and December 2012. On one trip, he and his son 
traveled together to visit Applicant's ill mother. Applicant also went to Ukraine in 2013 
and 2014 because he was required to be present for the sale of two properties he 
inherited from his mother. (GE 1; Tr. 31, 37-43) 
 
When Applicant's mother passed away in 2012, he inherited two apartments in 
Ukraine. When Applicant began the process of applying for a sensitive position, he 
learned that foreign financial interests constituted a concern, and initiated the process 
to sell the properties. He sold the first property in July 2013 for approximately $44,000 
in U.S. dollars. He sold the second property in January 2014 for approximately 
$53,000. Applicant testified that he had the proceeds transferred to his account in the 
United States. Applicant had opened a bank account in Ukraine to facilitate the sales. 
He provided documentation showing he closed the account in January 2014. He no 
longer holds financial interests in Russia or Ukraine. (GE 1; AE A-E; Tr. 33-35) 
 
Applicant owns a home in the United States with an estimated value of 
$180,000. He and his wife have retirement savings. He has additional savings in the 
United States, including the proceeds of the sale of the properties in Ukraine, which 
total approximately $130,000. (Tr. 43-44) 
 
Applicant has maintained contact with a man and woman he met when he was 
studying at the university in Ukraine. They are married and are currently citizens and 
residents of Ukraine. He spoke with them infrequently over the years, and a few times 
when he visited his sick mother in Ukraine several years ago. They also assisted him 
with the sale of his properties in Ukraine in 2013 and 2014. (Tr. 36-37, 44-45) 
 
 
 
4 
As of April 2013, when Applicant completed his electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP), he possessed a Russian passport.3 When he 
learned that his foreign passport presented a security concern, he contacted his facility 
security officer (FSO). His FSO provided signed documentation showing that, on June 
26, 2014, Applicant surrendered his foreign passport. (AE G) 
 
Applicant testified that he is willing to renounce his foreign citizenship. He has 
requested information from his FSO about how to proceed, but has not received further 
information. (Tr. 48) 
 
Administrative Notice: Russia; Ukraine 
 
The Russian Federation (Russia) comprises 21 republics, created at the 
dissolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (U.S.S.R.) on August 24, 1991. It 
has a centralized political system, with a bicameral legislature, a weak multi-party 
political system, and power concentrated in the president and prime minister.  
 
The United States and Russia share certain common strategic interests in 
counterterrorism, the reduction of strategic arsenals, and control of the proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. The Cooperative Threat 
Reduction (CRT) program was launched in 1992 to provide for the dismantlement of 
weapons of mass destruction in the former U.S.S.R. The CRT program was renewed in 
2006 for seven years, until 2013. 
 
Tensions between the United States and Russia increased in August 2008, 
when Russia sent its army into the Republic of Georgia. By the end of 2008, relations 
were at a ten-year low. The resetting of U.S. relations in 2009 offered opportunities for 
the creation of a new START treaty, which was completed and entered into force in 
February 2011. The two countries work closely on initiatives designed to address 
threats of nuclear terrorism. However, Russia’s 2014 decision to establish a military 
presence on the Crimean peninsula of Ukraine, and to declare it independent of 
Ukraine and part of the Russian Federation, has again increased tensions between the 
United States and Russia.  
 
Russian intelligence services target U.S. personnel with access to sensitive 
computer network information. According to the Director of National Intelligence, as of 
2014, Russia is one of the leading intelligence threats to U.S. interests. It pursues 
information on advanced weapon systems, as well as proprietary information from U.S. 
companies and research institutions involved with defense, energy, and dual-use 
technology. In addition, Russia supports countries of security concern to the United 
                                                 
3 The SOR alleges (¶1.a) that Applicant's passport expired in June 2014. However, Applicant testified at 
the hearing that this was a misinterpretation of the date. The Russian format places the month first, 
followed by the date (i.e., March 6 is written as 06/03). The expiration date of March 6, 2014 was 
misinterpreted as June 3, 2014. (Tr. 23-24)  
 
 
5 
States, by providing military and missile technologies to China, Iran, Syria, and 
Venezuela.  
 
Russia’s internal problems include a poor human rights record. The U.S. State 
Department’s 2013 human rights report indicated that Russian security forces 
throughout the country committed human rights abuses. The government continued its 
crackdown on dissent that began after Vladimir Putin’s return to the presidency. 
Human rights abuses include: credible reports of torture and excessive force by law 
enforcement officials with inadequate prosecution, resulting in a climate of impunity; 
life-threatening prison conditions; interference in the judiciary and the right to a fair trial; 
restrictions on religious freedom of minorities; widespread corruption; violence against 
women and limits on their rights in certain regions; and trafficking in persons.  
 
Although Russian law prohibits government officials from entering private homes 
except as allowed by law or judicial decision, the State Department reported 
allegations that officials engaged in electronic surveillance without authorization and 
entered homes without warrants. Russian law enforcement agencies have legal access 
to electronic communications, and the internet activity of private individuals. Police can 
legally monitor telephone calls in real time. 
 
Ukraine 
 
 Following the breakup of the USSR in 1991, Ukraine became an independent 
state. In March 2014, Russian forces moved into the Crimean peninsula in western 
Ukraine, and annexed the region. Ukraine and the United States do not recognize the 
annexation. The U.S. General Assembly affirmed Ukraine’s territorial integrity in March 
2014 and deemed the March 16 referendum on Crimean annexation illegitimate. 
Russia has positioned military forces on the border of eastern Ukraine and requires 
non-Russian citizens to obtain a Russian visa to enter Crimea. Armed militants have 
threatened, detained, or kidnapped some journalists and international observers in 
eastern Ukraine for hours or days. In May 2014, the State Department issued a 
warning to U.S. citizens to defer all non-essential travel to Ukraine, and to avoid all 
travel—essential or non-essential—to the Crimean peninsula. 
 
Policies 
 
 Each decision regarding a public trust position must be a fair, commonsense 
determination based on all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or 
mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
6 
against them because they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of 
access to sensitive information. In this case, the pleadings and the information 
presented by the parties require consideration of the adjudicative factors addressed 
under Guidelines B and C.  
 
 A trustworthiness decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether it 
is clearly consistent with the interests of national security5 for an applicant to either 
receive or continue to have access to sensitive information. The Government bears the 
initial burden of producing admissible information on which it based the decision to deny 
or revoke access to sensitive information for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, 
it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a sensitive position, an applicant bears a heavy burden 
of persuasion.6 A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interest as her 
or his own. The “clearly consistent with the interests of national security” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion 
by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
                                                 
5 See DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, ¶¶C2.1.2; C6.1.1. 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
7 
 Under AG ¶ 7 of Guideline B, I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, 
especially the following: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 Family ties to residents or citizens of a foreign country do not per se disqualify 
an applicant from obtaining access to sensitive information; such ties are only 
disqualifying if they create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation or a potential 
conflict of interest. The country in question also must be considered.8 Russia has been 
deemed one of the leading intelligence threats to U.S. interests based on its pursuit of 
information on advanced weapon systems, as well as proprietary information from U.S. 
companies and research institutions involved with defense, energy, and dual-use 
technology.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government and its human rights record are also 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable 
to coercion based on threats or pressure.9 Russia has a poor human rights record 
including, inter alia, abuses committed by security forces, crackdowns on dissent, 
inadequate prosecution of law enforcement’s use of excessive force, restrictions on 
religious freedom of minorities, violence against women, and trafficking in persons. 
Moreover, Russian law enforcement agencies can legally access the electronic 
communications, internet activity, and telephone calls of private individuals. 
 
                                                 
8 See ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 3 (App. Bd., Sep 26, 2006) (the nature of the foreign government 
involved must be evaluated in foreign influence cases). 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006). 
 
 
8 
 Applicant shares a home with his wife. She has been a U.S. citizen since 2012, 
but she is also a citizen of Russia. She is aware that Applicant is applying for access to 
sensitive information. Applicant's son is also a dual Russian-U.S. citizen. In addition, 
Applicant's mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Russia. His wife is in touch weekly 
with her mother, showing a close family relationship. Applicant is also periodically in 
touch with his mother-in-law. The Appeal Board has held, “As matter of common sense 
and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.”10 
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that he has ties of affection and/or 
obligation to his mother-in-law in Russia. Applicant’s relationships with Russian 
citizens--his wife, son, and mother-in-law--constitute a heightened risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation, and a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) 
apply. However, Applicant's infrequent contacts with two friends who are citizen-
residents of Ukraine do not pose a heightened risk of exploitation, and are not 
disqualifying.  
 
 After his mother passed away, Applicant inherited two properties in Ukraine. He 
provided documentation showing that he sold the properties in July 2013 and January 
2014. He no longer holds real estate, bank accounts, or any other financial interests in 
either Russia or Ukraine. AG ¶ 7(e) does not apply. 
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and, 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
Applicant has contact with his mother-in-law, a citizen and resident of Russia. 
Applicant’s wife is aware that he is seeking access to sensitive information, and is in 
                                                 
10 ISCR Case No. 05-00939 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 3, 2007).  
 
 
 
9 
touch with her mother weekly by telephone. Applicant has also been in touch with his 
mother-in-law intermittently on the telephone and over the internet via Skype during the 
years he has been married. Russian authorities monitor telephone and internet activity 
of private individuals. Given these facts, I cannot confidently conclude that Applicant 
could not be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual or government and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not 
apply. 
 
Applicant’s U.S. citizenship, graduate education, residence, and employment 
represent long-standing ties to the United States. Applicant receives partial mitigation 
under AG ¶ 8(b). However, on balance, these facts do not outweigh his relationship to 
a foreign family member with whom his wife has close ties, and with whom he and his 
wife have ongoing contact. Applicant's mother-in-law visits them in the United States 
every couple of years. Applicant's contacts with his mother-in-law are not so casual 
that they fail to raise a concern of foreign influence or coercion. AG ¶ 8(c) does not 
apply. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern under Guideline C, AG ¶ 9, states: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying condition is relevant: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
Applicant possessed a valid Russian passport, which expired in March 2014. He 
possessed the Russian passport until June 2014. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) applies.  
 
 AG ¶ 11 contains factors that can mitigate disqualifying conditions. I have 
considered all the mitigating conditions, especially the following: 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 
10 
 
 Applicant used his Russian passport for foreign travel before he became a U.S. 
citizen in 2009. On June 26, 2013, following his security officer’s instructions, Applicant 
surrendered his Russian passport to his FSO. He provided a statement signed by his 
FSO. Applicant also testified that he has sought information regarding the process to 
renounce his Russian citizenship. His actions indicate that he is willing to renounce his 
foreign citizenship. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 In evaluating the facts in light of the whole-person concept, I considered 
Applicant's U.S. ties: his service to the government through a federal defense 
contractor, his 25-years of residence in the United States, his U.S. citizenship, and his 
economic ties through U.S. property ownership. Moreover, decisions regarding public 
trust positions are made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”11 Here, Applicant’s loyalty 
is not in question. However, such decisions sometimes involve circumstances 
unrelated to an applicant's conduct, such as the foreign residence of an applicant's 
relatives. Here, Applicant’s family ties to a Russian citizen-resident raise security 
concerns. Through his wife, Applicant will continue to have ties to a foreign citizen-
resident, who resides in a country that engages in human rights abuses, monitors 
private communications, and targets U.S. personnel and U.S. companies and research 
institutions for sensitive information.  
 
                                                 
11 See Exec. Or. 10865 §7. 
 
 
11 
 
 Overall, the evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised under Guideline B. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 2.c – 2.f   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to allow Applicant access to sensitive 
information. Applicant’s request for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
