 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01356 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie Young, Esq. 
 
 
July 11, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 35 delinquent debts totaling $18,700, identified on the Statement 
of Reasons (SOR). Applicant is making payments on the majority of those debts 
through a credit counseling organization, in which she enrolled in November 2013. 
Applicant formally disputed all but one of the remaining delinquent accounts with the 
credit reporting agencies. Applicant is making a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise 
resolve her debts. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her electronic Security Clearance Application (e-QIP) on 
April 16, 2013. On February 26, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on April 24, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on May 23, 2014. A notice of hearing 
was issued to Applicant on May 27, 2014, scheduling a hearing for June 17, 2014. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
5, and Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified 
on her own behalf, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through W, which were 
admitted into the record without objection. Applicant requested that the record be left 
open to allow her to submit additional evidence and her request was granted. On July 1, 
2014, Applicant presented additional exhibits, marked AE X through AE DD.1 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE X through AE DD, and they were admitted 
into the record. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on June 24, 2014.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. She is divorced and has two minor children that reside 
out of state with their father. She has worked for a government contractor since April 
2013 and seeks a security clearance in connection with that employment. She 
previously held a security clearance while on active duty with the Army from 1998 to 
2002. She possesses an associate’s degree. (GE 1; AE U; Tr. 29-39, 76.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified 35 delinquent debts totaling $18,700. Applicant’s debts appear in credit 
reports entered into evidence. Applicant admitted all of the debts as alleged in 
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d, and 1.f through 1.hh. She denied subparagraphs 1.e 
and 1.ii.  (Answer; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5.) 
 
Applicant attributed her financial delinquencies to working minimum-wage jobs 
from 2007 to 2009, and the unexpected death of her boyfriend in 2008. During that 
same period, she required two surgeries and did not have adequate health insurance to 
cover the cost of those surgeries. Additionally, her daughter, which she had physical 
custody of at that time, required a surgery that was not fully covered by Tricare. The 
record reflects that Applicant experienced significant periods of unemployment 
including, October 2004 to October 2007; October 2008 to November 2009; January 
2010 to May 2010; May 2011 to July 2011; and March 2012 to July 2012. (GE1; AE U; 
Tr. 58-59, 86-88.) 
 
In November 2013, Applicant contacted a debt management company (DMC) to 
help her consolidate and repay debts. She makes monthly payments of $684.17 to 
DMC. Her first payment was made December 12, 2013, and she is current on her 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s attorney mismarked these exhibits as AE V through AE BB. I renamed them to avoid having 
two exhibits marked AE V and AE W. 
 
3 
 
monthly payment arrangement. Her starting debt balance in November 2013 was 
$21,720.46. As of April 24, 2014, her debt balance decreased to $16,019.38. The DMC 
is making monthly payments on Applicant’s behalf to the creditors identified in 
subparagraphs 1.b through 1.d, 1.g, 1.i through 1.u, 1.w through 1.y, and 1.aa through 
1.ii. She is resolving those accounts in good faith through the DMC.  
 
Applicant’s remaining creditors were all contacted, but did not have records of 
her accounts. She testified she is willing to resolve the remaining accounts through the 
DMC if the creditors will accept payments. (GE 3; AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE AA; AE 
BB; AE CC; AE Z; Tr. 47-57, 78-92.) Those six debts are as follows. 
 
Allegation 1.a is for a delinquent medical debt in the amount of $65. Applicant 
testified that she believes this debt is included in her debt management plan with DMC, 
but she failed to produce evidence to show this account is being resolved. (Tr. 47-48, 
77.) 
 
Applicant testified that the $100 medical debt alleged in allegation 1.e was 
included in her medical debt listed with the DMC. However, she disputed this debt with 
the credit reporting agency by letter dated June 30, 2014. (AE X; Tr. 80.) 
 
The $1,000 debt identified in subparagraph 1.f was incurred when Applicant 
received an advance from a private lender based upon her expected income tax refund. 
That tax refund was garnished to repay student loans and Applicant became indebted to 
the lender. She testified that she contacted this creditor to establish a repayment plan 
but the creditor was unable to locate her account. Applicant wrote to the credit bureau 
and formally disputed this debt on June 30, 2014. (AE X; Tr. 50-51, 71, 82.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a delinquent telephone account in the approximate 
amount of $1,464, as stated in subparagraphs 1.h. She testified that she contacted this 
creditor but that the company no longer has record of the accounts. Applicant wrote to 
the credit bureaus and disputed this debt on June 30, 2014. (AE X; Tr. 83.) 
 
Applicant was indebted on another delinquent telephone account in the 
approximate amount of $195, as stated in subparagraphs 1.v. She provided a letter 
from this creditor that indicated this account has been paid in full. (AE Y; Tr. 85.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a utility company in the amount of $132, as alleged in 
subparagraph 1.z. Applicant testified that she contacted this creditor and the creditor 
was unable to locate her account. Applicant wrote to the credit bureaus and disputed 
this debt on June 30, 2014. (Tr. 85.) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement reflects that she has money left over 
after meeting monthly expenses and satisfying her monthly DMC payment. She intends 
to pay all valid debts in full. (GE 2; AE E; Tr. 48-50.) 
 
Applicant is respected for her honesty, trustworthiness, and integrity by her 
friends, colleagues, and superiors. She has received several awards and training 
 
4 
 
certificates. During her service in the Navy, Applicant earned the Navy Good Conduct 
Medal and the National Defense Service Medal. She received an honorable discharge. 
(AE F through AE R; Tr. 30-33.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. The relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant incurred approximately $18,700 in delinquent 
debt. The debts have been delinquent since approximately 2007. While Applicant 
recently began to address the debts, in its entirety, the Government has established its 
prima facie case against Applicant. The evidence shows Applicant’s “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy” her debts from 2007 to 2013. She has an overall “history of not 
meeting financial obligations” during that time period. 
 
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 were 
considered, including:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The Appeal Board has held, “A security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”2 Security 
clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection proceedings. 
Rather, the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to 
make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”3  
 
 Applicant’s ongoing efforts to address her debt in a meaningful manner show she 
has the judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
While she has not resolved every debt, she is making a good-faith effort to repay 
$15,804 of her $18,700 debt through the DMC. She disputed $2,696 in debt by lodging 
formal disputes with the credit reporting agencies after the creditors found no records of 
the accounts, but is willing to resolve those debts if they are found to be valid. She paid 
one debt of $195. Applicant failed to document that one $65 debt was included in her 
debt management plan, but she credibly testified that she believes it was included. Her 
debts were incurred in 2007 and 2008 due to unfortunate circumstances beyond her 
control including unemployment, underemployment, the death of her boyfriend, and 
unexpected medical care. She has acted responsibly since December 2013, prior to 
receiving the SOR, when she began managing her debt. She now has an income that 
allows her to live within her means and pay off debt. Future indebtedness is unlikely to 
recur. Her financial history, and remaining debt, does not cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control. All five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
20 apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
3 AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a hardworking and dedicated employee who performs well on the 
job. She served in the Army from 1998 to 2002 and received an honorable discharge. 
She is diligently addressing her debts through the DMC or formal disputes. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a through 1.ii:  For Applicant 
   
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
