                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
           ----------------------------------                  )     ISCR  Case No.  13-01135           
                                                              )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns covering foreign preference and foreign
influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On December 6, 2013, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why the
DOD could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security
clearance, and the DoD CAF recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the DoD
on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 3, 2014, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on March 31, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on
April 22, 2014. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the Government's
case consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3). Applicant relied on two witnesses (including
himself) and three exhibits (AEs A-C). The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 7, 2014.
Besides its three exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of
certain facts with respect to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan). It cited
six source documents, all official U.S. Government publications, pertaining to
Afghanistan: Afghanistan: Post-Taliban Governance, Security and U.S. Policy, CRS
Report for Congress (October 2013); Unclassified Report on Progress Toward Security
and Stability in Afghanistan, U.S. Department of Defense (November 2013); Country
Reports on Terrorism 2012, Chapter 2-Country Reports: South and Central Asia, U.S.
Department of State (May 2013); Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012:
Afghanistan, U.S. Department of State (undated);  Travel Warning: Afghanistan, U.S.
Department of State (August 2013); and Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, U.S.
Department of State (August 2013).
Administrative notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative
proceedings. Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government
reports that are well known. Cf. Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co.
2006). For good cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the
identified background reports addressing the geopolitical situation in Afghanistan, in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 201 of the Federal Rules of Evidence.   
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested leave to supplement the
record to document endorsements. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted
seven days to supplement the record; Department Counsel was afforded three days to
respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant submitted two endorsements from
members of his command. Applicant’s submissions were received without objection,
and were admitted together as AE D.  
Prior to the close of the record, Department Counsel moved to amend
subparagraph 1.a of the SOR to allege Appellant’s sister now resides in Afghanistan.
(Tr. 83) Department Counsel’s amendment request is consistent with the presented
evidence in the record, was not objected to by Applicant, and was accepted. (Tr.  83-84)
With the approved amendment to subparagraph 1.a of the SOR, Applicant admitted the
allegation, as amended, in its entirety. (Tr. 83-84) 
Applicant, in turn, moved to amend his response to subparagraph 1.b of the SOR
to substitute an admission for his mistaken denial to the allegation. (Tr. 87-88)
Applicant’s amendment request was not objected to be by Department Counsel and
was accepted.  The amendment conforms to the explanations in Applicant’s response.   
3
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline C, Applicant allegedly exercised dual citizenship with
Afghanistan and the United States by possessing an Afghani passport issued to him in
June 2011 and not scheduled to expire before June 2016.
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly has a sister who is a citizen of
Afghanistan residing in Tajikistan, and an aunt who is a citizen and resident of
Afghanistan. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations, but
denied that his aunt is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. In his explanations, he
claimed his sister returned to Afghanistan to reside after leaving the country for a better
life and education for her children in Tajikistan. He claimed she did not find the living
conditions in Tajikistan to be suitable for her and her family, and moved back to
Afghanistan in June 2013. Applicant claimed his aunt was born and raised in
Afghanistan and still resides in the country with her family. He confirmed she does not
have dual citizenship and never lived anywhere else outside of Afghanistan.  Applicant
explained his application for an Afghan passport before he became a U.S. citizen.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 31-year-old linguist for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant was born and raised in Afghanistan and immigrated to the United
States in April 2005. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in February 2012 and
continues to be a dual U.S.-Afghanistan citizen. (GEs 1 and 2)  In 1996, Applicant’s
father was killed by members of the Taliban over a monetary dispute. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 40,
79, 94) Two years later, his mother was assaulted by members of the Taliban for failing
to wear a burkha when she attended a local bazaar. Before immigrating to the United
States in 2005, Applicant moved his family to Russia with the intent of becoming
refugees of the country. (GEs 1 and 2; Tr. 99-100) He resided in Russia for about seven
years (i.e., between 1999 and 2005) before immigrating to the United States. (GE 2)
Currently, his mother, three sisters, and a brother reside in the United States. (Tr. 98)
Another brother resides in Germany. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 106)
Applicant was issued a U.S. passport in March 2012. (GEs 1 and 2) He  obtained
an Afghan passport in December 2004 that was renewed in June 2011. (GE 3) He
earned a bachelor’s degree in criminal justice from an accredited U.S. academic
institution in December 2012. (Tr. 128-129) Applicant has never been married and has
no children. He never served in the Afghan military, worked for the Afghan government,
nor voted in an Afghan election. (GE 2) 
4
In June 2013, Applicant announced in his completed affidavit that he had
surrendered his Afghan passport to his employer’s Facility Clearance Officer (FSO) or
Contractor Special Security Officer (CSSO), with the understanding his FSO would
destroy the Afghan passport and retain Applicant’s original affidavit. (AE A; Tr. 43) He
surrendered his Afghan passport  as he promised. (Tr. 49-50) 
Applicant confirmed his understanding he would not seek to obtain a
replacement passport, new or otherwise, without first notifying his employer. (AE A) He
expressed his intent to renounce his Afghanistan citizenship. (GE 2; Tr. 46-49)
Applicant has a sister and an aunt who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. (GEs
2 and 3; Tr. 78-79, 85-86) 
Prior to June 2013, his sister resided in Tajikistan in refugee status. (Tr. 82, 86)
She has since returned to Afghanistan to live and work as a teacher and raise her
children. (Tr. 82-83) Applicant has not made physical contact with his sister since 1994.
(Tr. 112) 
Applicant last visited Afghanistan for non-military purposes in June 2012. On this
trip, he visited both his mother (before her immigration to the United States) and his
aunt. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 113-114) He maintains periodic contact with his sister and aunt, but
provides no financial support. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 112-114) The only financial support he
provided to either relative was money ($200) he wired his sister via Western Union in
2012 to help her with the six children she is responsible for. (GE 2; Tr. 77-80, 85-93,
106-111) 
To the best of Applicant’s knowledge, neither his sister nor his aunt have any
relationship or affiliation with the Afghan government. Neither Applicant nor any of his
relatives residing in Afghanistan have any known business or property interests in
Afghanistan. And Applicant has no plans to relocate to Afghanistan in the foreseeable
future. (GEs 2 and 3)
When asked about Applicant’s sister and aunt, Applicant’s brother corroborated
Applicant’s accounts of having little contact with their sister and aunt in Afghanistan. (Tr.
119-121) His brother confirmed that Applicant and most of their family immigrated to the
United States from Russia in 2005 and acquired U.S. citizenship. (Tr. 121-128)
Since obtaining his U.S. passport in March 2012, Applicant uses only his U.S.
passport when he travels abroad. (Tr. 78, 86-91, 94) He last traveled to Afghanistan  for
non-military purposes in June 2012 and used his U.S. passport. (GEs 1-3) 
Between 2007 and May 2013, Applicant traveled to Afghanistan for military-
related purposes on 57 different occasions as a cultural advisor. (GE 2; Tr. 95-96) The
last trip abroad he made for non-military purposes was in 2013 when he traveled to
Germany on his U.S. passport. (Tr. 94) Applicant’s loyalties extend only to the United
States, his adopted country. Currently, he exercises no Afghan privileges. (Tr. 92)
5
Endorsements
Applicant is well regarded in his work as an Army linguist in Afghanistan
supporting U.S. combat operations. (AE D)  During his recent tours between 2008 and
2010, he earned numerous certificates of achievement and appreciation and a team
coin recognizing his service work. (AEs A and  B) 
Country information on Afghanistan
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is sometimes referred to as the
crossroads of Central Asia. Since the British relinquished control of Afghanistan in
August 1919, Afghanistan has been an independent state. Between 1919 and 1973,
Afghanistan moved away from its longstanding isolation under a succession of Muslim
rulers: King Amanullah (1919-1929), Nadir Khan (1929-1933), and Mohammad Zahir
Shah (Nadir Khan’s 19-year-old son), who ruled Afghanistan for over 40 years (1933-
1973). See Background Note: Afghanistan, at 1-2, U.S. Department of State (November
2011).
Prime minister Sardar Mohammad Daoud (between 1953 and 1963) mounted a
military coup in 1973 and seized power amid charges of corruption and malfeasance
against Zahir Shah and his royal family. (Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 2)
Daoud proceeded to abolish the monarchy, abrogate the constitution, and declare
Afghanistan a republic. His economic and social reforms contributed little, however, to
stabilizing political conditions in the country.   
Following a Soviet-supported overthrow and assassination of Daoud in April
1978, a Marxist government was formed with the backing of the Soviets. See
Background Note: Afghanistan, supra; Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
Sur Muhammad Taraki was installed as the country’s president of the revolutionary
council.  Opposition to the Taraki government increased as many of members of Afghan
elites, religious establishments, and intelligentsia were imprisoned, tortured, or
murdered. A revolt against the Marxist government occurred in the summer of 1978 and
quickly spread into a countrywide insurgency.  (Background Note: Afghanistan, supra,
at 3)
Soviet invasion
Seeking to take advantage of the unrest following the April 1978 coup, the Soviet
Union quickly signed a bilateral treaty of friendship and cooperation with the new Afghan
regime and increased its military assistance to the regime. See Background Note:
Afghanistan, supra; Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra. Faced with a
deteriorating security situation, the Soviets invaded Afghanistan in December 1979,
killed the Afghan ruler, and, backed by 120,000 Soviet troops, installed Babrak Karmal
(an exiled leader of the Parcham faction) as the country’s prime minister.  (Background
Note: Afghanistan, supra)
6
Afghan freedom fighters (mujahideen) who opposed the Karmal communist
regime, armed with increased weapons and training assistance from the U.S. and its
allies, collaborated with other Pesawar-based guerilla groups in the 1980s to destabilize
the Karmal regime. See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra. The
resistance movement eventually led to an agreement known as the Geneva Accords
(signed by the front-line states of Pakistan and Afghanistan, the United States, and the
Soviet Union). The agreement served to ensure that Soviet forces withdrew from the
country in accordance with their expressed commitments in February 1989. (Id.)
Ascendency of the Taliban  
By the mid-1990s, the Taliban had risen to power in reaction to the anarchy and
increase of warlords in the aftermath of the withdrawal of Soviet forces.  (Background
Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 3-4)  Many of the Taliban had been educated in madrassas
in Pakistan with roots in rural Pashtun areas of the country.  See Country Specific
Information: Afghanistan, supra  Beginning with its capture of Kandahar in 1994, the
Taliban mounted an aggressive expansion of its control throughout Afghanistan. By the
end of 1998, its forces occupied almost 90 percent of the country, and reduced its
opposition largely to a small sections of the northeast and the Panjshir valley. (id.)   
Bolstered by its imposition of an extreme interpretation of Islam on the entire
country, the Taliban committed massive human rights violations (particularly directed at
women and children), and committed serious atrocities against minority populations.
See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 4. From the mid-1990s, the Taliban
provided sanctuary to Osama bin Laden, and provided a base of operations for his and
other terrorist organizations. (Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra)  Bin
Laden and his Al-Qaida group are known to have provided financial and political support
to the Taliban, and acknowledged their responsibility for the September 11, 2001
terrorist attacks against the United States.   (id.) 
Beginning in October 2001 (following the Taliban’s refusal to expel bin Laden),
the United States and its coalition partners initiated a military campaign, targeting
terrorist facilities and Taliban military and political assets within Afghanistan. U.S.
military and anti-Taliban forces routed the Taliban and caused their rapid disintegration.
After the fall of Kabul in November 2001, a UN-sponsored conference was created to
restore stability and governance in Afghanistan. See Country Specific Information:
Afghanistan, supra.  From this conference emerged a Transitional Authority headed by
President Hamid Karzai. This authority (renamed the Transitional Islamic State of
Afghanistan) was charged with the responsibility of drafting a constitution. (id.)
While the core insurgent faction in Afghanistan remains the Taliban movement,
other militant factions present security challenges to the United states and the allied
government of Afghanistan.  One militant faction cited by U.S. officials as a particularly
potent threat to Afghan security is the “Haqqani Network,” which the Administration
reported to Congress in September 2012 as an organization that meets the criteria for
FTO [Foreign Terrorist Organization] designation. See Afghanistan: Post-Taliban
Governance, Security and U.S. Policy, supra, at 15-17; Administrative Notice, supra, at
7
2)  Other groups designated by the Administration as FTOs include a Pakistani group,
known as the Pakistani Taliban, that supports the Afghan Taliban from both sides of the
Afghan-Pakistani border and another Pakistani group known as the Lakshar-e-Taryyiba
(LET) that is increasingly active inside Afghanistan. (id.)   
A new constitution was drafted and ratified by a constitutional loyal jirga on
January 4, 2004. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra, at 4-5; Country Specific
Information: Afghanistan, supra. The Afghan constitution provides for indirect election of
the National Assembly’s upper house by the provincial councils and by reserved
presidential appointments. On December 4, 2004, the country was renamed the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan.  (id.) Hamid Karzai was sworn in as Afghanistan’s President on
December 7, 2004. (id.) He presided over the new government’s first convened
parliament in late 2005.
Presidential and provincial elections in Afghanistan for 2010 were  coordinated by
the Afghanistan Independent Election Commission (IEC), with assistance from the UN.
Id. Challenged presidential election results in 2010 have not been widely disseminated.
See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
Political conditions in Afghanistan
         A new democratic government assumed control of Afghanistan in 2004 following a
popular election. See Background Note: Afghanistan, supra. While the national
government has continued to expand its authority, it has been hampered in its ability to
deliver necessary social services and remains dependent on U.S.-led assistance. See
Unclassified Report on Progress Toward Security and Stability in Afghanistan, supra.
With its international community support at work, its ability to secure its borders and
maintain internal order is increasing. Although the Taliban-led insurgency in Afghanistan
has lost ground in some areas, it remains resilient and capable of challenging U.S. and
NATO goals. See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
Iinternational  terrorists, fueled by Taliban and Al Qaida support, continue to
assert power and intimidation within the country. See Afghanistan: Post-Taliban
Governance, Security and U.S. Policy, supra, at 13-14.  Safety and security remain key
concerns because these terrorist organizations continue to target U.S. and Afghan
interests by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, car-jackings, assaults, and
hostage- taking. See Country Reports on Terrorism 2010, supra, at 9-10; Country
Specific Information, Afghanistan, supra, at 2-3. Risks of terrorist activity remain
extremely high at the present time. See Administrative Notice, supra, at 2-4
Human rights conditions in Afghanistan remain poor by all reported accounts.
State Department reports confirm active insurgent activity in Afghanistan.  See  Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012: Afghanistan, supra, at 1-3. No section of
Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence. See Travel Warnings, Afghanistan, supra.
Kabul, in particular, has experienced increased militant attacks in recent years,
including rocket attacks, vehicle-borne IEDs, and suicide bombings. Id. Foreigners
throughout the country continue to be targeted for violent attacks and kidnappings:
8
some motivated by terrorism, and others by common criminal activity.  See Country
Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra.
To date, Afghanistan has still not been able to build effective, honest, and loyal
provincial and district institutions and lacks a coherent tribal engagement strategy for
unifying the country. Besides being subject to Afghan laws, Afghan Americans may also
be subject to other laws that impose special obligations on Afghan citizens. See Country
Specific Information: Afghanistan, supra, at 6. U.S. citizens who are also Afghan
nationals do not require visas for entry into Afghanistan. Likewise, for U.S. passport
holders born in Afghanistan, a visa is not required for entry. For these individuals, the
Embassy of Afghanistan issues a letter confirming nationality for entry into Afghanistan.
(id., at 2) The Afghan drug trade remains a major source of revenue for corrupt officials,
the Taliban, and other insurgent groups who conduct operations in the country. See id.
at 8-9; Country Reports on Terrorism 2012, Chapter 2-Country Reports: South and
Central Asia, supra.
U.S.-Afghanistan relations
Since the fall of the Taliban, the United States has supported the creation of a
broad-based government in Afghanistan, and has made a long-term commitment to
help Afghanistan reconstitute and rebuild following years of war and unstable
governments. See U.S. Relations with Afghanistan, at 1-2, U.S. Department of State
(September 2013). At the July 2012 Tokyo Conference, the United States and other
international partners committed to continue providing development assistance to
Afghanistan through the 2014 transition and the ensuing transformational decade. (id.)
Through the Tokyo Mutual Accountability framework, the United States and other
international donors committed to providing Afghanistan $16 billion in aid through 2015
and continuing assistance at levels commensurate with the last decade through 2017. 
The United States and its coalition partners in the international community
currently provide important humanitarian assistance, capacity-building, security
protection, counter-narcotic programs, and infrastructure projects. The United States
has also brought important political influence to bear on the establishment of durable
democratic principles that promote the rule of law and encourage transparent and
accountable forms of government. See Country Specific Information: Afghanistan,
supra. Efforts are currently underway to improve Afghanistan’s business climate
(inclusive of measures designed to strengthen the country’s regulatory and legal
framework) to attract foreign trade and investment.  (U.S. Relations with Afghanistan,
supra)
The United States also supports the Afghanistan government’s commitment to
the protection of women’s rights, human rights, and religious tolerance. (U.S. Relations
with Afghanistan, supra) Educational advancements by 2009 reflect increased female
enrollment of 37 per cent of the student population in Afghan schools and similar
advances in the number of female teachers. (Country Specific Information: Afghanistan,
supra) 
9
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) cases. These
guidelines take into account factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for
the individual applicant, as well as considerations that could affect the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and
may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, revoked, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2©
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) .
AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the
context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign  P  r  eference  
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate preference  for
a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.  See
AG ¶  9.
10
Foreign Influence
     
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.   See AG ¶ 6.
                Burd e  n    o  f  P roof
Under the AGs, a decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance
may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the
national interest. Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a
commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate
determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part,
on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515
U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). 
As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. 
“[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). And because
all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the national interest, the burden of
persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
11
Analysis  
Applicant is a linguist for a U.S.-based defense contractor. He is an Afghan citizen
by birth and a naturalized U.S. citizen. His mother and four of his siblings (three sisters
and one brother) are naturalized U.S. citizens who reside in the United States. Trust
concerns relate to foreign preference based on Applicant’s past possession of an Afghan
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen and obtaining a U.S. passport. Additional foreign
influence trust concerns relate to Applicant’s having a sister and an aunt who are citizens
and residents of Afghanistan with whom he maintains little contact. 
Foreign Preference 
Preference concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite
critical considerations of acts indicating a preference for the interests of the foreign
country (Afghanistan) over the interests of the United States. By electing to retain his
Afghan passport after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen and obtaining his own U.S.
passport, Applicant demonstrated some disposition for a split preference for
Afghanistan and the United States.
Since obtaining a U.S. passport, Applicant has not used his Afghan passport for
his travel privileges. His continued holding of his Afghan passport after obtaining a U.S.
passport reflects some active indicia of Afghan preference. But Applicant has since
surrendered his Afghan passport and expressed his willingness to renounce his Afghan
citizenship.  
Because Applicant elected to retain his Afghan citizenship and passport after he
became a naturalized U.S. citizen with a U.S. passport, he acquired travel privileges
not available to other U.S. citizens. The Government may apply certain provisions of
disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 10(a) of AG ¶ 9, “exercise of any right, privilege or
obligations of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign
citizenship of a family member.  This DC includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such        
              benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another   
            country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
12
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
Specifically, DC ¶ 10(a)(1) has some application to the established facts and
circumstances herein. By retaining his Afghan passport, Applicant was potentially able
to achieve travel privileges and conveniences not available to other U.S. citizens. 
Still, Applicant has since surrendered his Afghan passport and expressed a
willingness to renounce his Afghan citizenship. As a result, he no longer has any
material privileges that can realistically create split preferences between Afghanistan
and the United States. Several mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s situation: MC
¶ 11(a), “dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign
country; “ MC ¶ 11(b); “the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual
citizenship;” and MC ¶ 11(e), “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered, to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.”
Whole-person precepts are helpful to Applicant in surmounting the
Government’s preference concerns herein. The positive trust impressions he has
forged with his military command corroborate his claims of undivided loyalty and
preference for the United States.
Overall, Applicant is able to persuade that his current preference is solely with
the United States. Because he made limited use of Afghan privileges associated with
his retaining his Afghan passport and dual Afghan citizenship, he manifested some
initial preference for Afghanistan under the criteria established by the Appeal Board.
Applicant absolves himself, though, of foreign preference concerns associated with the
presented issue of whether he retains a preference or split preference for his birth
country (Afghanistan), or his adopted country (the United States). Favorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline C.
Foreign Influence
Applicant’s sister and aunt who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan have
deep roots in Afghanistan, a country rich in history and socio/political traditions,
constitutional government and institutional respect for human rights, intermixed with
periodic reports of abuses by police and government authorities. Despite encouraging
efforts in the development of strategic partnerships between Afghanistan and the U.S.
in recent years, terrorist organizations continue to target U.S. and Afghan interests by
suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, car-jackings, assaults, and hostage-
taking. Human rights problems continue to plague law-enforcement efforts. And
foreigners throughout the country continue to be targeted for violent attacks and
kidnappings: some motivated by terrorism, and others by common criminal activity. 
The Government urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s sister and
aunt residing in Afghanistan might be subject to undue foreign influence by either
Afghan government authorities or terrorist organizations linked to the Taliban and al
Qaida to access classified information in Applicant’s possession or control. Because
13
Applicant’s two family members have Afghan citizenship by birth and reside in
Afghanistan, they present potential heightened security risks covered by disqualifying
condition  DC ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” The citizenship/residence status of these family
members in Afghanistan pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the
risks of undue foreign influence that could potentially impact the privacy interests
subject to Applicant’s control. 
Because neither of Applicant’s two family members residing in Afghanistan
have any identified Afghan government or military service affiliation, no consideration of
DC  ¶ 7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create
a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information,” or  DC  ¶ 7(d), “sharing living quarters with a
person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” have any
application to Applicant’s situation. Neither Applicant’s sister nor aunt residing in
Afghanistan have any history of being subjected to any coercion or influence, or appear
to be vulnerable to the same at the hands of Afghan government or military authorities.
While Applicant’s family members are at potential risk to terrorist attacks for so long as
they reside in Afghanistan, they know nothing about Applicant’s linguist work that could
be exploited by known terrorist organizations operating in Afghanistan. 
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or
mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of
foreign countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign
country may not be in another. The AGs take into account the country’s demonstrated
relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular
relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk.
The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime involved do matter.
The AGs also take into account the applicant’s demonstrated loyalty and willingness to
assume heavy risks associated with assisting the Army’s combat operations in a war
zone.
While the reports of terrorism and human rights abuses in Afghanistan are a
matter of some security concern to the United States, Afghanistan’s emergent status
as a strategic partner of the United States in its continuing war against terrorism is an
important political development that serves to promote political solidarity, and reduce
security risks and concerns between the two allied governments. 
Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(b): “there is no conflict of
interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can
14
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” is available
to Applicant. Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty and professional commitments to the
United States are well demonstrated and sufficient under these circumstances to
neutralize any  potential conflicts that are related to his relationships with his immediate
and extended family. MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so
casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create risk for foreign
influence or exploitation,” has some applicability, too, based on Applicant’s infrequent
contacts with his family members residing in Afghanistan.   
 
One other mitigating condition has mixed application to Applicant’s situation:
MC ¶ 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or
organizations from a foreign country.”  Between 2007 and 2013, Applicant completed
over 50 military deployments to Afghanistan as a cultural advisor without any
suggestions of a reporting lapse. Under these circumstances, presumptions are
warranted that he complied with all reporting requirements covering foreign contacts.
Whole-person assessment is available also to minimize Applicant’s exposure to
potential conflicts of interests with his sister and aunt residing in Afghanistan. As an
Army linguist, Applicant is strongly committed to protecting U.S. security interests in
Afghanistan and has consistently avoided any notable actions that might add risk to
U.S. security interests. Although his sister and aunt residing in Afghanistan remain at
risk to terrorist attacks, they know nothing about his linguist duties that could be
exploited in a hostage situation. 
Whatever security risks associated with Applicant’s family members residing in
Afghanistan are imposed on Applicant, they are manageable ones based on
Applicant’s demonstrated devotion to duty and the protection of classified information
made available to him in the course of executing his command assignments. So, in
Applicant’s case, the potential risk of coercion, pressure, or influence being brought to
bear on him, or his family members residing in Afghanistan is minimal and mitigated. 
Overall, potential security concerns over Applicant's family members in
Afghanistan are sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about
Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue influence attributable to his familial
relationships in Afghanistan. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by Guideline B as well.
   
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
15
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                  
