 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01263 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gregory L. Sandler, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct security concerns, but failed to mitigate 
the financial considerations and personal conduct concerns. He has over $30,000 in 
delinquent debts. He amassed this debt after being granted a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
discharge five years ago. He took no action to address his finances after repeatedly 
promising to do so during the course of the current security clearance process. He has 
a long track record of traffic offenses, even while on probation, that raises concerns he 
may similarly disregard rules and regulations regarding the proper handling of classified 
information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 13, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD), in accordance with 
DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under the financial considerations, personal 
conduct, and criminal conduct guidelines (Guidelines F, E, and J).  
 
On January 21, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to 
establish his continued eligibility for access to classified information (Answer). Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
appended to his Answer exhibits (Ex.) A – G, which were admitted at the hearing 
without objection. On March 3, 2014, Applicant’s counsel supplemented the Answer by 
providing further clarification regarding his client’s responses. 
 
On April 3, 2014, Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to 
proceed with a hearing in the case. On April 15, 2014, a notice was issued setting the 
hearing for May 14, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 28, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (Ax.) 1 – 10, which were 
admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s request for additional time post hearing 
to submit matters in support of his case. He timely submitted Ax. 11 and 12, which were 
also admitted without objection.1 The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on May 27, 
2014, and the record closed on May 28, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his late forties. He is a computer systems engineer for a defense 
contractor. He received an associate’s degree in information technology (IT) in 2002 
and since then has worked as a contractor in the defense industry. He has performed 
his work in an exemplary and professional manner. Based on his work history, Applicant 
was selected to assist senior U.S. military officers and DOD civilian employees with 
their IT needs. He has held a security clearance since about 2003.2  
 
 Applicant is divorced and lives with his girlfriend. He has custody of his two 
teenage children from his previous marriage. He does not receive child support from his 
former spouse.3 
 
 Applicant’s financial trouble started in about 2006 when he divorced. In 2009, he 
filed and had about $40,000 to $45,000 in debt discharged through Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. He states the debts were primarily medical debts related to his former 
marriage.4 The bankruptcy is alleged at ¶ 1.a in the SOR.  
 
 The SOR lists 20 delinquent debts that have been reduced to judgments or are in 
collection status. Applicant submitted proof refuting one of the alleged debts, a state tax 
debt (1.r). The remaining SOR debts remain unresolved and total over $30,000. The 
majority of this amount is for a delinquent student loan totaling about $23,000. Applicant 
defaulted on his student loan obligation in about 2005.5 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel’s position regarding Ax. 10 was marked Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) V and made a part of 
the record. Hx. I – IV are identified at page 3 of the transcript.  
 
2 Tr. at 20-30, 54, 93; Gx. 2; Ax. 1, Ax. 2; Ax. 12.  
 
3 Tr. at 21, 95-97; Gx. 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 91-95; Gx. 2; Gx. 3 (number of delinquent medical debts reported on 2002 credit report); Gx. 6. 
 
5 Tr. at 89-91. 
 
3 
 
 
In May 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). He 
disclosed his student loan debt and said he was working on resolving the debt. He was 
asked about the status of the student loan debt during his security clearance 
background interview, in questions posed to him in a financial interrogatory, and at 
hearing. He claimed to be negotiating a payment plan to resolve the debt. He submitted 
no documentation of his efforts to resolve his student loan debt or the majority of his 
debts.6 The SOR debts and their respective status are set forth in the table below. 
 
Allegation           Amount        Status   Information       Reference 
b. Judgment $3,821 Unresolved In 2012, Applicant’s former landlord 
secured a judgment. Applicant was 
made aware of the judgment during his 
clearance interview. He contacted his 
former landlord after receiving the 
financial interrogatory. No agreement 
has been reached to resolve this debt. 
Tr. at 36-43;  
Gx. 4-6; Ax. 8 
c. Judgment $1,290 Unresolved In 2011, Applicant’s former landlord 
secured a judgment. Applicant did not 
submit proof that the debt is paid. 
Tr. at 36-43; 
Gx. 4-6 
d-f, h-m, q-u. 
Medical Debts 
$2,854 Unresolved Fourteen delinquent medical debts 
ranging from a $35 collection account to 
a $389 debt. Applicant was asked about 
the debts during his clearance interview 
and in the financial interrogatory. He 
submitted no documentation regarding 
his efforts to resolve the debts.  
Tr. at 48-51.  
g. Collection 
Account (cable) 
$166 Unresolved Past-due cable bill that is in collection 
status. Applicant was previously asked 
about the debt. He submitted no 
documentation regarding his efforts to 
resolve the debt. 
Tr. at 48-51; 
Gx. 6 
n. Collection 
(telephone) 
$130 Unresolved Past-due telephone bill that is in 
collection status. Applicant was 
previously asked about the debt. He 
submitted no documentation regarding 
his efforts to resolve the debt. 
Tr. at 48-51; 
Gx. 6 
o. Student Loan $23,901 Unresolved In 2005, Applicant defaulted on his 
student loan. His tax returns were 
intercepted to offset the debt.  
He submitted no proof of voluntary 
efforts to resolve the debt. 
Tr. at 43-46, 
83, 89-91; 
Gx. 6; Ax. 3 
p. State tax lien $4,380 Resolved Applicant testified that the state tax lien 
was the result of a past-due child support 
account that he has since resolved. He 
submitted proof that his only outstanding 
state tax obligation is less than $12. 
Tr. at 46-48, 
83-86; Ax. 4; 
Ax. 9 
 
Applicant has not received financial or debt counseling. His income has remained 
relatively stable over the past few years. He states that he pays his monthly recurring 
expenses on time, does not have any credit card debt or consumer loans, and is living 
within his means. In November 2013, Applicant submitted a personal financial 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 80, 83, 89-91; Gx. 2; Gx. 6; Answer. 
 
4 
 
 
statement claiming $200 a month in disposable income. He testified that his monthly 
disposable income doubled to about $400, when his girlfriend moved in with him earlier 
this year.7 He was unable to explain why he had not used this discretionary income to 
address the smaller debts listed in the SOR, such as the medical debts for $50 and $35 
listed at 1.l and 1.m.8  
 
 Applicant has a lengthy police record. In 1995, he was charged with possession 
of marijuana. The charge was later dismissed. He did not disclose this drug-related 
criminal charge on his original or current SCA, because he did not realize it needed to 
be listed.9  
 
In 2005, Applicant was charged with issuing bad checks. He was convicted and 
received a 90-day suspended jail sentence. He was placed on probation for a year. He 
was required him to remain on “good behavior” for the entire period of his probation. 
The term “good behavior” was defined to Applicant in writing and included “no moving 
violations.”10 Five months later, Applicant violated the terms of his probation when he 
was charged with driving on a suspended license.11 He was convicted of the driving 
offense and received a 90-day suspended jail sentence. He was placed on probation for 
three years, which again required him to remain on good behavior for the entire term of 
his probation.12 Applicant omitted these convictions and probation violations on his 
recent SCA, because he did not recognize that the matters needed to be listed in 
response to several questions on his current application.13 
 
Between 2009 and 2014, Applicant was charged and convicted of 14 driving 
offenses. Applicant testified about taking a safe driver course and other remedial steps 
he has taken to avoid committing further traffic violations. His last driving infraction 
occurred in January 2014.14  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 51-54, 80-82, 95-96; Gx. 6.  
 
8 Tr. at 93-94.  
 
9 Tr. at 55-58; Gx. 1, Gx. 2, Gx. 8.  
 
10 Ax. 5.  
 
11 Gx. 13; Ax. 7.  
 
12 Ax. 6. See also, Gx. 11-12.  
 
13 Tr. at 58-70, 85-89, Gx. 2.  
 
14 Tr. at 70-79, 97-98; Gx. 14-25, Gx. 27-28. See also, Gx. 9 (In March 2001, Applicant was convicted of 
two misdemeanor traffic offenses).  
 
5 
 
 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.15 However, as the Appeal Board, has unequivocally 
stated there is no per se rule in security clearance cases requiring disqualification. 
Instead, a judge must decide each case based on its own merits.16 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.17 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
                                                          
15 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”) 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations require 
administrative judges to make predictive judgments about an individual’s ability and willingness to protect 
and safeguard classified information). See also, ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (The “Adjudicative 
Guidelines are designed to predict. The prediction in nonsecurity violation cases is made by identifying 
and then evaluating behaviors or circumstances that have an articulable nexus to the ability or willingness 
to safeguard classified information.”) (emphasis in original). 
 
6 
 
 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern regarding an applicant with financial problems is explained 
at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are established through Applicant’s admissions 
and the other evidence submitted at hearing, to include his current SCA and several 
credit reports. Applicant’s history of failing to pay his debts raises the Guideline F 
concern and establishes the disqualifying conditions at:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a):  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c):  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts date back several years and continue to the present 
day. His present financial situation is, in part, due to a lack of financial support from his 
ex-wife for their children. However, he has been gainfully employed since 2002 and was 
granted a bankruptcy discharge in 2009. Following the bankruptcy discharge, Applicant 
accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt. He has yet to address the vast 
majority of the SOR debts, to include a significant student loan debt that he defaulted on 
nine years ago and repeatedly promised to rectify during the course of the current 
security clearance process. Applicant’s failure to address and, more importantly, provide 
documentation of his efforts to resolve his past-due debts undermines the favorable 
evidence he presented of resolving a state tax lien. He has not received financial 
counseling and his finances are not under control. None of the mitigating conditions 
apply. His financial situation remains a security concern.18 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges two types of conduct that purportedly raise the Guideline E 
security concern. The first set, which are alleged at 2.a, 2.b, 2.d – 2.o and 2.r – 2.t, 
involve Applicant’s past criminal conduct and traffic violations. The second set, which 
are alleged at 2.c and 2.p – 2.q, raise the prospect that Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose pertinent information regarding his police record on his initial and current SCA. 
Both sets of allegations raise the security concern under the personal conduct guideline, 
which is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s extensive police record, to include long track record of committing 
traffic violations, directly implicates the above concern because it raises questions about 
his judgment and willingness to follow rules and regulations. Applicant’s extensive 
police record establishes the following disqualifying condition under Guideline E: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
                                                          
18 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-11660 (App. Bd. July 9, 2014) (adverse decision sustained because 
applicant did not pay his debts while gainfully employed and failed to submit documentation that he paid, 
settled, or otherwise resolved the debts listed on his SOR). 
 
8 
 
 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant can mitigate the security concern raised by his police record by 
establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions listed under the guideline. I have 
considered all the mitigating conditions and only the following are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant’s offenses, when considered in total, are not minor. Traffic infractions in 
and of themselves would not normally raise a security concern. However, in this case, 
Applicant’s past criminal offenses and long track record of disregarding traffic laws paint 
a troubling picture of an individual who may similarly be unable or unwilling to abide by 
rules and regulations regarding the proper handling of classified information.19  
 
 Security clearance adjudications are “not an exact science, but rather predicative 
judgments about a person’s security suitability,” where an applicant’s past history is the 
best indicator of future conduct.20 Applicant has twice been sentenced to jail, the last 
following a conviction for a serious traffic offense. The convictions, jail sentence, and 
the imposition of probation had no discernible effect on his conduct. Of note, Applicant’s 
probation required him to remain on “good behavior.” He was advised in writing that this 
specific term required him to refrain from committing further traffic offenses. Yet, even 
under such circumstances, Applicant was incapable of reforming his conduct.  
 
 Applicant continued to commit traffic offenses after being issued an SOR and 
being placed on notice that such conduct could jeopardize his clearance.21 Applicant 
clearly does not appreciate the security significance of his conduct and is either 
unwilling or unable to reform his behavior to what is required to maintain a security 
                                                          
19 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-09281 at 4 (App. Bd. March 5, 2012) (upholding denial of security 
clearance under Guideline E because individual had a seven year track record of traffic violations); ISCR 
Case No. 01-25941 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (sustaining adverse decision due to applicant’s long track 
record of traffic violations, namely, 13 violations over 10 year period).  
 
20 ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 (App. Bd. May 7, 2004) [citing to Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528-529 (1988)].  
 
21 I have only considered the post-SOR traffic offenses in evaluating Applicant’s “claim of extenuation, 
mitigation or changed circumstances.” ISCR Case No. 10-00922 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2011).  
 
9 
 
 
clearance. His past history leaves me with concerns that this type of conduct will recur. 
His conduct also leaves me with doubts about his judgment and ability to follow rules 
and regulations regarding the proper handling of classified information. Accordingly, I 
find that none of the mitigating conditions apply to the first set of allegations under the 
personal conduct guideline.  
 
 On the other hand, I find that Applicant mitigated the potential security concerns 
raised by the omission of his past drug-related offense and other criminal matters from 
his initial and current SCA. When confronted with the omission of material, adverse 
information on a SCA, an administrative judge must examine the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.22 
Applicant did not list these matters because he genuinely believed they did not need to 
be listed either because he mistakenly thought they were over seven years old or, as in 
the case of his probation violations, was under the mistaken impression they were not 
serious enough to warrant listing on his application. Although Applicant’s inability to 
comprehend the seriousness of his past conduct and legal ramifications that have 
befallen him due to such conduct seems implausible, it is this lack of appreciation and 
concern that appears to be at the core of his inability to reform his behavior. Therefore, I 
find Applicant’s assertion that he did not deliberately falsify his SCAs credible, but his 
lack of regard for the security significance of his past conduct and inability to reform his 
behavior continues to raise a security concern under Guideline E. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s past criminal conduct is alleged as a security concern under 
Guideline J. The security concern regarding individuals who engage in criminal activity 
is addressed at AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant has not committed a criminal offense since his probation violation for 
driving with a suspended license over seven years ago. Although he has a long track 
record of violating local traffic laws, he has not engaged in any criminal activity since 
2006. He has been gainfully employed throughout this entire period and is raising his 
teenage children on his own. Notwithstanding Applicant’s long track record of violating 
traffic laws, I find that it is unlikely he will engage in criminal activity in the future.23 His 
past criminal conduct no longer raises a security concern under Guideline J.  
                                                          
22 See generally, ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 (Appl. Bd. 
Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
23 See, AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d). 
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I gave due consideration to Applicant’s work as a 
federal contractor and that he is a loving and responsible father. However, Applicant’s 
reckless disregard for his personal finances and traffic laws raise doubts about his 
judgment, reliability, and ability to follow security rules and regulations. As noted above, 
any doubt concerning an applicant must be resolved in favor of national security. 
Accordingly, I find that the favorable whole-person factors present in this case do not 
outweigh the security concerns at issue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s continued eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.p:          For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q – 1.u:         Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b, 2.d – 2.o and 2.r – 2.t:      Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c and 2.p – 2.q:        For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   3.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
