KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s credibility assessment.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 13-00917.a1
DATE: 07/08/2014
DATE: July 8, 2014
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-00917
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Cathryn E. Young, Esq.  
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 19, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of
2
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On April 8, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that
his omissions from his security clearance application (SCA) were deliberate and whether the Judge’s
adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is seeking a clearance in connection with his employment by a Government
contractor.  He has held this job since 2012.
In January 2006, Applicant was cited for speeding.  Fined $210, he served 14 days in jail in
lieu of payment.  In May 2008, Applicant was cited for no registration, failure to provide evidence
of financial responsibility, driving with a suspended/revoked license, and other charges.  Convicted
of the suspended/revoked license charge, he served nine days in jail in lieu of a $896 fine.  He also
served 24 months probation.
In May 2012, he was cited for driving without a license, driving while license suspended,
and speeding.  Convicted of driving with no license, he was fined $205, of which $100 was
suspended.  The following August, Applicant was cited for using a cell phone while driving, driving
with a suspended license, failure to appear, and no operator’s license.  He pled guilty to having no
operator’s license and was fined $690, which he paid in March 2014.
In completing his SCA, Applicant failed to disclose that he had been on probation during the
previous seven years.  He also failed to disclose other of his offenses that were required by the
questions.  He stated that the questions were vague and that he did not disclose the August 2012
incident because he had not been sentenced.  The Judge stated that the questions were not vague and
that Applicant’s explanations were not credible.
Applicant experienced three job terminations between 2006 and 2012.  The first incident
occurred because Applicant was working and attending school full time, as a consequence of which
his duty performance suffered.  On the second occasion, Applicant was fired as a security guard for
sleeping on the job.  The most recent termination resulted from Applicant’s having damaged
equipment at work.
Applicant claims that he has matured and is now responsible.  He has a monthly remainder
of $989 and nearly $9,000 in retirement savings.  He has had no citations since 2012 and has a valid
driver’s license.
3
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for honesty, trustworthiness, and integrity.  He has
received awards and recognition for the quality of his work.  However, in early 2012, he received
two verbal warnings for clocking out of lunch late and for tightening a part too much. 
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant was required to disclose his January 2006 and May 2008
offenses on his SCA but intentionally failed to do so.  She stated that Applicant was aware that he
had performed community service or served jail in lieu of the fines and that he knew he was on
probation as result of the 2008 conviction.  She characterized Applicant’s security-significant
conduct as a pattern that exhibited poor judgment and an unwillingness to follow rules.  She found
that none of the mitigating conditions could be said to apply.  He made no effort to correct his
omissions.  His pattern of misconduct, viewed as a whole, is not minor and that too little time has
elapsed since his last offense to ensure that Applicant has in fact matured.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s poor work history and his traffic-
related offenses.  She also found that Applicant was not candid concerning his August 2012 offense,
although it had not been alleged in the SOR.  
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s finding that he had intentionally omitted required
information from his SCA.  In analyzing an applicant’s mens rea, we consider his omissions in light
of the entirety of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-12172 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 9,
2014).  In this case, the Judge’s finding about the clarity of the questions and about Applicant’s
awareness of the amounts of the fines imposed and of his having served probation support her
conclusion that he deliberately omitted material facts from his SCA.  We find no reason to disturb
the Judge’s assessment of Applicant’s credibility regarding his false statements.  We defer to a
Judge’s credibility determination.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
Applicant cites to various pieces of record evidence, asserting that the Judge did not consider
the evidence.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 11-13948 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 26, 2014).  Applicant’s argument on appeal is not
sufficient to rebut that presumption.  Applicant’s brief cites to a Hearing Office case which, he
asserts, supports his case for a clearance.  We have given it due consideration.  However, Hearing
Office cases are binding neither on other Hearing Office Judges nor on the Board.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 13-00464 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2014).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision, both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  Applicant’s security-
significant conduct, viewed cumulatively, sufficiently undermines his trustworthiness and reliability
so as to render the decision sustainable.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted
only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
4
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”  
5
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                
Michael  Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
