 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01322 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 July 15, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Security concerns were raised under the Guideline for Personal Conduct 
because Applicant was terminated by her employer for misconduct. Applicant mitigated 
the Personal Conduct concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on May 29, 2012. On March 12, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the 
guideline for Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on April 10, 2014, and requested a 
hearing in this matter. The case was assigned to me on May 12, 2014. A notice of 
hearing was issued to Applicant on May 13, 2014, scheduling a hearing for June 3, 
2014. Applicant requested the hearing date be amended to June 2, 2014, and the 
hearing was rescheduled to that date. On June 2, 2014, the hearing convened as 
scheduled.  
 
The Government presented Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and 
offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted into the record 
without objection. Applicant requested that the record be left open to allow her to submit 
additional evidence and her request was granted. Applicant presented additional 
exhibits, marked AE G through AE N. Department Counsel had no objection to AE G 
through N, and they were admitted into the record. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on June 10, 2014. The record closed on July 7, 2014. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 42 years old. She is married and has two adult children. She has 
worked for her current employer, a Government contractor, since April 2012. She seeks 
a security clearance in connection with her employment. (GE 1.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
engaged in conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. The SOR alleged Applicant was 
terminated by her employer, a Government contractor (GC1), in July 2011 due to her 
violation of business ethics and the company’s code of conduct. Applicant worked for 
GC1 from January 2006 to July 2011. Applicant admitted this allegation, with 
explanations. (Answer; GE 1.) 
 
Applicant’s employment with GC1 was suspended in May 2011, and she was 
terminated in July 2011, for continued violation of GC1’s business ethics and code of 
conduct policy for “Insubordination” and “Respect Peers.” The termination letter stated, 
“Specifically, you worked from your home and charged time on your timecard after 
being told by your supervisor in writing, through an email, which you acknowledged, not 
to do so.” Additionally, Applicant’s “dress and behavior had become disruptive.” The 
termination letter referenced disruptive behaviors such as visiting her work area after 
being directed not to, and speaking disrespectfully to her supervisor, co-workers, and 
employer. (GE 2; GE 3.) 
 
Applicant acknowledged each of the identified causes for her termination and 
accepted responsibility for her improper actions. She offered explanations for her 
actions, but understood that she did not exercise good judgment despite her feelings or 
justifications at the time of the incidents. She believed she was performing in 
accordance with her Government customer’s policies and demands, despite the fact 
 
3 
 
that those policies may have conflicted with the policies of GC1. (Tr. 37, 41-42, 46, 57-
59.) 
 
Applicant admitted she went against her supervisor’s instructions and worked 
from home on a laptop provided by her Government customer “for the purposes of 
working from home.” Applicant’s supervisor emailed her on December 17, 2010, and 
indicated, “I would rather have you work comp time [than] take stuff home. Bringing 
work home can lead to security issues.” She responded to her supervisor that her 
Government customer indicated there were no security issues involved, but that she 
would comply with his request. She testified that her supervisor later verbally told her to 
“do whatever it took to get the job done,” and she incorrectly took that statement to 
mean it was acceptable to work from home. (GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 55-66.) 
 
She acknowledged dressing in polo shirts, yoga pants, and jeans due to a back 
injury that made it uncomfortable for her to adhere to her employer’s dress code. She 
informally discussed her injury with the Government customer’s director, who gave her 
permission for such attire, but she failed to discuss it with her supervisor at GC1. (GE 3; 
Tr. 62-65.) 
 
She admitted that she had an on-going conflict with her GC1 supervisor, in part 
because she received less pay than a male co-worker with commensurate level of 
experience and requested equal compensation.1 A former co-worker, employed by the 
Government customer, wrote letters of support on Applicant’s behalf and verified that 
the events of 2011 were initially generated over “discrimination in pay.” That letter 
acknowledged, “[m]istakes were made on both sides and the situation rapidly spiraled 
out of control due to a personality conflict between [Applicant] and a new supervisor at 
[GC1].” Applicant acknowledged she acted inappropriately in her final days of 
employment in May 2011 including crying at work, using profanity, and yelling at her 
supervisor in front of others. She failed to fulfill tasks her supervisor assigned to her. 
(GE 3; AE D; Tr. 20-66.)  
 
The Director for the Government customer wrote a letter of recommendation on 
Applicant’s behalf. He indicated: 
 
I hand chose [Applicant] for this position because of her exceptional work 
ethic and dedication to the successful completion of any task assigned. In 
getting this new position created, there seemed to be a lot of confusion at 
the [GC1] management level concerning what the requirements were and 
how this work fit into their current Letter of Technical Direction. In the end 
they decided to not write a new position for several months but instructed 
[Applicant] to “do whatever the customer wanted,” where this position was 
concerned. With this direction from her supervisors, the [Government 
customer] issued [Applicant] a laptop in order to complete work at home if 
needed. There was a very short deadline looming with the [Government 
customer requirements]. Although the laptop was issued for the purpose 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s husband is employed by GC1. They feared retribution against him if she filed any type of 
lawsuit. (Tr. 52.) 
 
4 
 
of working from home, I cannot recall if or how many times [Applicant] 
performed work at home. In my time working with [Applicant], she was 
always willing to go above and beyond what was required in order to get 
the job done and ensure the important mission of [Government customer] 
was accomplished. (AE H.) 
 
Applicant’s Government customer was very happy with her performance.  In fact, 
while Applicant was suspended from her position with GC1, she was also awarded the 
Top Civilian Support Staff award by her Government customer for her work leading up 
to her suspension. (AE K; Tr. 38-39.) 
 
 Applicant is highly respected by those that know her personally and 
professionally. She is regarded as a hardworking, trustworthy, and an ethical employee. 
She has no other disciplinary actions against her in her employment record. Applicant’s 
current employer finds she meets or exceeds all performance measurement criteria and 
recommends her for a clearance. She was also nominated and won two awards for 
outstanding performance with her present employer. (AE E; AE F; AE G; AE H; AE I; AE 
J; AE K; AE N.) 
 
 After Applicant was suspended by GC1, she independently sought counseling for 
employment related stress. She documented her participation in a six-week group 
therapy course on how to manage workplace conflict. She successfully completed the 
counseling. She testified that the counseling gave her new tools to help her 
communicate calmly in disagreements. She recounted examples of how she uses these 
tools to manage workplace stress and avoid inappropriate conflict in her current 
position. (AE L; Tr. 68-71.) 
 
 Applicant also returned to college after her termination. In May 2014 she was 
awarded a Bachelor of Science degree. Applicant’s two children both serve in the Air 
Force. She testified that she is a loyal American and would never jeopardize U.S. 
security. (AE M; AE N; Tr. 43-45, 48.) 
  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
 
5 
 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. The 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace; and 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct, which resulted her termination from GC1, support a whole-
person assessment that she may continue to exercise questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, and unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations; and therefore may not properly safeguard protected information. She 
engaged in inappropriate workplace behavior and displayed a pattern of rule violations. 
AG ¶ 16(c) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are applicable:  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged her rule violations and inappropriate workplace 
behavior. She obtained counseling to change her behavior and learned techniques that 
she utilizes in stressful workplace disagreements to alleviate stressors. Her counseling 
has given her skills that reduce or eliminate vulnerability. She is unlikely to violate 
workplace policy again. She is well respected by her current employer and future 
unreliable or inappropriate behavior is unlikely to occur. AG ¶ 17(d) and 17(e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a hardworking and patriotic government contractor. She is well 
regarded by those that know her. She is dedicated to the U.S. military and success of 
it’s mission. She was forthright in acknowledging her improper actions that led to her 
termination. While she thought her conduct was justified due to what she believed was 
workplace discrimination, she now understands that her behavior was improper. She 
learned new tools to deal with workplace stressors through her participation in group 
therapy. Future improper conduct and rule violations are unlikely to recur. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
