 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00063 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 11, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On April 3, 2014, Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On May 19, 2014, the case was assigned 
to me. On June 4, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for June 23, 2012. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, while Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C. 
The record of the proceeding was left open until June 30, 2014, to provide Applicant an 
opportunity to present additional matters. He timely submitted documents that were 
marked as AE D through N. All proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on July 1, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old engineer who works for a defense contractor. He has 
been working for his current employer since February 2002. He was born overseas, 
entered the United States at age eight, and became a U.S. citizen in 2000. He attended 
undergraduate and graduate schools in the United States and earned a bachelor’s 
degree in 1992, a master’s degree in 2002, and another master’s degree in about 2009. 
He is married and has two children, ages six and nine. He has held a security clearance 
without incident since about 2003.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had eight debts totaling $94,102 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a–
1.h). The allegations consist of six delinquent student loans totaling $93,562 (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a–1.f) and two credit card accounts that are past due for a total of about $540 (SOR 
1.g–1.h). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each debt. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings as fact.2 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to providing monetary support to his 
parents’ business. His parents operated two dry cleaning stores. When those stores 
struggled financially, Applicant paid various store expenses such as the rent, utilities, 
supplies, and employee wages. He never kept track of the amount that he contributed to 
their business, but estimated that it totaled about $50,000. One store was eventually 
sold and the other closed. The closure of the store, which occurred about five years 
ago, left outstanding debts that Applicant paid so that his parents could retire peacefully. 
Because of his contributions to his parents’ business, Applicant contends that he unable 
to meet his own financial obligations.3  
 
The delinquent student loans arose from Applicant’s latest period of graduate 
education (2007-2009). Five of those loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.b–1.f) have been consolidated 
into one collection account, while the other student loan (SOR ¶ 1.a) remains a 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6, 38-39; GE 1, 2. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 24-28, 34, 52-54; GE 2, 3; AE A.  
 
3 
 
 
separate account. After finishing his latest master’s degree, the student loans were 
deferred for one year. Applicant defaulted on the student loans in about 2011.4 
 
The amount of the charged-off student loan in SOR ¶ 1.a is $25,822. In 2013, 
Applicant contacted the collection agency handling this loan and authorized that agency 
to make withdrawals from his checking account. The collection agency made three $100 
withdrawals between August and October 2013, but for reasons unknown to Applicant 
the withdrawals stopped. He testified that he had not contacted the collection agency in 
the past six months.5 
 
In about August 2013, Applicant received a letter from his employer indicating 
that 25% of his net wages were being garnished. This garnishment was for the five 
consolidated student loans. At that point, the collection agency contacted him about 
participating in a rehabilitation program to which he agreed. Under that program, he was 
to pay $402 per month for nine months to remove those loans from a default status. The 
rehabilitation payments were to be made in addition to the garnishment action. From 
August 2013 to April 2014, he consistently made the monthly rehabilitation payments. 
During that period, he paid a total of $13,750 toward those debts, reducing the total 
amount owed from $85,027 to $74,468. Applicant testified that the loans were removed 
from a default status in about May 2014 and transferred to another company for further 
processing. At the time of the hearing, Applicant was waiting to hear from the new 
company concerning how much he would have to pay on them in the future. He testified 
that he intended to continue making the required payments on those loans.6 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h are past-due credit card accounts. According to a credit 
report dated September 19, 2013, the account in SOR ¶ 1.g was opened in April 2004, 
had a date of last activity of September 2013, had an outstanding balance of $13,900, 
and was past due $440. The account in SOR ¶ 1.h was opened in March 2007, had a 
date of last activity of September 2013, had an outstanding balance of $2,600, and was 
past due $100. At the hearing, he testified that those debts remained outstanding. 
Because of the garnishment, he was not able to continue making payments on these 
credit card accounts. His last payments on them were in 2013.7 
 
Applicant’s wife does not work outside the home. In his post-hearing submission, 
Applicant submitted a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) that indicated his net 
monthly income was $5,278, that his total monthly expenses were $3,130, and that his 
total debt payments were $2,320, which left him a negative net monthly remainder of 
$172. The debt payments listed in the PFS included a payment of $1,340 toward the 
                                                          
4 Tr. 39-41, 46-47; GE 1-3. 
5 Tr. 35-38, 65-67; GE 1-3; AE D, K-M. 
6 Tr. 35-47, 54-55, 65; GE 2, 3; AE C. 
7 Tr. 49-51, 67-69; GE 2, 3.  Only one credit report, GE 3, was admitted in evidence.  
 
4 
 
 
consolidated student loans. This was the amount Applicant was paying on them during 
the garnishment/rehabilitation program; but it unclear what amount he will be required to 
pay on those loans in the future. The PFS listed that he owed a total of $1,550 per 
month on the debts in SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.g, 1.h, and two other (non-alleged) credit card 
accounts and indicated that he was not making any payments towards those debts. The 
PFS indicated that Applicant is carrying about $39,000 in credit card debt as well as an 
$18,000 car loan. He testified that he was using credit cards to supplement his income. 
He also indicated that he borrowed $10,000 from a sister. He intends to pay her back, 
but indicated there was no time limit for that repayment. He further stated that, in the 
past year, he and his family have changed their lifestyle, cutting back expenditures and 
learning to live with less.8 
 
Since 2005, Applicant has traveled outside the United States nine times. One of 
those trips was for business and the remaining were for tourism. He indicated that the 
airline tickets for the personal travel were either acquired through an airline frequent 
flyer program or were purchased by his in-laws.9 
 
One of Applicant’s sisters, a licensed mental health counselor, testified that he is 
honest, hardworking, and dedicated. She also stated that pressure was placed on him 
as the only son in the family to support his parents’ business. A former coworker 
testified that he knew Applicant for 12 years. The coworker stated that Applicant was 
honorable, honest, loyal, unselfish, and always followed all regulations in handling 
classified information.10 
 
About five years ago, Applicant was promoted to the fourth highest of six 
engineering levels at his company. Over the years, he has also survived a number of 
layoffs. In May 2013, he was presented with a certificate of appreciation for his 
outstanding performance on a work project. His work performance evaluations for 2011, 
2012, and 2013 showed that he consistently met or exceeded his employer’s 
expectations.11 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 49-52, 55-57; GE 2, 3; AE H-J, N. Non-alleged debts were not considered in applying the 
disqualifying conditions. Conduct not alleged in the SOR, however, may be considered to assess an 
applicant’s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has 
demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of the whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 
at 4 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006). 
9 Tr. 47-49; GE 1. 
10 Tr. 22-33. 
11 31-33, 57-59; GE 2; AE B, D-G. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts totaling over $94,000 that he was unable 
to satisfy for an extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant is a devoted son who supported his parents financially with their 
struggling business. His sister indicated that pressure was placed on him to provide such 
support. While the dynamics of a family situation of that nature are often complicated, the 
decision to provide such support to the detriment of his own financial situation was a 
matter within Applicant’s control. The parents’ business closed about five years ago. 
Since about 2011, Applicant became delinquent on a number of student loans. In August 
2013, his wages were garnished for five consolidated student loans. To his credit, 
Applicant participated in a rehabilitation program for nine months and was able to remove 
the consolidated student loans from a default status. He also contacted the creditor of the 
remaining student loan and authorized withdrawals from his bank account for payment of 
that loan. However, when the withdrawals stopped on that remaining student loan, he 
took no action to inquire into the reason for the stoppage and has had no contact with that 
creditor for six months. For at least the past six months, he also has not made any 
payments on the two past-due credit card accounts.   
 
In his post-hearing submission, Applicant submitted a PFS that reported a negative 
net monthly remainder of $172. The PFS reported that he was making payments of 
$1,340 on the consolidated student loans; but it is unclear from the evidence whether he 
will be required to pay that amount or possibly a lesser amount on those loans in the 
future. In the PFS, he also listed that he was not making payments on the other student 
loan or on four credit card accounts.  
 
Applicant’s financial situation is not stable. Based on the evidence presented, I 
cannot find that his financial problems are being resolved or are unlikely to recur. His 
delinquent debts are ongoing, significant, and cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. He receives credit under AG ¶ 20(d) for successfully 
participating in the rehabilitation program for the consolidated student loans and for the 
three payments on the other student loan. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
8 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a devoted son, husband, and father. He is a valued employee. He 
has held a security clearance for over ten years without incident. Nevertheless, his 
financial situation is not stable. He was employed throughout the entire period in 
question. In his PFS of June 2014, he reported a negative net monthly remainder. While 
he has stated that he will pay his delinquent debts, he failed to provide a plausible plan 
for resolving them. His financial problems remain a security concern. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has 
failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.f:  For Applicant 
   Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
