 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00405 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 July 8, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns 
created by his failure to file Federal income tax returns and to pay a past-due Federal 
tax delinquency. Additionally, he failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct security 
concerns related to the falsification of his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his e-QIP on September 6, 2013. On March 13, 2014, the 
Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns under the guidelines for Financial Considerations and Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on April 14, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 16, 2014. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 
27, 2014, and the hearing was convened via video teleconference as scheduled on 
June 17, 2014.  
 
The Government presented Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted 
without objection and Hearing Exhibit I. Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant 
requested that the record be left open to allow him to submit additional evidence, and 
said request was granted. On June 30, 2014, Applicant submitted two exhibits, marked 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and B. Department Counsel had no objection to AE A or AE B, 
and they were admitted into the record. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on June 27, 2014. The record closed on July 1, 2014. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He earned an Associate’s degree in 1990. He has been 
married twice, but is now single. He has no children. He has been employed by a 
Federal contractor since August 2012. Applicant’s work requires him to travel both 
nationally and internationally for lengthy periods of time. (GE 3; Tr. 36-37.)   
 
As stated in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be indebted to the Federal 
Government for a tax lien entered against him in April 2013 in the amount of $43,154. 
Applicant denied this debt. The SOR also alleged that Applicant failed to file his Federal 
income tax return for 2010, and intentionally omitted his tax debt and failure to file the 
tax return when he completed his September 6, 2013 e-QIP. He denied all allegations. 
(Answer.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
I make the following findings of fact.  
 
Applicant’s September 27, 2013 credit report shows a Federal tax lien was filed 
in April 2013 in the amount of $43,154. This tax lien also appears on Applicant’s May 
13, 2014 credit report. Applicant testified that the tax lien was related to his 2007 
Federal income tax. He incurred an unanticipated tax liability that year when he 
withdrew money from his 401(k) to pay his debts from a failed business. He testified that 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) did not receive his 2007 income tax return, although 
it was properly filed by his accountant. He believes that when the IRS reviews his 2007 
income tax return, he will not be indebted to the Federal Government. However, he 
claims that if the IRS determines he does owe the money, he has the funds to pay his 
debt. Applicant testified he did not learn of the alleged $43,154 tax delinquency until 
2012, because he moved around a lot. He testified that he has been in frequent contact 
with the IRS, and is waiting for them to process his tax return. Applicant failed to 
produce any documentation corroborating his assertions of frequent communications 
with the IRS in relation to this debt. His post-hearing exhibits included a copy of his 
2007 Federal Income tax return, dated July 19, 2013. It was unsigned. It showed he 
was due a refund for the 2007 tax year. (GE 4; GE 5; AE A; Tr. 28-61.) 
 
3 
 
Applicant claimed that he filed his 2010 Federal income tax return by April 15, 
2011. He produced no documentation to substantiate his claim. Instead the record 
contained evidence that shows in February 2014, he received a letter informing him that 
his 2010 tax return had not been signed. He failed to provide evidence showing when 
the 2010 Federal income tax return was initially submitted or that it was resubmitted 
after the February 2014 letter. (GE 6; Tr. Tr. 44-45.) 
 
In Applicant’s September 6, 2013 e-QIP, he was asked about his financial record 
as part of Section 26. Applicant indicated “No” to the question, “In the past seven years 
have you failed to file or pay Federal, state, or other taxes when required by law or 
ordinance?” He testified that he always filed his tax returns in a timely manner before 
April 15 of the subsequent year. He repeatedly asserted that he filed both 2007 and 
2010 returns as required by law. Given the record evidence, this claim is not credible. 
(Tr. 44, 56.) 
 
Applicant provided no explanation for why he did not address his required 
Federal income tax filings or delinquent tax debt sooner than 2013, other than to note 
that he moved frequently. He failed to submit a budget or income statement. He testified 
that he is a valued employee but he submitted no evidence concerning the quality of his 
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record 
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. 
He provided no character references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, 
or reliability. He provided only a photograph as evidence of his good character. (AE B; 
Tr. 54-55, 60.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
4 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. The 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state or local income tax returns as 
required or fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 The record evidence shows that Applicant failed to file his 2010 Federal income 
tax return as required. As a result of his early withdrawal of funds from his 401(k) 
account, he incurred an unresolved tax lien for $43,154. He failed to produce evidence 
to show this tax lien is either erroneous or being resolved. The Government established 
the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(g). Further inquiry about the 
applicability of mitigating conditions is required. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 were 
considered, but found inapplicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 In this case, Applicant’s 2007 Federal Income tax return appeared to have been 
prepared in July 2013, despite his assertions it was filed in a timely manner. However, 
Applicant offered no substantive proof it was either filed or accepted as being accurate 
by the IRS. Further, the tax lien remains a valid debt on his May 2014 credit report. His 
2010 Federal Income tax return was rejected by the IRS in February 2014, for failure to 
include a valid signature. He failed to show that it initially was submitted in a timely 
manner prior to it later being rejected by the IRS. Further, he failed to offer 
 
6 
 
documentation to show he signed and resubmitted it. Applicant has the burden of 
producing evidence sufficient to mitigate the Government’s concerns and he failed to do 
so. His failure to document that he filed his 2010 Federal income tax return, and failure 
to pay or otherwise resolve his 2007 tax debt demonstrate a continuing course of 
conduct involving the failure to comply with Federal law. He has not established that his 
problems are being resolved or are under control, or that he made a good faith effort to 
resolve them. None of the mitigating conditions were sufficiently established by the 
record evidence. 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant denied falsification of his 2013 e-QIP. He claimed he did file his 2007 
and 2010 Federal income tax returns in a timely manner, albeit without proper 
signatures, and that his answer was truthful. However, Applicant also testified that he 
became aware of the lien in 2012. The Government presented sufficient information to 
establish that Applicant was aware that he failed to properly file his Federal income tax 
returns, and of the resulting $43,154 tax lien, by at least 2012, before completing his 
2013 e-QIP. His explanation that he filed his 2007 and 2010 Federal income tax returns 
as prescribed by law is self-serving, and inconsistent with the record evidence. The 
Government has established sufficient concern under AG ¶ 16(a) to disqualify Applicant 
from possessing a clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
7 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant's falsification is unmitigated. He failed to acknowledge or correct his 
behavior, even after being confronted with the facts. Falsification of information provided 
to the Government in connection with the security clearance process cannot be 
considered minor. His conduct reflects negatively on his trustworthiness and good 
judgment. He failed to demonstrate positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Applicant failed to establish mitigation under AG 
¶¶ 17(a), 17(c), 17(d) and 17(e). 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
8 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He testified that he 
is a valued employee, works hard, and is constantly traveling in support of his 
employer’s mission. However, as a citizen of the United States, he has a legal obligation 
to ensure his Federal income tax returns are filed in a timely manner and that he 
satisfies any and all debts to the Federal Government. His busy travel schedule is no 
excuse for his failure to diligently resolve tax issues. Further, he was aware in 2012 that 
he had not properly filed his 2007 and 2010 tax returns, and that a large tax lien had 
been filed against him for failing to pay 2007 taxes, but he deliberately failed to disclose 
this information on his e-QIP. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Personal Conduct or 
Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
