 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00128 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 4, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On March 20, 2014, 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On May 19, 2014, the case was 
assigned to me. On June 4, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for June 24, 2012. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 3, while Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through E. All proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on July 1, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old mechanical engineer who works for a defense 
contractor. He has been employed in his current job since June 2013. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in December 2011. He married in October 2013 and has no children. 
This is the first time that he has sought to obtain a security clearance.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had six delinquent debts totaling $81,547 (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a – 1.f). The allegations consisted of three student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c) and 
three credit card accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.f). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted each debt. His admissions are incorporated as findings as fact.2 
 
In about 2002, Applicant was attending his sophomore year in college when his 
mother had a stroke. At that point, he left college to return home to assist her. He began 
working fulltime in various restaurant jobs to help make ends meet but did not have 
extra money to make payments on the student loans. In those jobs, he was making 
about $28,000 per year.3  
 
From January 2003 to December 2011, he attended a community college and a 
university on a part-time basis until he earned his bachelor’s degree in mechanical 
engineering. In 2004, he met his future wife and they began living together. She worked 
in the banking industry. She was laid off from her job when the real estate market 
collapsed. He also was laid off from a job when the restaurant at which he was working 
went out of business. At the time he was laid off, his future wife was only working at a 
part-time job. They were forced to rely on credit cards to cover living expenses.4 
 
Applicant indicated that his current job is his first stable source of income. Shortly 
after starting that job, he contacted a consumer debt counseling company to establish a 
debt repayment plan. For the past ten months, he has been making regular payments to 
such a plan. At the time of the hearing, his payments under that plan totaled over 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5-6, 25-26, 29; GE 1, 2. 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 25-26; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1.  
4 Tr. 25-27; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
 
$1,427. Of those payments, $800 has been paid toward the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 
1.e. He still owes about $400 on those two debts. Applicant also independently reached 
a settlement agreement with the creditor of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f and paid that debt in 
October 2013.5 
 
The consumer debt counseling company also provided him assistance with both 
his private and federal student loans. His two private student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b) totaling $44,341 were charged off. In June 2014, the company servicing the two 
private student loans offered him a new repayment program in which he will be required 
to pay $250 per month for both loans. After making the first three payments, the interest 
rate for these loans will be reduced from about 12% to 0.001% as long as he continues 
making timely payments. The first payment on the repayment program was due shortly 
after the hearing.6 
 
Applicant’s federal student loans were consolidated into one account (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
totaling $35,000. His federal student loans have been in forbearance. The federal 
student loans will be placed in an extended repayment plan. Under this plan, he will be 
required to pay $205 monthly for 25 years. He indicated that he is confident he could 
make all of his student loan payments.7 
 
Applicant indicated that he has not incurred any new delinquent debts since his 
graduation from college in 2011. His current annual salary is $56,000. He expects to 
receive a pay raise soon. His wife is working part time and currently earns about 
$15,000 to $20,000 per year. He testified that their net monthly remainder (monthly 
income minus monthly expenses and debt payments) was between $200 and $500. 
That figure took into consideration his upcoming monthly obligation of paying $459 
toward his federal and private student loans.8 
 
Applicant’s company has between 200 to 300 employees, including about 20 to 
30 engineers. In December 2013, he received the company’s President’s Award for 
Excellence, which recognizes outstanding performance, unselfish dedication, and 
exceptional contributions. Only two employees in the company received this annual 
award last year.9 
 
Applicant’s performance evaluation indicated that he exemplified unquestionable 
ethical and professional behavior at all times. He supervisor stated that Applicant is a 
                                                          
5 Tr. 27-29; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 3; AE A, B.  
6 Tr. 28-31, 34-35; GE 2, 3; AE A, B, C. 
7 Tr. 28-31; GE 3; AE A, B.  
8 Tr. 31-36.  
9 Tr. 33-34; AE E. 
 
4 
 
 
“responsible, mature, trustworthy individual who portrays the highest values of 
professionalism, ethics, morals and accountability in all aspects of his professional and 
personal life.”10 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
                                                          
10 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; AE D.  
 
5 
 
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts totaling over $80,000 that he was unable 
to satisfy for an extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
6 
 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
In about 2002, Applicant’s mother suffered a stroke. At that time, he left school to 
assist his family. He worked in low-paying restaurant jobs. In 2004, he met his future wife, 
and they began living together. She worked in the banking industry but was laid off when 
the real estate market collapsed. Applicant was also laid off from a job. His mother’s 
medical problems as well as his and his wife’s employment problems were conditions 
beyond his control that contributed to his financial problems. From about 2003 to 2011, he 
continued to attend college part time until he earned his bachelor’s degree. Since then, he 
obtained stable employment in June 2013 and sought financial counseling. He has 
resolved one debt (SOR ¶ 1.c) and established repayment plans for his remaining debts. 
He has been making regular payments toward the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. He will 
soon begin making payments on the student loans, some of which were in forbearance. 
Since graduating from college he has incurred no new delinquent debts. He presented 
sufficient evidence to show that his financial problems are under control, are being 
resolved, and are unlikely to recur. He has acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) apply. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) partially apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
7 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a young man who is beginning his professional career. In a relatively 
short period, he established himself as a valued, reliable, and trustworthy employee. He 
has taken meaningful steps to show that he is committed to resolving his financial 
problems. His current financial situation is stable and improving.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
