 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00119 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
        Statement of the Case 
 
The Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), dated February 27, 2014, detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an April 7, 2014, response to the SOR, Applicant denied all 11 allegations 
raised, and requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on May 15, 2014, then transferred to me on May 27, 2014, for administrative reasons. 
DOHA issued a notice of video teleconference hearing on June 11, 2014, setting the 
hearing for June 20, 2014.  
 
 
2 
 
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered five 
documents, which were accepted as Exhibits (EX) 1-5 without objection. Applicant 
offered testimony and 12 documents, which were accepted without objection as Exhibits 
(EX) A-L. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on July 1, 2014, and the 
record was closed.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old man who has been an operations supervisor for a 
defense contractor since June 2005. He served on active duty in the United States 
military from 1996 until 2001, then served as an inactive reservist until 2004. He was 
honorably discharged from military service. Applicant has two associate’s degrees. He 
is presently single and has two minor daughters. At issue are 11 allegations concerning 
delinquent debts amounting to about $38,000. 
 
 As of September 2009, while living with his mother, Applicant was in sound 
financial condition.  He was encouraged to invest in a home of his own, which he did 
with only a minor impact on his finances. About a year later, Applicant and the mother of 
his eldest child began having problems. When she threatened to leave the state with 
their child, Applicant challenged her in court. In turn, the mother sued him for child 
support, although they had been providing equal physical and financial support for the 
child for years. Given no credit for his past financial support, the court ordered that he 
pay past and present child support. The court based the amounts on a recently acquired 
pay raise, which moved his salary from the $30,000s to the mid-$50,000s. 
Consequently, the value of his past years of contributions was artificially inflated, and, 
due to the retroactive nature of the payments, he was instantly deemed to be in arrears. 
His payments began in December 2010.   
 
In the interim, Applicant received credit counseling and his youngest child was 
born. He contributed his fair share to that child’s care and well-being. The mother of the 
child, however, ultimately took Applicant to court, too. There, the court based his 
allotments for child support on a figure even higher than Applicant’s salary. (Tr. 22) 
Challenging this decision finally led Applicant to the brink of financial distress. (Tr. 30-
31) In the end, Applicant was liable for approximately $1,000 each month for each child 
until his arrearages were satisfied.   
 
 Applicant did his best to economize. He prepared meals at home, reduced his 
expenses, took a second job, and employed other measures to reduce his expenses. 
Such measures, however, could not help him address all his debts and creditors. He 
made the decision to focus on his mortgage payments as his priority. Consequently, 
some accounts became delinquent. In 2012, he intentionally took a lateral move some 
thought of as a demotion to another position. That job permitted him to earn overtime 
and be paid for travel, thus increasing his net income. As his available income 
increased, he started satisfying the debts at issue by addressing his debts in order, then 
bringing past-due accounts to a current status. The status of those debts follows: 
 
 
3 
 
 
1.a - Addressed. (Tr. 38, 47; SOR Response attachment A1 (2013 Order Vacating 
Judgment)); 
1.b - Settled. (Tr. 47; SOR Response attachment B and B1); 
1.c - Addressed. (Tr. 40-41, 47; Duplicate account of 1.a, above);  
1.d – In Repayment. (Tr. 49-50; SOR Response attachment C and C1); 
1.e – Settled. (Tr. 43-45; Ex. G); 
1.f - In Repayment. (Tr. 51-52); 
1.g - In Repayment. (Tr. 52); 
1.h - Settled. (Tr. 52-53); 
1.i - In Repayment. (Tr. 53-54); 
1.j - Account Current/Rehabilitated. (Tr. 54-55); 
1.k - Account Current/Rehabilitated. (Tr. 54-55). 
 
Those accounts currently in repayment are part of a comprehensive repayment plan 
Applicant initiated in 2011, before the issuance of the February 2014 SOR. The 
remaining accounts in that plan now have minimal balances, with a cumulative balance 
due of about $1,100 as of the hearing date. He has made regular and timely payments 
on his repayment plan. Applicant remains timely on his rehabilitated, formerly past-due 
accounts (1.j-1.k). He has always been timely on his mortgage and court-ordered child 
support payments, the accounts he made his primary priority. He remains timely on his 
rehabilitated, formerly past-due accounts (1.j-1.k). 
 
 Applicant lives within his means. He has no outstanding delinquent debts. He 
reserves “a couple of grand” in his savings account for emergencies and has a savings 
account. (Tr. 55) Applicant invests in a 401(k) retirement account. He is in the process 
of setting up funds to secure his children’s future. (Tr. 55-56) He is presently in control 
of his finances. (Tr. 57-58) Applicant is a highly valued performer at his workplace. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had 
acquired multiple delinquent debts. This is sufficient to raise two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant received a significant raise in 2010, around the time a court assessed 
his child support obligation and a retroactive sum based on his newly acquired wage 
base. It then increased his child support further. The unforeseen sum caused Applicant 
to become late on some of his accounts while his prioritized obligations were deemed to 
be his child support and his mortgage. Despite measures to increase his income and 
minimize expenses, no significant progress was possible until 2012, when he accepted 
a lateral position which paid overtime and other excess wages for travel. With the 
resultant increase in income, Applicant was able to use his financial counseling skills 
and implement a plan to settle, satisfy, or go into repayment on the debts at issue. 
Moreover, two debts, which were simply past due, are now current. These efforts were 
exerted due to Applicant’s sense of obligation, not the threat of losing his job or security 
clearance. Today, he lives within his means and is saving for both his and his children’s 
future. In light of these considerations, I find that mitigating conditions AG ¶ 20(b)-(d) 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a credible, responsible, and mature man. He is educated and served 
honorably in the United States military. Despite being on cordial relations with the 
mothers of his two children, both took him to court for child support, which he had 
already been voluntarily paying. The rate of the payments imposed in 2010 and 2011, 
plus a retroactive sum deemed owed, strained Applicant’s finances. He concentrated on 
those payments and his mortgage only. For nearly two years he tried to find a way to 
meet his delinquent debts. Ultimately, in 2012, he accepted a position that had the 
potential of paying a higher salary.  
 
With the extra income, Applicant has been able to make considerable progress 
toward satisfying his debts. As of today, all the accounts at issue have been addressed 
in a positive manner, and Applicant has both the motivation and resources to satisfy the 
modest balances on those few accounts still in repayment. He is saving for his future 
and the future of his children. He has reserved a considerable cushion in his bank 
account for emergencies. In light of his efforts to address his delinquent debts, his 
current financial situation, and his improved understanding of how best to prioritize his 
debts and prepare for contingencies, I find security concerns are mitigated. Clearance is 
granted.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
