Item 4.1
Item 1.2
1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00409
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has one unresolved delinquent student loan debt that has increased to
$17,868 while held by a collection agency. Despite five years of continuous
employment, he demonstrated no effort to repay or otherwise resolve it. Resulting
security concerns were not mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on October 17,
2013.  On March 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of1
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding2
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Item 3. 3
The Government submitted five Items in support of the SOR allegations. 4
Item 4.5
Item 3.6
Items 3 and 5.7
2
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines that
came into effect in the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted a written response to the SOR (Answer) on April 7, 2014,
and requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record
without a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on3
April 29, 2014. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was provided4
to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on May 9, 2014. He submitted no material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within
the 30-day period thereafter, made no objection to consideration of any contents of the
FORM, and did not request additional time to respond. I received the case assignment
on June 30, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 30 years old, single, and childless. He earned a bachelor’s degree
from a state university in August 2008. He has no military service, and this is his first
application for a security clearance. He started his present employment as a welder,
working for a defense contractor, in October 2013. Prior to obtaining this position, he
worked as a chef from July 2010 to September 2013, and as a truck driver from May
2009 to September 2010. He was unemployed from October 2008 to May 2009, and
worked as a line cook in a restaurant from June 2006 to October 2008.  5
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and
denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, with some explanations.  Applicant’s admissions are6
incorporated into the following findings of fact.
Applicant has a delinquent student loan. He took out this loan in September
2004, from the lender identified in SOR ¶ 1.b, in the amount of $12,990. The record
credit report shows that the last activity on this account was in March 2008, and that the
original lender placed it for collection and filed a claim with the Government for the
insured portion in December 2008. The credit report shows a zero balance due to the
original lender on the account.7
Items 3 and 5.8
Item 3.9
Item 5.10
3
Applicant admitted, and the record credit report confirms, that this debt remains
delinquent and is now held by the collection agency identified in SOR ¶ 1.a. As of
November 2013, accrued interest and fees have increased the balance being claimed
by the collection agency to $17,868.  8
Applicant’s only response to the Government’s concerns about the security
significance of this delinquent debt, as formally expressed in the SOR and the FORM,
was to state in his Answer, “I am interested in seeking legal advice to discuss settling
possibilities in the near term. I am willing to communicate with the collection agency to
discuss payment options to eliminate this financial debt.”  He offered no evidence of any9
such communication or other attempt to resolve this outstanding legal obligation.  
There is no evidence that Applicant was requested to respond to financial
interrogatories from DOHA, or that he responded if such a request was made. He
submitted no financial statement, or other evidence concerning his budget, income,
assets, and ability to repay this debt. The record credit report shows that all of his other
credit accounts, including several smaller student loans, are either paid in full or being
paid as agreed.10
Applicant submitted no evidence of financial counseling or other efforts to
establish financial responsibility. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures.
He submitted no character references describing his judgment, trustworthiness,
integrity, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in
person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
4
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
5
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security
concerns under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant obtained a student loan in the amount of $12,990 in September 2004.
After his graduation from college in 2008, and his failure to make required payments,
the lender placed the loan for collection and made a claim to the Government for the
insured portion. Despite his continuous employment since May 2009, and payment as
agreed on all other debts, he provided no evidence of efforts to repay or otherwise
resolve this debt. It is now held by a collection agency and the balance due has risen to
$17,868. This evidence raises security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), thereby
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s student loan debt has risen by more than 37% over the past six years
without any apparent effort to resolve it. The balance remains due and continues to
increase. Applicant’s apparent lack of any effort to address this obligation during five
years of continuous employment prevents a finding that his behavior does not cast
6
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The evidence does
not establish mitigation under MC 20(a). 
Applicant offered insufficient evidence to support mitigation under MC 20(b). He
has been fully employed during the past five years and asserted no other hardship that
may have interfered with his ability to address this obligation. 
Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling, did not establish clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control, and demonstrated no
effort to repay or otherwise resolve this significant and growing debt. MC 20(c) and
20(d) are therefore inapplicable. 
Applicant credibly explained that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a duplicate
credit report listing of the original student loan that is now held by a collection agency as
described in SOR ¶ 1.a. The dates and annotations contained in the record credit report
confirm this explanation. Accordingly, he mitigated the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b, as being
a source of distinct or additional security concerns, under MC 20(e).
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable
adult, who is responsible for his voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the security
concerns expressed in the SOR. His financial irresponsibility is ongoing toward a
delinquent student loan debt of $17,868 that continues to grow while he fails to address
it. This debt did not arise under circumstances that were beyond his control, yet
remained unresolved during his past five years of continuous employment. He offered
no evidence of financial counseling, rehabilitation, better judgment, or responsible
7
conduct in other areas of his life. The potential for pressure, coercion, and duress
remains undiminished. 
In the absence of any demonstrated effort to resolve or rehabilitate this single
delinquent student loan debt, or to otherwise mitigate the resulting security concerns,
the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility
and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the
security concerns arising from his financial considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
