 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00500 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s illegal marijuana use while possessing a security clearance in 2013 
violated the trust placed in him by the Government. His criminal behavior raises serious 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, ability to comply with the law 
and follow regulations, and his ability to protect classified information. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 25, 2013. The 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) and Guideline E (personal 
conduct) on March 20, 2014.1 Applicant answered the SOR on March 31, 2014, and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated April 21, 
2014, was mailed to him that same date. Applicant received the FORM on April 29, 
2014. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide 
material in extenuation and mitigation. He did not answer the FORM and provided no 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on June 30, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, 
including his answers to the SOR and his July 2013 SCA, I make the following findings 
of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old systems engineer hired by a government contractor in 
September 2004. He was awarded a bachelor’s degree in December 2000, completed a 
master’s degree in May 2004, and received his doctorate degree in May 2012. He 
married his wife in December 2003, and they separated in the summer of 2013. In his 
answer to the SOR, he stated that he has three children under the age of seven.  
 
Applicant was granted access to classified information at the secret level in May 
2006, and he has possessed a top secret clearance since May 2008. He explained that 
the cumulative stress caused by his 2013 marital separation, having three children 
under the age of seven, a mortgage, and working 50-hour weeks led him to use 
marijuana as a means to find relief for his stress. He claimed he used marijuana during 
a brief period, and in a home environment. He did not provide information concerning 
the extent of the period during which he used marijuana, where he acquired the 
marijuana, and whether he used the marijuana alone or with others.  
 
Applicant stated that his situation was exacerbated by the fact that he has 
suffered from depression and an obsessive-compulsive disorder for numerous years. At 
the time his stress peaked, he was in the process of seeking medical attention to find 
the right treatment and medications. He claimed that he recently found the right 
treatment and it is helping him greatly. He averred that he has disclosed his illness in 
prior SCAs, and that his condition never interfered with his ability to function at work or 
to protect classified information. Applicant provided no other information concerning his 
diagnosis, prognosis, or the treatment he is receiving. 
 
Applicant noted that he has possessed a security clearance for many years 
without incidents or concerns, except for the current SOR allegations. He averred he 
was honest and upfront during the security clearance process. He believes that through 
his work he has made important contributions to the United States, and he considers 
himself to be a valuable asset to the Government.  
 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant averred that he has always been diligent and meticulous about the 
protection of classified information. He acknowledged that his illegal use of drugs, even 
as an outlet to relieve his stress, demonstrated poor judgment on his part. However, he 
claimed that he has never compromised, and would never compromise, classified 
information. He considers himself to be a law-abiding person who is honest, trustworthy, 
and has integrity. He promised never to again engage in the use of illegal drugs while 
possessing a security clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana in about September 2013, while possessing a 
top secret security clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and are disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides two potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence. 
 
None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s most recent 
illegal drug-related behavior occurred in September 2013. As such, his drug-related 
behavior is recent. Although Applicant underwent a stressful period as a result of his 
marital separation, I do not find that a marital separation is an extraordinary 
circumstance that would justify the illegal use of drugs. Marital separations and divorces 
are a common occurrence in today’s society. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Because of his age, education, and his experience working for government 
contractors and possessing a security clearance, Applicant knew or should have known 
of the adverse legal and security clearance consequences he would face as a result of 
his illegal use of marijuana. Applicant’s illegal use of marijuana is a violation of the trust 
placed in him by the Government. It demonstrates a lack of judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and an inability to comply with the law and follow regulations. 
 
Applicant promised to never use illegal drugs in the future; however, his promise 
holds little weight. He was aware of the criminal prohibition against the illegal use of 
drugs, and that did not stop him from using marijuana in September 2013. Moreover, 
Applicant provided little evidence concerning the circumstances of his illegal drug use. 
Numerous questions remain about his illegal drug use such as: the extent of his illegal 
drug use; where did he acquire the illegal drugs; the periods of use; whether he has any 
drug-using associates and contacts; and whether he has completed a drug treatment 
program, participated in rehabilitation, and is undergoing aftercare requirements.  
 
Applicant’s security concerns are further exacerbated by the unknown 
circumstances regarding his depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Applicant 
claimed that he recently found the right treatment and that it is helping him greatly; 
however, he provided no documentary evidence from treating physicians concerning his 
diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment. In sum, Applicant’s scant evidence is insufficient to 
mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  The personal conduct security concerns are based on the same facts alleged 
under the drug involvement guideline, incorporated herein. Applicant’s illegal marijuana 
use in about September 2013, while possessing a top secret security clearance, triggers 
the applicability of disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(e): 
 
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists three conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 For the same reasons outlined under the Guideline H discussion, incorporated 
herein, I find that none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s illegal use of 
marijuana is a recent, serious offence, committed while possessing a security 
clearance. The available evidence does not show that the criminal offense occurred 
under unique circumstances.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged his behavior and claimed he sought medical help to 
control his depression and obsessive compulsive disorder. Notwithstanding, the 
evidence presented is insufficient for me to conclude that the steps taken are sufficient 
to alleviate the stressors and circumstances that caused his illegal behavior, and that 
such illegal behavior is unlikely to recur. With the disclosure of his illegal drug use, 
Applicant has taken the first steps to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation and 
manipulation, but at this time, his efforts are not sufficient to fully mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J and E in my 
whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a competent and highly educated systems engineer working for a 
government contractor since September 2004. He was granted access to classified 
information at the secret level in May 2006, and he has possessed a top secret 
clearance since May 2008.  
 
 Notwithstanding his personal qualifications and past contributions to the 
Government, Applicant’s illegal use of marijuana in 2013 violated the trust placed on 
him by the Government. His criminal behavior while possessing a security clearance 
raises serious questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, ability to comply 
with the law, and his ability to protect classified information. He failed to mitigate the 
Guideline H and Guideline E security concerns.  
 
7 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
