 
 
 
 
1 
                                                             
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
              DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR No.  14-00122 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was born and raised in Taiwan. He immigrated to the United States in 
1981 and became a citizen in 1991. He has numerous family members who are 
residents and citizens of Taiwan, whom he visits regularly. He used a Taiwanese 
passport to travel there last year. Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
  History of Case 
 
On July 17, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 7, 2014, the Department of Defense 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B and Guideline C. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
 
 
 
 
2 
Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 28, 2014, and waived his right 
to a hearing before an administrative judge. On April 23, 2014, Department Counsel 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing four Items and mailed Applicant 
a complete copy. Applicant received the FORM on April 30, 2014, and had 30 days from 
its receipt to file objections and submit additional information. He did not submit any 
additional information.  On June 30, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Within the FORM, Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts relating to Taiwan. Attached to the FORM are 
documents marked as Exhibits (Ex.) I through XIX.  Applicant did not object to my 
consideration of those exhibits as relating to Taiwan. Hence, the facts administratively 
noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to 
reasonable dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out under the heading 
“Taiwan.”  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
Paragraph 1 and Paragraph 2 of the SOR. (Item 3.) His admissions are incorporated 
into the findings below. 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old. He was born in Taiwan. He attended a Taiwanese 
university from 1968 to 1974 where he earned a bachelor’s and master’s degree. He 
served in the Taiwanese army from July 1974 to June 1975, as mandated by the 
Taiwanese government. He has a Taiwanese passport that was issued in January 2013 
and expires in January 2023. He used that passport in March 2013 to travel to Taiwan. 
He returns to Taiwan about once a year to visit his family.  (Item 3, 4.)  He also has a 
current U.S. passport that he did not use for travel to Taiwan. 
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States in January 1981. He attended a U.S. 
university from August 1981 to December 1983 and earned a doctorate’s degree. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 1991. He considers himself a dual citizen of 
the United States and Taiwan. In January 1991 he started a position with a defense 
contractor. He owns a home in the United States. (Item 4.)  
 
 Applicant married his wife in June 1981 in Taiwan. She was born in Taiwan and 
is a naturalized U. S. citizen. She holds dual citizenship with both countries. They have 
two children. One child was born in Taiwan and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. The 
 
 
 
 
3 
second child was born in the United States. Applicant’s elderly parents were born in 
Taiwan. Both suffer from illnesses. They are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Four of 
his sisters are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Another sister is a citizen of Taiwan and 
resident of Singapore, where she teaches. Applicant’s elderly parents-in-law are citizens 
and residents of the Taiwan. Both suffer from illnesses.  (Items 3, 4.)  
 
 Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect 
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. He submitted 
no character references describing his judgment, morality, trustworthiness, integrity, or 
reliability.  
 
Taiwan 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. The United States does not support Taiwan 
independence, in keeping with the One-China policy; however, it maintains strong and, 
unofficial relations with Taiwan in order to further peace and stability in Asia. The United 
States supports Taiwan’s membership in appropriate international organizations where 
statehood is not a requirement for membership and encourages its meaningful 
participation in appropriate international organizations, such as the World Trade 
Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, and the Asian 
Development Bank. Maintaining diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC) has been recognized to be in the long-term interest of the United States by six 
consecutive administrations.  
 
There are significant economic ties between Taiwan and the PRC, which are 
attributable to their physical proximity and history. Because of its location, Taiwan has a 
particular interest in information from the United States that could aid it in its own 
defense. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion from the PRC. The PRC 
maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals 
with Taiwanese connections. Unlike the PRC, however, the constitutional basis of the 
Taiwanese government suggests that resorting to coercive measures against its citizens 
to collect economic intelligence is unlikely. 
 
The record references various cases involving the illegal export or attempted 
illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to and/or through Taiwan. One 
report to the U.S. Congress concerns foreign economic collection and industrial 
espionage. That report notes that Taiwan was known to be an active collector of U.S. 
economic intelligence in 2008. The report ranked Taiwan, along with China, Japan, 
Israel, France, and Korea as an active collector of such information.  (Ex. II.) Although 
some of the record information about Taiwan’s intelligence activities targeting U.S. 
classified or sensitive information is more than 10 years old, several exhibits address 
more recent espionage by Taiwan’s National Intelligence Bureau. There is evidence that 
Taiwan has specifically targeted U.S. citizens in the last five to seven years to obtain 
protected and classified information. (Exs. III to XIII.) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by an applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:  
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in May 1991. He admitted that he possesses a 
current Taiwanese passport that he either renewed or obtained in January 2013, and 
which expires in January 2023. He used it for travel to Taiwan in March 2013. Those 
facts are sufficient to raise a disqualification under AG ¶ 10(a)(1).   
After the Government raised a disqualification, the burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence and prove mitigation. AG ¶ 11 provides five conditions that could 
potentially mitigate security concerns raised under this guideline: 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant ecurity 
authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 
 
 
6 
Applicant is a mature adult who has chosen to continue holding dual citizenship. 
He has not expressed any intention to renounce his Taiwanese citizenship. He renewed 
his Taiwanese passport in 2013, years after becoming a U.S. citizen. The U.S. 
government has not authorized the use of the Taiwanese passport for purposes of 
travel. It has not been destroyed. None of the above mitigating conditions apply to the 
security concerns raised in this case.  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.1  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual desire to 
help a foreign person, groups, or country by providing information. 
 
Applicant’s parents, four sisters and parents-in-law are resident citizens of 
Taiwan. He visits his Taiwanese family every year. His family’s presence in a country 
that consistently engages in espionage against the United States raises a significant 
security concern and generates a heightened risk of exploitation, pressure or coercion 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
of the Applicant. Those circumstances could place Applicant in a position of having to 
choose between his family members residing in Taiwan and the United States. The 
Government met its burden of production by raising the above disqualifying conditions 
and shifts the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation. 
 
  Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the security 
concerns raised under this guideline: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Because the record does not contain much evidence about the nature or scope 
of Applicant’s relationships with his family members or their past or current positions 
and activities in Taiwan, a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, or 
coercion remains a concern. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. He indicated that he 
visits his family every year, which indicates that his communication with them is more 
than casual. AG ¶ 8(c) cannot apply. 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient persuasive evidence to establish his deep or 
longstanding relationships to the United States, which would warrant the application of 
AG ¶ 8(b). He provided information that he has lived in the United States since 1981; 
his wife and two children are U.S. citizens; he obtained an advanced degree from a U.S. 
university; and he has been employed by a defense contractor since 2009. He became 
a U.S. citizen in 1991. While those facts demonstrate some longstanding relationships 
to the United States, without further amplification they are not sufficient to find that he 
would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
 
 
 
8 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
In cases involving foreign influence, the Appeal Board requires the whole-person 
analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of 
an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his 
or her ties social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given 
case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence tending to 
mitigate the raised security concerns under the whole-person concept.  Applicant is a 
mature person, who has lived in the United States since 1981. His wife and children are 
U.S. citizens. He attended a U.S. university. He owns a home here. He has worked for a 
defense contractor since January 2009. There is no evidence that he has ever taken 
any action that could cause potential harm to the United States.  
 
Other circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole-person analysis.  First, 
China’s government (the PRC) has strong connections to people in Taiwan. More 
importantly for security purposes, Taiwan is actively involved in industrial espionage 
against the United States, and may attempt to use émigrés such as Applicant for illegal 
purposes. Second, his parents, four siblings, and parent in-laws are resident citizens of 
Taiwan. Third, he maintains contact with his family as demonstrated by yearly visits. 
Fourth, though he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1991, he maintains, and has 
recently renewed, a Taiwanese passport that he used to travel there.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, and considering my inability to 
observe Applicant’s demeanor or judge his credibility, I conclude he failed to mitigate 
the security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign influence. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                     
                 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
