                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 14-00536
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
July 30, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(E-QIP) on August 6, 2007, and September 25, 2013.  (Government Exhibits 1 and 3.)
On March 11, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order
10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
(as amended), issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 20, 2014, and he requested an
administrative hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned
to the undersigned Administrative Judge on May 2, 2014.  A notice of hearing was
issued on May 8, 2014, and the hearing was scheduled for June 11, 2014.  At the
hearing the Government presented eight exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1
through 8, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented three
exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, which were also admitted into
evidence without objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained
open until close of business on June 24, 2014, to allow the Applicant to submit
2
additional documentation.  The Applicant submitted three Post-Hearing Exhibits,
referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits A through C, which were admitted
without objection.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on June 24, 2014.  Based
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 42 years old and divorced with three children.  He has a Bachelor’s
of Arts Degree and a Bachelor’s of Science Degree in Mechanical Engineering.  He
holds the position of Logistics Engineer for a defense contractor.  He is seeking to
obtain a security clearance in connection with this employment.   
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant denied allegation 1(a) set forth in the SOR, and admitted each of the
other allegations under this guideline.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Credit
Reports of the Applicant dated August 16, 2007; October 10, 2013; an June 9, 2014,
reflect that at one time Applicant was indebted to each of the six creditors set forth in
the SOR, in an amount totaling approximately $15,000.  (Government Exhibits 2, 4 and
7.)  In June 2013, Applicant started working as an intern for a defense contractor.  He
was offered and accepted a full time position in January 2014.
 
From 1989 to 2009, Applicant served honorably on active duty in the United
States Navy, until he retired.  During his military career, Applicant received numerous
awards and commendations for his outstanding service, which includes at least four
Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medals and one Navy Commendation Medal.  In
1992, Applicant was married.  He admits that during his marriage, he and his wife were
not as financially responsible as they should have been.  They divorced in 2002, and
Applicant assumed all of the debt from the marriage.  His intention was to pay all of the
debt as soon as possible.  Applicant testified that although some of his debts became
delinquent, he never missed a child support payment.
In 2007, Applicant and his brother moved in together and comfortably shared the
rent on a house.  That same year, Applicant cosigned for an automobile for his older
brother.  In September 2008, Applicant’s brother unexpectantly lost his job and
Applicant could not afford to pay the rent by himself, since it was his brother who
provided most of the monthly financial assistance.  Applicant’s brother’s loss of income
forced the Applicant to break the residential lease to avoid additional penalties.  In 2009,
3
when the Applicant retired from the Navy, he enrolled in school full-time.  While in
school he was not working, and his only income was from his G.I. Bill and his pension.
This covered his rent, living expenses, and child support, but he did not have the ability
to address his other debt.  The following delinquent debts set forth in the SOR became
delinquent, but have since been paid.  1(a) A delinquent medical account for services
rendered to Applicant’s minor daughter in the amount of $111 was paid by the Applicant
on May 14, 2014.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, and Tr. p.  28.)  1(b) A delinquent credit card
debt in the amount of $782 was paid by Applicant on May 19, 2014.  (Applicant’s Exhibit
B.)  1(c)  A delinquent credit card debt in the amount of $1,504 was paid by Applicant on
May 27, 2014.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)        
Applicant has been working to resolve the three remaining creditors.  With
respect to 1(d), a delinquent debt owed for a purchase of a television in the amount of
$3,347, Applicant has been given three options.  He can pay the debt in full now, pay a
settlement amount now, or make payments until the full amount is paid.  Applicant
states that he intends to make payments until the debt is paid in full, and is waiting to
hear from the creditor as to the amount of the payment.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibit A.)  Applicant recently arrived at a settlement agreement with the creditor
concerning 1(e), a delinquent debt in the amount of $7,818 for a vehicle he cosigned for
his brother that was repossessed. Applicant will pay the creditor $1,250 on or before
June 24, 2014, and $1,250 on or before July 24, 2014, for a total of $2,500.  The debt
will then be resolved.  (Applicant’ Post-Hearing Exhibit E.)  1(f) A delinquent debt owed
for the purchase of a timeshare in the amount of $1,276.00 has been resolved.
Applicant submitted a copy of a e-mail confirmation indicating that the company’s credit
department has notified a credit reporting agency that the account has a zero balance.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B.)
Applicant acknowledged that while in college he took courses in finance that
have helped him learn how to set up a budget, pay his bills on time, and live within his
means.
Naval evaluation reports of the Applicant for the period from November 2006 to
November 2007, and March 2008 to November 2008, reflect ratings of either “above
standards” or “greatly exceeds standards”, in every category.  It is also noted that
Applicant is a top performer and superb leader.  Applicant submitted a certificate of
appreciation for his honorable service to the country, and a letter of appreciation from
the Department of the Navy for his tremendous job during the September 20 2002, fire
prevention brush removal project.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits C and D.)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
4
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances;
20.(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
    b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
5
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as
emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination
under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
6
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that the Applicant became delinquently indebted during his
marriage, when he and his wife were not financially responsible.  Later, when  his
brother lost his job, his financial problems compounded.  After retiring from the Navy,
Applicant attended college and did not work, so his income was limited to what he
received under the G.I. Bill and his pension.  Only after graduating from college, and
obtaining a full time job with a defense contractor, is Applicant earning sufficient monies
to pay his bills.  Since he has been employed, he has shown progress toward resolving
his delinquent debts and has demonstrated financial responsibility.
           
Applicant has provided documentation showing that he has contacted each of his
creditors, and has either paid off the delinquent debt, settled it, or set up payments to
resolve it.  Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve his debts.  He understands
that he must remain fiscally responsible if he is to hold a security clearance.  He has
paid off three of the six debts, reached a settlement with two others, and is starting
payments on the sole remaining debt.  He has not incurred any new debt that he cannot
afford to pay.  He has learned in college how to properly manage his financial affairs.
There is clear evidence of financial rehabilitation.  However, in the event that he
becomes excessively indebted again, and cannot meet his financial obligations, or if he
does not completely resolve his current outstanding debt, his security clearance will be
in immediate jeopardy.  Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome
the Government's case. 
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
obligations, apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 20.(c) the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20.(d) the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts also apply.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, and a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
7
  I have considered all of the evidence presented, including Applicant’s twenty
years of military service, his favorable performance evaluations, awards and
commendations.  It mitigates the negative effects of his financial indebtedness and the
effects that it can have on his ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it
is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's case opposing his
request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding for the
Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of
the SOR.   
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.f.: For the Applicant.
  DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
