                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14–00132
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
July 29, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
dated August 27, 2013.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On February 28, 2014, the
Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry” (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of
Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 19, 2014, and he requested a hearing
before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to an Administrative
Judge on April 22, 2014, and set for hearing by video-teleconference on May 20, 2014.
Applicant had difficulty entering the military base and the matter was cancelled.  The
case was assigned to the undersigned on June 2, 2014.  A notice of hearing was issued
that same day, and the hearing was scheduled for June 11, 2014.  At the hearing the
Government presented one exhibit, referred to as Government Exhibit 1.  The Applicant
presented five exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through E.  He also testified
2
on his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on June 19, 2014.  Based
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 22 years old and unmarried.  He has a Bachelor’s of Science Degree
in Computer Science and is employed by a defense contractor as a Data Analyst.  He is
applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.  (See
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.)  Applicant began using marijuana in high school in
June 2008.  He explained that he used it to help him deal with the stress of his senior
year.  (Tr. p. 18.)  During college, from July 2009 to December 2013, Applicant
continued to use marijuana.  He used marijuana about two times a week.  (Tr. p. 19.)  In
total, he estimates that he used it about 100 times a year, and about 500 times in his
life.  He stated that marijuana helped him through the stress he experienced in college
with exams and the academic workload.  Marijuana made him relax and helped him
sleep at night.  (Tr. p. 20.)  After graduating from college in December 2013, Applicant
continued to use marijuana.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.)
                
In August 2013, Applicant started working for his current employer.  (Tr. p. 21.)
Applicant testified that he still felt stressed and continued to smoke marijuana.  On
August 27, 2013, Applicant completed a security clearance application and disclosed his
illegal drug use.  He stated that he understood the importance of the application, and
that he knew he was applying for a security clearance.  He also acknowledged that he
understood that the use of marijuana is illegal and against DoD policy.  (Tr. p. 35.)  
After completing the security clearance application in August 2013, and for the
following six months, Applicant continued to use marijuana because he enjoyed its use,
and it continued to help him with stress.  (Tr. p. 22.)  He decided to stop using marijuana
and his last use occurred on February 2014.  (Tr. p. 23.)  During the five year period
between 2009 and 2014 that he used marijuana, he purchased it many times for his
personal use.  He last purchased it in February 2014.   
Applicant testified that he now believes that his use of marijuana was a stupid
mistake.  He states that he has several reasons not to use marijuana again.  He has
finished college and has a job.  He no longer associates with individuals who use
marijuana.  His parents have recently learned that he used marijuana and they are
upset about his actions.  He understands the health risks and the fact that it is illegal.
He states that he has no intention of ever using marijuana again.  (Tr. p. 18.)  At the
time of the hearing, he had not used marijuana for three months.       
                                 
3
Applicant is actively involved in a variety of community service organizations,
among those are his college fraternity, Americans Helping Asian Children, and The
Seany Foundation for pediatric cancer research.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A, C and D.) 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
4
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse and dishonesty that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government met its initial burden of proving that the Applicant
has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because
of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
5
connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence, the
Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline H of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that in 2008, during high school, the Applicant started using
marijuana.  He continued to use it throughout college, after graduation, and after
obtaining his first job with a defense contractor.  Even after completing a security
clearance application in August 2013, he continued to use it.  He also purchased it for
his own use.  He knew is was wrong, illegal, and against DoD policy to do so.  Applicant
intentionally disregarded the law and DoD policy.  Applicant’s conduct shows immaturity
and raises serious security concerns about his reliability and trustworthiness.  Under
Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse, 25.(c)
illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale
or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia apply.  None of the mitigating
conditions are applicable.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline H,
Drug Involvement. 
 I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is a young, immature,
inexperienced, recent college graduate who has used and purchased marijuana on a
regular basis for the past five years or so.  In February 2014, only three months before
the hearing, he decided to stop using marijuana.  Applicant has not demonstrated that
he can remain drug free for any sufficient amount of time to guarantee the Government
that he will not return to his old habits.  At this time, Applicant’s conduct is an indicator
of poor judgment and unreliability that preclude him from security clearance eligibility.
  
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the government’s national interest. Based upon the conduct outlined here, this Applicant
has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he does not meet the eligibility
requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find against the
Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).     
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
6
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
