 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00652 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations and criminal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 19, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and J (criminal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 10, 2014, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on May 28, 2014. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on June 5, 2014. As of July 17, 2014, he had not responded. The 
case was assigned to me on July 18, 2014. The Government exhibits included in the 
FORM (Items 4-8) are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2013. He is applying for a security clearance for 
the first time. He attended a technical school from 2007 to 2008. He has never married 
and he has no children.1   
 
 Applicant and a friend were riding off-road motorcycles (dirt bikes) in June 2011. 
The motorcycles were not registered to ride on the street. After observing several traffic 
violations, a police officer attempted to make a traffic stop of the two motorcycles. Both 
Applicant and his friend fled, which started a high-speed chase.2 The police officer 
wrote in his report: 
 
The motorcycles failed to stop at all stop signs, use proper turning signals, 
drove at a high rate of speed, and drove on the wrong side of the road 
several times during the pursuit. There were several other vehicles on the 
road and pedestrians in the area.3   
 
Applicant eventually pulled over and was arrested. The friend continued to drive. He 
was arrested after Applicant cooperated and gave the friend’s name to the police. 
Applicant admitted traveling about 75 miles per hour during the chase.4 
 
 Applicant was charged with evading a police officer. He pleaded no contest in 
August 2011. He was sentenced to 60 days in jail, a $460 fine, and summary probation 
for three years. Applicant’s jail time was stayed, and he was referred to a work release 
program (community service).5   
 
 Applicant completed the terms of his work release program. His probation will 
end in August 2014. He admits he made a “bad judgment call,” but he assures that “it 
will not happen again.”6   
 
 The SOR also alleges two charged-off student loans: SOR ¶¶ 2.a ($30,356) and 
2.b ($12,016). Applicant admitted owing the debts, and both of the debts appear on two 
                                                          
1 Item 4.  
 
2 Item 5.  
 
3 Item 6.  
 
4 Item 6.  
 
5 Items 3-6.  
 
6 Item 3.  
 
3 
 
credit reports. However, Applicant stated that he is paying the student loans and the 
accounts are current.7 
 
 Applicant stated that his student loans became delinquent when he was 
unemployed. He had several periods of unemployment, including from February 2007 to 
June 2008, October 2010 to February 2011, and January 2012 to September 2013.8    
 
 Applicant’s credit report from November 2013 lists charged-off student loans for 
$30,356 and $12,016 (SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b). The credit report also lists student loans 
that were not in collection with balances of $20,866; $6,158; $5,941; $5,732; $3,344; 
$1,156; and $1,146. All but the $20,866 student loan were listed as in deferment. 
Applicant’s May 2014 credit report lists the charged-off student loans with balances of 
$30,409 and $11,265. It also lists student loans that were not in collection with balances 
of $20,508; $6,329; $6,105; $5,746; $3,352; $1,188; and $1,149.9   
 
 Applicant stated that he has been making payments on the defaulted student 
loans listed in the SOR. He stated that without the student loans, he would not have had 
the opportunity to obtain his current employment. He would like to obtain his security 
clearance so he can remain employed, start a consistent career, and complete his 
student loan payments.10   
 
 Applicant stated that the $12,016 defaulted student loan had been reduced to 
$11,303 by his payments. Applicant submitted a copy of a transaction from the student 
loan provider’s website from April 1, 2014. It shows the loan with a balance of $12,198, 
with an interest rate of 9.75%, and a past-due minimum payment due of $910. Applicant 
paid $910 on April 1, 2014. That payment is consistent with the May 2014 credit 
report.11   
 
 Applicant stated that the $30,356 student loan had been reduced to $27,435. As 
proof of that assertion, Applicant presented part of a statement from the student loan 
provider. The statement shows four student loans with balances of $5,956; $5,606; 
$1,159; and $1,121; for a total of $23,289. The interest rate for the four loans is 6.8%. 
The statement does not list account numbers, but it appears that it is referring to four 
student loans that were not in collection. Applicant did not submit any documentary 
evidence establishing payments toward the $30,356 defaulted student loan.12    
                                                          
7 Items 3, 7, 8.  
 
8 Item 3-5.  
 
9 Items 7, 8. Any financial matters that were not alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. They may be considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the 
application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
10 Item 3.  
 
11 Items 3, 7.  
 
12 Item 3.  
 
4 
 
 Applicant listed his conviction and his defaulted student loans on his 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in October 
2013. He was also forthcoming about both matters when he was interviewed for his 
background investigation in November 2013.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
13 Items 4, 5.  
 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had defaulted student loans that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
6 
 
  Applicant had several extended periods of unemployment from 2007 until he was 
hired by his current employer in September 2013. His unemployment qualifies as a 
condition that was beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires 
that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
  Applicant established that he paid $910 toward one of his student loans on April 
1, 2014. His statement that he has been paying his other defaulted student loan has not 
been corroborated by documentary evidence. The Appeal Board has held that “it is 
reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of specific debts.” See ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug 11, 
2010) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-10671 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2006)).  
 
  Applicant’s has additional student loans that he will have to start paying at some 
point. There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) 
are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial considerations 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and  
 
 (d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of evading a police officer. He remains on probation until 
August 2014. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
7 
 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has an otherwise clean criminal record. He completed the terms of his 
work release program, and he should be off probation next month. He has been open 
and honest about his criminal record. Nonetheless, the nature of Applicant’s offense 
raises a concern. Rather than stop and accept a possible ticket for a minor traffic 
offense, Applicant took off on his dirt bike and led the police on a high-speed chase. 
The DOD requires security clearance holders to self-report security violations and other 
actions of security consequence. By fleeing the police, Applicant did the exact opposite 
of what would be expected of a security clearance holder. Applicant was 32 years old at 
the time, so it is difficult to attribute the conduct to youthful recklessness.  
 
 Applicant’s statements of rehabilitation appear sincere, but at this time, his 
criminal conduct continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. Both of the mitigating conditions have some applicability. Nonetheless, 
criminal conduct security concerns remain. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and J in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
8 
 
Applicant remains on probation until August 2014. In the not-so-distant future, 
Applicant may establish that his criminal conduct was an aberration that will not be 
repeated and his finances are in order. However, at the present time, he has not 
established either.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations and criminal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
  Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
