 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00232 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 1, 2014, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on June 4, 2014. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant responded 
 
2 
 
with a memorandum and documents that have been marked Applicant’s exhibits (AE) 1 
through 4. The case was assigned to me on July 18, 2014. The Government exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 4-10) and AE 1 through 4 are admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he 
has held since at least 2008. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1990 
until he was honorably discharged in 1994. He has two associate’s degrees. He is 
divorced with two minor children from his marriage and an adult child from a relationship 
before his marriage.1   
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts with balances totaling $66,176. That 
amount was based upon a credit report from February 2013. The figure is inflated by a 
delinquent vehicle loan for $24,058 (SOR ¶ 1.c). A June 2014 credit report lists the 
balance on the loan as $3,832, which is the deficiency owed after the vehicle was 
repossessed and sold. The corrected total of the six delinquent debts is $45,954. 
Applicant denied owing the debts in that his ex-wife was awarded responsibility for the 
debts in their divorce.2 
 
 Applicant’s ex-wife filed for divorce in June 2006, but the divorce was not final 
until June 2012. The ex-wife submitted an income and expense declaration in August 
2006. The declaration listed the ex-wife’s average monthly gross wages as $8,000 and 
Applicant’s gross monthly income as $4,583. The declaration listed 15 debts with 
balances totaling $182,000. The debts included two vehicle loans for $58,000 for a 2005 
sports utility vehicle (SUV) and $53,000 for a 2006 luxury car; three loans for jewelry 
totaling $25,500; and ten consumer accounts totaling $45,500. She listed their total 
monthly expenses, which included their mortgage loan, timeshare, and payments 
towards the 15 debts, as $9,177. All of the creditors alleged in the SOR are listed in 
some manner as creditors in the income and expense declaration.3 
 
 During a settlement conference in February 2007, the parties reached an 
agreement. Applicant’s ex-wife was to receive the house. She was to make an 
equalization payment to Applicant in the amount of $100,000. She was to pay $50,000 
to Applicant by the close of the day’s proceedings. She was to pay $27,000 “in the form 
of debts and obligations to be detailed in judgment including obligations related to 911 
call and ambulance transportation.” The balance of the $100,000 ($23,000) was to be 
paid by May 2007 from a refinance of the mortgage loan on the house. Applicant’s ex-
wife was to be awarded the SUV and the luxury car; Applicant was to be awarded their 
                                                          
1 Items 4, 5.  
 
2 Items 3, 6, 8-10; AE 1.  
 
3 Item 3. The creditor named in SOR ¶ 1.a is not specifically named in the income and expense 
declaration, but a credit card company that subsequently merged with the creditor named in SOR ¶ 1.a is 
listed in the declaration. 
 
3 
 
2005 pick-up truck. The ex-wife’s attorney was to prepare the agreed-upon judgment for 
signature by the judge.4 
 
 The agreed-upon judgment was prepared, but it was not signed by the judge. 
Applicant retained another attorney who sent a letter to his ex-wife’s attorney in May 
2011. The attorney wrote that the judgment “was not entered in that there were some 
discrepancies in the wording and some items were missing.” He also indicated their 
house and timeshare were not addressed in the judgment.5 He further wrote: 
 
I have reviewed the transcript and it appears to me that one of the bigger 
issues is that you stated you would “detail” the specific debts paid by the 
wife in the Judgment to justify the final settlement figure. I cannot see 
where the debts were ever set out which means that my client has no idea 
what was paid by the petitioner. I would request at this time you furnish 
this office with the exact amount and to whom each debt was paid. My 
client is still receiving notices from a collection company and if this was 
one of the debts paid then the company should be notified of their error. At 
any rate, it is my client’s right to know what was paid from the community 
funds.6 
 
 In December 2011, Applicant’s attorney sent a letter to Applicant stating that he 
had not heard from the wife’s attorney. He stated their only recourse was to “prepare an 
order as to how we think it should be prepared and submit this to the court.”7 
 
 The judge signed the order and granted the divorce in June 2012. The order 
contained the clause about the ex-wife paying $27,000, but except for the “obligations 
related to 911 call and ambulance transportation,” the order still did not specify which 
debts were to be paid by the ex-wife. Applicant’s attorney sent the ex-wife a letter in 
March 2014 requesting copies of all the bills paid with the $27,000. There is no 
indication that he ever received a response.8 
  
 Applicant’s combined credit report was obtained as part of a previous 
investigation in November 2007. The report did not list any delinquent debts. It showed 
paid mortgage loans, but it did not show any active mortgage loans. It listed a joint car 
loan for the 2005 SUV that was awarded to the ex-wife. The balance was listed as 
$48,504.9 The loan for the 2006 luxury car was listed as paid. There was a joint $25,025 
debt that appears to be the loan for Applicant’s pick-up truck. The report listed a joint 
                                                          
4 Item 3.  
 
5 Item 3.  
 
6 Item 3.  
 
7 Item 3.  
 
8 Item 3.  
 
9 This is the loan for the repossessed SUV that formed the basis for SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
4 
 
$8,121 consumer debt and eight individual consumer debts with balances totaling 
$63,726.10 
 
 Applicant’s combined credit report from February 2013 lists five unsecured debts 
with balances totaling $42,122 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d-1.f). One of the debts is listed as a 
joint account; the remaining debts are listed as individual accounts. The report listed two 
additional accounts that were “paid for less than full balance.” This is consistent with an 
IRS Form 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt) received by Applicant that reported a $9,439 
debt was forgiven by the creditor in 2009. The creditor on the 1099-C was one of the 
creditors listed in the income and expense declaration. The credit report listed a number 
of accounts as paid and closed.11 
 
 Applicant stated that he was unfamiliar with the $8,339 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b. The account was opened in June 2006, at a time when Applicant was already 
separated from his ex-wife. In August 2006, his ex-wife listed the account with a $4,000 
balance in the income and expense declaration. The account is listed with a $479 
balance in the November 2007 credit report.12  
 
 Applicant contacted the creditors for the debts alleged in the SOR and requested 
information on the accounts. He indicated that he would forward the information to his 
lawyer and the DOD. He indicated that the creditor for the $4,628 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.f informed him that he was only an authorized user of the account. This is inconsistent 
with the credit reports that list the debt as a joint account.13 
 
 Applicant stated that he is living within his means and he is willing to meet his 
obligations. The loan on his pick-up truck is paid. His two most recent credit reports do 
not show any accounts with balances other than those accounts alleged in the SOR.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
10 Item 8.  
 
11 Item 9.  
 
12 Items 3, 8-10; AE 1.  
 
13 Items 3, 8-10; AE 1.  
 
14 Items 3, 9, 10; AE 1.  
 
5 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
6 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant states the debts in the SOR should have been paid by his ex-wife. The 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is for the repossessed SUV that was awarded to his ex-wife. 
She should have paid that loan. SOR ¶ 1.c is concluded for Applicant. I also accept at 
face value Applicant’s assertion that the $8,339 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was 
accumulated by his ex-wife without his knowledge. SOR ¶ 1.b is concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
  Applicant was unable to establish that he is not liable for the remaining four debts 
alleged in the SOR. The judgment for his divorce was not entered until June 2012. Even 
if it is accepted that Applicant relied on the 2007 agreement, except for the 911 call and 
ambulance, that agreement never stated which debts Applicant’s wife would pay. The 
2007 income and expense declaration listed three loans for jewelry totaling $25,500; 
and ten consumer accounts totaling $45,500. Even if she paid $27,000 towards those 
debts, there would have still been more than $40,000 in debts to be addressed.  
 
 
7 
 
  Applicant and his ex-wife appeared to be headed toward financial difficulties 
before their separation and divorce. They had three vehicles, a house, a timeshare, and 
extensive consumer debt. Applicant may not have been the spendthrift in the family, as 
he has not accumulated any new debt since the separation. Nonetheless, he had a 
responsibility to address accounts that were in his name. He does not know what debts 
his ex-wife was supposed to pay, which also makes it impossible for me to attribute 
specific debts to her.  
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There are no applicable 
mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant and his ex-wife accumulated a large amount of debt. She clearly 
should have paid part of their debt, what part remains unclear. The 2007 income and 
expense declaration lists $71,000 in jewelry and consumer debts. Whether she paid 
$27,000 toward their debts is unknown, but even if she did, someone had to pay the 
remaining $44,000 in debts.  
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
