 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00479 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Guideline E security concerns regarding inaccuracies in his 
security clearance applications. He failed, however, to mitigate Guideline F security 
concerns due to ongoing concerns regarding his alcoholism, which he cites as the root 
of his financial delinquencies. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On March 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In a letter notarized on April 18, 2014, Applicant addressed the SOR allegations 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
 
 
 
 
2 
on May 9, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on May 15, 2014, setting the hearing for June 4, 2014. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled.  
 
As a preliminary matter, allegation ¶ 1.a was struck from the SOR without 
objection. The Government then offered Exhibits (GX) 1-3, which were accepted into 
the record without objection. Applicant offered testimony. The transcript of the 
proceeding (Tr.) was received on June 12, 2014. With no additional materials received, 
the record was closed on June 18, 2014.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old senior technical trainer who has been in the same 
position with a defense contractor for five years. He served honorably in the United 
States military from 1980 through 1993. Applicant has a high school education and 
received technical training while in the military. He is married and has no children. 
Applicant was unemployed between June 2007 and September 2007, then alternatively 
unemployed and underemployed from March 2008 to June 2009, due to circumstances 
beyond his control. He collected unemployment compensation during those periods. He 
has been continuously employed since June 2009.  
 
Applicant has abused alcohol since 1999. He has never hidden his struggle with 
alcohol. (Tr. 18) As of the June 4, 2014, hearing, he had maintained sobriety since the 
end of April 2014, about six weeks. (Tr. 20) Applicant’s alcohol abuse has not adversely 
impacted his work. Rather, he blames his alcoholism for creating his present financial 
distress. (Tr. 17-18, 23) His abuse of alcohol was mostly in public venues with friends, 
where he collected large bar tabs during long periods of time lasting from happy hour 
until closing; at times he would spend “$200 bucks a night.” (Tr. 24) These tabs were 
paid on Applicant’s credit cards. Then, alcohol would get him “behind in things and [he 
did] not pay certain things because [he would be] trying to feed an addiction that’s 
terrible.” (Tr. 18) Alcoholism also contributed to his citations for driving under the 
influence (DUI) of alcohol in 1983, 2000, and 2004.  
 
Applicant unsuccessfully sought treatment for his disease in 2004 and 2011. 
Applicant has attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) since at least 2004. He has an AA 
sponsor. He is currently in an intensive outpatient treatment program, which 
commenced in April 2014. It convenes three nights a week for two hours each evening 
at a well-regarded facility in his region. Group sessions are complemented with 
individual counseling. His longest period of sobriety in the past decade lasted for nearly 
a year-and-a-half, overlapping with his March 2008 to June 2009 period of 
unemployment and underemployment. (Tr. 22)  
 
The debts at issue in the SOR (1.a-1.j) represent approximately $27,000 in 
delinquent debt. Applicant admits to some of the debts. He disputes some of the other 
debts noted, but has not taken any action to dispute those entries with the cited 
creditors or the credit reporting bureaus. He presented no documentary evidence 
 
 
 
 
3 
indicating formal action has been taken on any of the debts at issue. (See, e.g., Tr. 37-
38) Applicant presently has $3,000 to $4,000 in savings, and about $20,000 in a 
retirement savings account. His present salary is about $71,000 a year; his wife is a 
realtor who made about $15,000 in the past year. He is current on his rent, household 
bills, and other recurring obligations. None of his current bills are delinquent. (Tr. 36) He 
has not received financial counseling, but he is contemplating seeking assistance with a 
consumer counseling service at some point in the future.  
 
In 1980, 1994, and 2000, Applicant was investigated for earlier security 
clearances. His most recent security clearance applications (SCA) were from August 
2013 and September 2013. On those SCAs, Applicant answered “no” to the questions 
related to Section 26 (Financial Record – Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts: In 
the past seven (7) years…). He did not disclose any financial issues or knowledge that, 
in 2007, his home was foreclosed upon because he believed all of the debts at issue 
had been delinquent for over seven years. He interpreted the questions as “trying to 
capture debts which were created within the preceding seven years.” (Tr. 40) Applicant 
made a mistake; he was not trying to mislead. (Tr. 39-40)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
 
 
 
 
4 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has 
multiple delinquent debts, amounting to over $27,000. He presented no documentary 
evidence indicating that he has addressed them in any manner or made any progress 
toward their satisfaction. Such facts are sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
 
 
5 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           Although the debts at issue do not appear to be recent, Applicant concedes that 
they were acquired and disregarded due to his alcoholism, a condition with which he still 
suffers and for which he is currently seeking intensive treatment. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply.  
 
Although little is known of Applicant’s conduct regarding his debts during his 
periods of unemployment, there is evidence that he has sought intensive treatment for 
his alcoholism on at least three different occasions in the past decade. To the extent 
that his alcoholism resulted in the creation of his delinquency crisis, AG ¶ 20(b) applies 
in part. It does little, however, to mitigate its on-going existence and neglect. 
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling, made progress on the debts at 
issue, or implemented a plan for addressing his delinquent debts. Indeed, no 
documentary evidence was introduced indicating any initiative on Applicant’s part to 
address the debts noted in the SOR. Therefore, neither AG ¶ 20(c) nor AG ¶ 20(d) 
apply. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant provided no documentary proof 
showing he has formally disputed any of the debts at issue. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
At issue are multiple allegations that Applicant falsified material facts on two 
recent SCAs. Applicant earnestly set forth an argument explaining how he interpreted 
the questions at issue to be strictly limited to debts newly acquired in the preceding 
 
 
 
 
6 
seven years. Given his credible testimony, continued candor, and plausible argument, I 
do not find that any of the personal conduct disqualifying conditions apply. Personal 
conduct security concerns are mitigated.    
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature, credible, and earnest man who has maintained his current 
position for nearly five years. He has a record for honorable military service. He has a 
high school education complimented by advanced technical studies in the military. He is 
married and has no children. There is no evidence that he meant to mislead the 
Government with his 2013 SCA answers. Despite suffering from alcohol abuse, his 
illness has not adversely affected his job performance.  
 
By Applicant’s own direct testimony, however, the creation and continued neglect 
of the delinquent debts at issue – amounting to about $27,000 – is attributable to his 
alcohol abuse. He has suffered from alcohol abuse for at least a decade. During that 
time, his longest period of alcohol abstinence was about a year-and-a-half, an 
admirable achievement sadly cut short. At the time of the hearing, his current period of 
sobriety had lasted about six weeks. A longer period of demonstrated abstinence and 
sobriety is needed to demonstrate that he is able to control his drinking and, in turn, 
control his acquisition of alcohol-related debt and delinquency-related fines and fees. 
Moreover, Applicant failed to demonstrate that he has made positive strides in 
addressing any of the debts at issue. This process does not require that an applicant 
satisfy all of his debts. It does, however, demand that an applicant articulate a workable 
plan for addressing his debts and evidence that such a plan has been successfully 
implemented. Based on the facts here, I find that financial considerations security 
concerns remain unmitigated. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Allegation Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.j:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
