 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00499 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 25, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 28, 2014, and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on May 5, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 13, 2014, setting the hearing for June 4, 
2014. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, all of which were admitted 
into evidence, except for GE 3. Applicant objected to all the Government exhibits. I 
 
2 
 
overruled the objections to GE 1, 2, and 4, but sustained the objection to GE 3. 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through Z. AE H was the same document 
as GE 3. Upon questioning, Applicant withdrew AE H and it was not considered by me). 
The remaining exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. Although the 
record was not held open, Applicant submitted two exhibits after the record closed, 
which were marked as AE AA and AB. Department Counsel posed no objection, so 
those exhibits were also admitted. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 
12, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old and was the CEO of a defense contractor since March 
2013, but was relieved of his duties pending resolution of his security clearance issue. 
He has a bachelor’s degree and is a CPA. He is married for the third time and has a 
child from his second marriage and a stepchild from his third. He does not currently hold 
a security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was indebted on four accounts. The debts were listed 
on credit reports obtained in August 2013 and February 2014. Applicant denied the first 
three debts, indicating that he had settled the credit card debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.b) and 
re-financed his home mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.c). He admitted the final debt, but indicated he 
was working on a settlement with the creditor (SOR ¶ 1.d).2  
 
 Applicant was a highly successful business executive in the private sector for 
many years. His tax records show that from 2005 to 2009 his average income was 
about $950,000, with his high income being about $1.4 million. During this time, he was 
the chief financial officer (CFO), chief operating officer (COO), and senior vice president 
of Company X. Through his efforts as CFO and COO, the company’s earnings grew to 
approximately $200 million in 2008. He would receive an end-of-the-year bonus (.015 
percent of pretax earnings) and for, 2008, it was projected to be about $1.5 million. In 
the past, he used this bonus money to pay the credit card bills he accumulated during 
the year. Also in 2008, Company X grew to such an extent that company executives 
entertained offers to sell the business for $1 billion. If the sale went through, Applicant 
would receive about $12 million. The business market for Company X collapsed later in 
the year and all the sale offers were withdrawn, except for one low offer that was 
rejected. In February 2009, right before he was to receive his $1.5 million bonus for 
2008, he was terminated without warning or explanation. He did not have a written 
employment contract with Company X.3   
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6-7, 15, 55-56; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2, 4; Answer. 
 
3 Tr. at 41-43; GE 1; AE J-N; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant also went through a contentious divorce with his second wife, which 
settled in July 2008. The settlement required him to pay his ex-wife approximately 
$329,000 at that time. He retained physical custody of their minor child.4  
 
 Applicant hired an attorney to pursue his options against Company X because of 
his termination. They reached a settlement where Applicant received about $625,000 in 
a severance package, but which also required him to sign a non-compete agreement 
extending two years (from February 2009 to April 2011). Applicant explained that the 
non-compete agreement restricted him from working as a business executive for any 
other company. He was not restricted from starting his own business, which is what he 
did. He opened a restaurant, which was successful, but it did not produce a profit for 
him to take out of the business. In 2011, when the non-compete provision expired, he 
started his own management consulting firm, which he owned from 2011 to 2013, until 
he became the CEO of the defense contractor sponsoring his security clearance. Before 
he was let go from his current position, his annual salary was approximately $360,000.5   
 
 Applicant presented documentation showing the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b were settled in March 2014. He presented documentation showing that he 
successfully negotiated a mortgage modification and proof that he is current on that 
mortgage. His post-hearing evidence showed that he negotiated a settlement with the 
creditor of SOR ¶ 1.d and, although not yet executed, provided the terms of the 
settlement.6  
 
 Applicant presented 16 letters of recommendation from colleagues, co-workers, 
business associates, and friends. All held the highest regard for the Applicant in the 
areas of integrity, trustworthiness, and professional ethics.7    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 41, 58; AE O. 
 
5 Tr. at 44-47, 50. 
 
6 Tr. at 51-52; AE E, T-X, Z, AA; Answer. 
 
7 AE Y. 
 
4 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
 
5 
 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.8 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to raise the 
disqualifying conditions stated in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant were recent. He has settled two 
credit card debts, worked to modify his mortgage, which is now in good standing, and 
negotiated an expected settlement for the final debt. These efforts to repair his financial 
position make it reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do 
they cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
partially applies.  
 
Applicant became indebted when he was suddenly terminated from a position 
where he was earning about $1 million per year. He reached a financial settlement in 
that matter, but was required to give up pursuing his profession for two years. He also 
                                                          
8 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
went through a contentious divorce during the same time frame and paid his ex-wife in 
excess of $300,000. Once he obtained full-time employment in his career field in 2013, 
he began resolving his delinquent debt. His termination and divorce were conditions 
beyond his control and once he was able to do so, he acted responsibly by settling his 
credit card debts, successfully seeking a mortgage modification, and establishing a 
settlement plan for the remaining debt. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 There are clear indications that all the debts have been resolved through 
payment or are being resolved through a settlement plan. He made good-faith efforts to 
resolve all the debts listed on the SOR. He supplied documentary evidence showing the 
payments made and the settlement plan established. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I found Applicant to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his 
debts. He has an outstanding business reputation. His character references described 
him as a man of integrity and high professional ethics. He has settled his debts, 
negotiated a mortgage modification that has him in good standing, and worked out a 
settlement plan for the final debt. I found nothing to indicate a likelihood that similar 
circumstances would recur.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT   
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
