 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00114 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Brett K. Williams, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 28, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 26, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct). DOD 
CAF took that action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
On March 28, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR. The case was assigned to me 
on May 9, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on June 5, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled on June 30, 2014. 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B. Applicant objected to 
GE 2, a Joint Personnel Adjudications System (JPAS) record, on the grounds of 
hearsay, and the objection was overruled. The remaining proffered exhibits were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
July 8, 2014.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old managing engineer who works for a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since June 2013. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 1991. He has been married for the past 25 years and has two 
children, ages 19 and 22. He has held a security clearance without incident since about 
2001. He is pending a promotion that is contingent on him holding a security clearance.1 
 
 The SOR listed one Guideline E allegation that asserted Applicant was 
terminated from a job for providing false information during an employer’s investigation 
into a subordinate’s complaint of harassment and for maintaining an inappropriate 
relationship with that subordinate. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied that 
allegation.2 
 
 From about June 1990 to June 2013, Applicant worked for a defense contractor 
(hereinafter referred to as “Company X”). In his last position at Company X, he was the 
director of a department. Between January and March 2013, he had an inappropriate 
relationship with a subordinate female employee (hereinafter referred to as “Employee 
Y”). Employee Y did not work directly for him, but she worked within his department. On 
three occasions, they met at parking lots away from the workplace after working hours. 
They kissed and had other sexual contact, but did not engage in sexual intercourse.3   
 
 In June 2013, officials at Company X became aware of information that led them 
to suspect Applicant had an inappropriate relationship with Employee Y. An 
investigation was initiated into that suspected relationship. During the investigation, 
Applicant was asked whether he had exchanged text messages with Employee Y’s 
husband, and he reportedly said, “No.” Employee Y’s husband was asked that same 
question, indicated that he had such communications with Applicant, and supplied a 
string of text messages that were exchanged between him and Applicant on May 31, 
2013. In the text messages, Employee Y’s husband was seeking to get a pay raise for 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26-27, 34, 41-45; GE 1. 
2 Applicant Answer to the SOR.  
3 Tr. at 27-36, 38, 86-89. At the hearing, Applicant admitted that his relationship with Employee Y 
was inappropriate.  
 
 
3 
 
his wife. The text messages did not directly mention the inappropriate relationship, but 
referred indirectly to it.4    
 
 On June 21, 2013, Applicant signed a disciplinary action notice that advised him 
that his employment with Company X was terminated. The notice contained the 
following excerpts: 
 
Details of Incident:  
You were interviewed during the course of an investigation into whether 
you had engaged in an inappropriate and personal relationship with a 
subordinate employee. During the course of the investigation, you 
repeatedly denied the relationship and made other statements in support 
of the denial. The investigation revealed, however, that these denials and 
other statements that you made were knowingly and intentionally false. 
 
Expected Improvement:  
None. Effective immediately, your employment with the company is 
terminated. You are being terminated for Dishonesty and 
Misrepresentation of Fact based on the false statements and totality of the 
circumstances of the same.5   
 
 On June 24, 2013, the facility security officer at Company X made a JPAS entry 
regarding Applicant that stated: 
 
[Applicant] was interviewed during the course of an investigation into 
whether he had engaged in an inappropriate and personal relationship 
with a subordinate employee. During the course of the investigation, he 
repeatedly denied the relationship and made other statements in support 
of the denial. The investigation revealed, however, that these denials and 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 27-36, 52-70, 79-83, 87-89; GE 4. In one text message, Employee Y’s husband indicated 
that Employee Y was hysterical when she found out Applicant “told” another female employee. This other 
female employee later complained that Employee Y might get a promotion because of her inappropriate 
relationship. In another text message, the husband stated, 
 
It’s for that reason that we really might go to management because [its] not fair for her life 
to be ruined over this and there be no action ... You are her director and should have 
stayed professional … She told me you urged her to meet more and get “away” for a few 
hours … She made excuses and did not do it[.] [S]he said that’s why it ended … I am 
telling you [Applicant] I don’t know what to do[,] my life is in peril and you have put the 
stature of my family at risk with your indiscretions. 
*  *  * 
Give me one good reason why I shouldn’t tell your wife and give her pictures and show 
her all of the emails. 
5 Tr. at 46-52, 92; GE 4.  
 
 
4 
 
other statements that he made were knowingly and intentionally false. 
Because of these false statements [Applicant] was terminated.6   
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he advised the investigators 
(personnel from Company X’s Human Resources (HR) Department) that Employee Y’s 
husband called him in early June 2013. He noted the husband was upset, informed 
Applicant that his wife had an affair in the past, and stated the husband was concerned 
that she doing so again. Applicant further stated:  
 
I told him that I was not having an affair with his wife, but he insisted 
otherwise. He called me again approximately one week later and left a 
message on my phone apologizing and crying stating that he talked to 
some people in the department and they told him that there was nothing 
going on that involved me. I still have the voice mail and played it to the 
Human Resource personnel.7    
 
Applicant further stated that Employee Y had been authorized to work from home for 
about two years due to medical issues, but that steps were taken to bring her back to 
work in the office because of increased workload demands. When Employee Y’s 
husband learned that his wife would be working more from the office, he complained 
that she was sick and that Applicant did not appreciate her work ethic.8 Applicant also 
indicated: 
 
[The investigators] asked me when was the last time I had heard from the 
husband. I was not exactly sure and said something like “Tuesday of last 
week”. Human Resources asked me if I was sure and I said “I think so” or 
“I guess”. 
 
I was called back in the Human Resources’ office two days later on Friday. 
They informed me that I was terminated for having an inappropriate 
relationship with a subordinate and not being honest in the investigation. 
They told me that they had telephone records that showed the husband 
tried to contact me on Wednesday and I had told them that the last time I 
thought I had heard from him was on Tuesday. This honest mistake 
certainly does not rise to the level of “providing false information.”9  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant stated that he admitted during Company X’s 
investigation to having an inappropriate relationship with Employee Y and denied 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 38-42, 83-85; GE 2.  
7 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. The phone message from the Employee Y’s husband was not 
presented as evidence at the hearing.  
8 Tr. at 29-32, 70-77; GE 4; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
9 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
 
5 
 
providing false or misleading information during that investigation. He denied stating 
during the investigation that he never exchanged text messages with Employee Y’s 
husband. He continued to claim that the “false information” he provided during 
Company X’s investigation merely consisted of him mistakenly telling investigators the 
wrong day of the week he last had contact with Employee Y’s husband. He stated that, 
when he was later called into the HR department to be terminated, he was informed that 
the company’s legal department decided that him telling Employee Y that she would 
have to work 40 hours a week from the office, instead of at her home, was a form of 
harassment, and the legal department recommended he be terminated for that conduct. 
He also stated that a HR employee told him that “we wouldn’t be here today if you’d 
been more honest in the investigation” and informed him the dishonesty involved his 
statement about which day of the week he last had contact with Employee Y’s husband. 
He stated that he did not read the disciplinary action notice when he signed it and did 
not obtain a copy of it at that time.10 
 
 Applicant stated that he told his wife, parents, and friends about the inappropriate 
relationship. However, he provided no proof to substantiate that his wife, parents, and 
friends know about that relationship. In general, I did not find Applicant to be a credible 
witness.11    
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor endorsed him for a security clearance. A 
representative in the state legislature who has known Applicant for 23 years indicated 
he is a skilled, dedicated, and productive employee and citizen.12 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 27-33, 35-52, 80-83, 87-92; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
11 Tr. at 88-89. 
12 AE A, B. 
 
 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
 
7 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available evidence 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of 
proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or 
other government protected information; (2) disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
 In early 2013, Applicant had an inappropriate sexual relationship with Employee 
Y, a subordinate within his department. He acknowledged that his employment at 
Company X was terminated, in part, because of that inappropriate relationship. He also 
stated that the company’s legal department decided that his actions regarding 
Employee Y amounted to harassment. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) apply to such conduct.  
 
 Applicant denied providing false or misleading information during Company X’s 
investigation into his inappropriate relationship. He testified that he told investigators 
about the inappropriate relationship and that he told them the he had exchanged text 
messages with Employee Y’s husband. He claimed that his employment was terminated 
for mistakenly providing investigators with the wrong day of the week that he last had 
contact with Employee Y’s husband. I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible. 
Substantial evidence was presented to show that he repeatedly denied to investigators 
that he had an inappropriate relationship with Employee Y and that he denied 
exchanging text messages with Employee Y’s husband. The evidence established that 
he deliberately provided false and misleading information concerning relevant facts 
during Company X’s investigation. AG ¶¶ 16(b) and 16(e) applies to his false 
statements.  
    
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 
 
8 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant engaged in an inappropriate relationship with a subordinate employee 
and then lied about it. At the hearing, he denied providing false statements to the 
investigators. His misconduct is recent and demonstrates a lack of honesty, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. After examining all of the applicable mitigating 
conditions, I find that none apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
9 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has worked for defense contractors for about 24 years. He has held a 
security clearance for a number of years without incident. He is pending a promotion to 
a high-level position. A member of the state legislature endorses him. Nevertheless, his 
questionable conduct and false statements continue to raise serious questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He has failed to present sufficient 
evidence to conclude such wrongdoing is unlikely to recur. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
