1 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 06-12429 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the concerns raised by his criminal conduct. Eligibility 
for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
On December 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 29, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on April 2, 2008. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 15, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
2 
scheduled on May 28, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 
5, 2008.  
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel made an oral motion to amend SOR ¶ 1.a by changing the 
date in the allegation from “2004” to “2005.” Applicant did not object to the motion and it 
was granted.  
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. Applicant did not object to 
any of the documents except the part of GE 2 which referenced Applicant’s nonjudicial 
punishment (NJP) received while in the U.S. Marine Corps in 1994. He objected to the 
admission of the NJP based upon relevance and the age of the NJP. Department 
Counsel argued that Applicant’s entire military record was relevant and that it would 
rebut the favorable character evidence that Applicant planned to present. I withheld 
ruling on the objection until after Applicant presented his case. GE 1 through 8 were 
admitted except for the part of GE 2 which referenced Applicant’s 1994 NJP.  
 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through G. 
Department Counsel objected to the admission of AE D, a security clearance 
application, on the basis that it was unsigned. The objection was overruled. Department 
Counsel objected to AE E, extracts from the record of trial of Applicant’s Special Court-
Martial, on the basis of completeness. Applicant stated that he had a complete copy of 
the record of trial, but that he did not have it with him. I informed Applicant that I would 
hold the record open and ask him to submit a complete copy of the record of trial. 
Applicant withdrew his offer of AE E. AE A through D, F, and G were admitted. 
Applicant’s exhibits reference his entire military record. I overruled Applicant’s objection 
to GE 2 and it was admitted in its entirety. 
 
I held the record open until June 11, 2008, for Applicant to submit additional 
matters. I requested that Applicant submit a copy of the record of trial of his Special 
Court-Martial. Applicant submitted a one page memo (AE H), four pages of e-mail traffic 
(AE I), a computer diskette (AE J), and the record of trial of his Special Court-Martial 
(AE K). The exhibits were received without objection. Department Counsel’s memo is 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The record closed on June 11, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is married with 
two children, ages seven and three. He has an associate’s degree. Applicant served in 
the United States Marine Corps from 1997 through 2005, and was discharged as a 
Corporal (E-4) with a General (Under Honorable Conditions) Discharge.1 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 44-45, 57, 62-64; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 Applicant’s Marine Corps career, but for nonjudicial punishment for a minor 
offense in 1994, was commendatory until about 2003. He received numerous awards, 
decorations, and accolades and his fitness reports were excellent. He was promoted to 
Staff Sergeant (E-6) and was selected for promotion to Gunnery Sergeant (E-7). 
Applicant began to have an inappropriate sexual relationship with a female subordinate 
in about 2003. The female Lance Corporal (E-3) eventually reported Applicant and 
stated he assaulted her. A Military Protection Order (MPO) was issued by Applicant’s 
Commanding Officer on October 9, 2003, directing him to have no contact with the 
female Lance Corporal. The order was effective until November 7, 2003. A second MPO 
was issued on November 13, 2003, to be in effect until cancelled by the Commanding 
Officer or higher authority. Applicant repeatedly violated the orders.2 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his security clearance investigation by a Special 
Agent of the Defense Investigative Service (DIS) on January 29, 2004. He denied 
engaging in a sexual relationship with the female subordinate and that he assaulted her. 
He admitted he “had feelings” for her. He also admitted that he spoke with her in person 
and left a voice mail message for her after the MPO was issued. He stated he was 
attempting to get her to tell “the truth” that they did not have sexual relations.3 
 
 Applicant was interviewed again by a DIS Special Agent on April 4, 2004. He 
admitted that he was charged with assault, adultery, and violation of an MPO, and was 
going to a Special Court-Martial. The DIS agent questioned him about allegations that 
he contacted the Lance Corporal telephonically 20 to 30 times and had in-person 
contact on two additional occasions. He admitted he contacted her on “multiple 
occasions.” He stated he “didn’t tell [DIS] this on 29 Jan 04, [because he] did not believe 
it relevant.” He also admitted that he had an additional in-person contact with her.4 He 
wrote in his statement: 
 
Yes, the other aforesaid contacts were in violation of the MPOs. However, 
looking back on it, I have much more at stake, i.e. my career and family. I 
considered my career & family more important than the MPOs. Also I’ve 
been taught to meet problems head on.5 
 
 Applicant was charged at a Special Court-Martial in February 2005, with violating 
a general order; failure to obey a Military Protection Order; two specifications of assault; 
adultery; and wrongfully impeding an investigation, under the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice. He pled not guilty to all charges. He was found guilty of violating a general 
order and adultery and not guilty of the remaining charges. He was sentenced to 
perform hard labor for two months; to forfeit $200 pay per month for two months; and to 
be reduced to the pay grade of E-4.6 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 45-50, 67-68; GE 2-4; AE K.  
 
3 GE 5. 
 
4 GE 6. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 GE 2; AE K. 
4 
 
 Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application (SF-86) on September 16, 
2005. He listed his court-martial conviction under Question 25, “Your Police Record – 
Military Court.” He provided further details under Question 43, “General Remarks.”7  
 
 Applicant submitted a Public Trust Application (SF-85P), certified as true on 
September 21, 2005. Question 16 asked, “Your Police Record   In the last 7 years, 
have you been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s)? (leave out 
traffic fines of less than $150.” Applicant answered “Yes,” and listed a speeding offense 
in May 2003. He did not list his court-martial conviction.8  
 
Applicant denied the falsification allegation in the SOR. He stated he already 
provided the requested information via the SF-86 and did not understand the specific 
question in the SF-85P.9 After considering all the evidence, I find there is insufficient 
evidence for a finding that Applicant intentionally falsified his Public Trust Application as 
alleged in the SOR.  
 
Applicant denied engaging in a sexual relationship with the female subordinate in 
statements given on January 29, 2004 and April 9, 2004. He stated in a background 
interview on June 6, 2007, that he and the subordinate had developed a “buddy” type 
relationship. He was asked by Interrogatories to authenticate the report of investigation 
(ROI) of the interview of June 6, 2007. He made several changes to the ROI and further 
stated on October 15, 2007, “I would only like to add that the verdict given was based 
on no solid proof and only questionable testimony from a perjuring and disgraceful 
witness.” In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied the criminal activity and stated 
the offenses show “an isolated incident of lack of judgment, if the accusations were 
true.” At his hearing, Applicant adamantly denied having any kind of intimate contact or 
sexual relations with the subordinate.10 After reviewing all the evidence, including the 
record of trial of his court-martial, I find Applicant did commit adultery by having sexual 
intercourse with his subordinate. I further find that Applicant was untruthful when he 
denied committing the conduct. 
 
 Applicant is very highly regarded by his current employer. He is described as a 
valued and reliable associate and a man of integrity with high ethical and moral 
standards. His performance appraisals were very positive. He was recommended for a 
security clearance and an ADP position.11 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
7 GE 8; AE D. 
 
8 GE 1. 
 
9 Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
10 Tr. at 50, 73; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6, 8. 
 
11 AE A-C, F, G, K. 
 
5 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
6 
 Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant omitted information from his Public Trust Application; however, he had 
already provided the information through a different questionnaire six days earlier. 
There is insufficient evidence to find that it was a deliberate omission. AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 30 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
 
 
7 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Applicant was convicted at a Special Court-Martial of adultery and violating a 
general order by fraternizing with a subordinate. He denied committing adultery but 
admitted to conduct that would amount to fraternization and violations of a Military 
Protection Order. This raises both of the above disqualifying conditions. Applicant did 
not intentionally falsify his Public Trust Application. SOR ¶ 1.b is concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
Four Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 32(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 The conduct that formed the basis of Applicant’s Special Court-Martial occurred 
in 2003. There is no evidence that Applicant was pressured or coerced into committing 
his criminal acts. His denials that he had a sexual relationship with his subordinate 
constitute some evidence that he did not commit the offense of adultery. However, I did 
not find his denials credible. Applicant provided false, incomplete, and misleading 
information about his involvement with his female subordinate in statements on January 
29, 2004 and April 9, 2004; in a background interview on June 6, 2007; in his response 
to Interrogatories on June 6, 2007; in his response to the SOR on January 29, 2008; 
and in his hearing testimony on May 28, 2008. While there is some evidence of 
rehabilitation, I cannot find successful rehabilitation without complete candor. I am also 
unable to find that Applicant’s criminal conduct is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. No mitigating 
condition is completely applicable. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant committed criminal 
offenses which ultimately cost him his military career. He has been untruthful about his 
criminal acts throughout this process, including providing false testimony at his hearing. 
He has a favorable work record and served honorably for most of his career in the 
Marine Corps. Despite the positive evidence, Applicant’s actions raise serious concerns 
about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from his criminal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
