                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-21093
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge
Statement of the Case
On October 20, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant.  DOHA recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 4, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on January 3, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on
March 5, 2008.  A hearing was held on March 5, 2008, for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny,
or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At the hearing, the Government's case
consisted of nine exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and one exhibit.
The transcript (R.T.) was received on March 18, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case
file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified information is
denied.
2
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline J, Applicant is alleged to have been arrested, charged, or
indicted with four criminal offenses between 1994 and January 1999.  Those four
offenses are as follows: (1) in June 1994 for eluding/fleeing (on foot) and possession of
a controlled substance prohibited (a felony), for which he pleaded guilty to both counts
(judgment deferred on eluding/fleeing count), and later charged with failure to pay fines
and found  guilty to three charges in June 1996, (2) in August 1995 for petty larceny, for
which he later found guilty in June 1996 (including failure to appear on two occasions)
and served one day in jail, (3) in December 1997 for larceny (a felony) and
receiving/disposing of stolen property (a felony, for which a bench warrant issued after
his failure to appear for arraignment (still outstanding), and (4) in January 1999 for
criminal trespass, for which he pleaded guilty and was fined.
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have (a) falsified his public trust
application of March 2003 by omitting his 1997 larceny indictment and his January 1999
criminal trespass arrests, (b) misrepresenting his awareness of his 1997 larceny
indictment in a follow-up January 2004 signed, sworn statement, ©) falsified his
November 2005 security clearance application (SF-86) by omitting his 1997 felony
larceny indictment., and (d) omitting his January 1999 criminal trespass arrest.
For his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted three of his four alleged
offenses: He denied his alleged 1997 larceny indictment.  Applicant also denied
falsifying either of his trust applications and making any false misrepresentations to a
investigator about his 1997 larceny indictment.  In further explanation of his omission of
his 1997 larceny indictment, Applicant claimed he was never charged or notified of any
indicted offense and had no recollection of any such charged offense.  
Findings of Fact
           Applicant is a 31 year-old products support technician for a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated herein by reference and adopted as relevant and material
findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant is married and has two children, both girls (see exs. 1 and 2; R.T., at
25).  Applicant became attracted to drugs at an early age.  His parents were heroin
addicts and poor parents.  His grandparents filled in for his parents and essentially
raised him (R.T., at 28).  After his grandmother expired in 1994, he lost his way.  With
his grandfather an alcoholic, he really had no one to provide guidance and structure in
his life  (R.T., at 28).
While still in high school (18 years of age), Applicant attended a party in June
1994 where marijuana was used, and was confronted by police upon leaving the party.
Applicant fled the scene and was eventually run down by the police officer who gave
chase (R.T., at 28-30).  At this point, Applicant offered no resistance.  He was arrested,
fingerprinted, and charged with eluding/fleeing (on foot) and possession of a controlled
substance prohibited (a felony).  He was then assigned a court date, and released
(R.T., at 32).   When he did not appear for his scheduled court date, a bench warrant
3
was issued for his arrest (R.T., at 32-33).  Months later, he was cited for a traffic citation
and jailed over the weekend on both the citation and the outstanding bench warrant
(R.T., at 34).  After spending the weekend in jail, he was released to attend his court
arraignment.  When he appeared in court, he pleaded guilty to both the traffic offense
and the eluding/failure to appear offenses. The court accepted his guilty plea, credited
him for the two days he served in jail, and imposed a fine (R.T., at 34).  At the time of
his arrest, Applicant had dropped out of high school.  Later, he returned to school and
completed his high school educational requirements (R.T., at 35).
In August 1995, Applicant was charged with petty larceny (a misdemeanor under
Sec. 30-16-1 of State Code), and later for twice failing to appear in court on the charge
(see ex. 6: R.T., at 37-38).  He had walked out of a store with a tea shirt he did not pay
for and was arrested for shoplifting.  In 1996, he was picked up by police for a traffic-
related offense and jailed for a day (see ex. 3).  In court on the charges, Applicant
pleaded guilty to three charges (including the larceny charge) and was fined (R.T., at
38-39). 
In December 1997, Applicant was indicted for larceny and receiving/disposing of
stolen property, each charge a felony (see ex. 7).  Applicant was never arrested for the
covered offense, and indicated that he knew nothing about the indictment issuance
when a government investigator inquired about it several years later (see exs. 3 and 7).
Pressed to account for a reported stolen wedding ring by a woman he worked for back
in December 1997, Applicant acknowledged taking the ring and later pawning it without
the permission or knowledge of the owner (R.T., at 49-51). Applicant later apologized to
the ring’s owner for taking her ring (R.T., at 51-52).  When he failed to appear for his
scheduled arraignment in January 1998 on the pending charges, however, a bench
warrant was issued.  Applicant attributes his failure to appear to his lack of notice, which
the case docket appears to corroborate.  Until this year, the issued warrant associated
with the 1997 charges remained outstanding (see ex. 9).  In March 2008 (following the
hearing), the presiding court dismissed the charges and cancelled the bench warrant
(see ex. B).  
Applicant was arrested in January 1999 for criminal trespass.  He made a wrong
u-turn into a store lot and received a trespassing ticket from police (R.T., at 39-40).
Applicant assures that the other cars making similar u-turns into the store lot also
received trespassing citations (R.T., at 40).   While he denies any court appearance, the
court docket covering the case reports he pleaded guilty to the charge in court and paid
the imposed fine.  The case docket also reports that the court deferred findings on the
merits (see ex. 8; R.T., at 42, 59).  Applicant’s assurances he paid the issued ticket and
made no court appearance cannot be reasonably reconciled with the case docket.  The
criminal trespass charge is listed as a misdemeanor offense and could reasonably be
expected to require a court appearance absent an express waiver from the court.  Any
dispensing of a court appearance should have some reference in the case docket. It
does not and cannot be presumed in this situation (see ex. 8)  
Asked to complete a public trust application in March 2003, Applicant answered
question 16 of the application (inquiring about his police record over the previous seven
years) in the negative.  In answering “no” to the question, he omitted both his 1997
larceny indictment and his 1999 criminal trespass arrest.  Applicant attributes his 1997
4
larceny indictment omission to his lack of awareness of the indictment at the time he
completed his 2003 application (R.T., at 55-58).  He attributes his 2003 omission of his
1999 trespass arrest to memory lapse and a mistaken understanding of the scope of the
question (R.T., at 54-55, 58-59).  Since he was only cited (not arrested), it never
occurred to him that the citation was potentially covered by question 16.  
Applicant’s assigned reasons for his omissions draw some contradictions from
the record.  The case docket covering the 1997 offense recites larceny/receiving stolen
property charges filed against Applicant in December 1997 (ex. 7).  The same case
docket reports the issuance of a bench warrant in January 1998 and the return of an
undelivered notice of arraignment in January 1998 (ex. 7).   Neither the case docket nor
any other documents in the case provide any clarifying clues on the issue of whether or
not Applicant was notified of the scheduled arraignment or the issuance of a bench
warrant to insure Applicant’s availability at each of the scheduled proceedings. 
By contrast, the case docket covering Applicant’s 1999 criminal arrest reports a
scheduled arraignment on the misdemeanor charge in January 1999, and Applicant’s
ensuing appearance, entry of a guilty plea, payment of a fine, the court’s deferral of any
findings on the charge, and the closing of the case in September 2006 (ex. 8).  It is quite
apparent from the docket entries on this 1999 charge that Applicant made a court
appearance on the charge and was informed of the court’s deferred finding in the case.
If this was not the case, it became incumbent on Applicant to provide better
explanations of the circumstances in which he entered his guilty plea.
When subsequently asked about his 1997 indictment and 1999 arrest in a
signed, sworn statement he gave in January 2004, Applicant could remember no more
about either event until asked about them specifically (see ex. 3; R.T., at 56-57).  When
confronted with the 1997 larceny charges, Applicant insisted he was “not aware of any
7/1997 larceny charge” (ex. 3).  This may be true, since the 1997 case docket does not
contain any notice information.  At the same time, his statement implicitly acknowledges
his being informed of a 1997 larceny charge.  With this information, he was in a position
to look into the status of the charge and any outstanding warrant before executing any
future security clearance applications.  In this same signed, sworn statement, Applicant
also addressed his 1999 trespass citation, but provided no further details about any
court appearance, guilty plea, and deferred finding referenced in the 1999 case docket. 
Applicant submitted another security clearance application in 2005: specifically,
an SF-86 he completed in November 2005.  In this application, Applicant answered “no”
to two questions: question 21, which inquired about felony offenses, and question 26,
which asked him about other offenses in the past seven years.  Applicant omitted anew
both his 1997 larceny charge and his January 1999 trespass charge.  He attributes his
negative responses to the same reasons he supplied for his earlier 2003 omissions:
unawareness, memory lapse, and a mistaken understanding of the scope of question
26 (R.T., at 58-59). 
Applicant’s assured lack of knowledge of his 1997 indictment and ensuing charge
is plausible only so much.  While clearly aware of the underlying facts based on his
exchanges with the employer whose wedding ring he misappropriated, it is certainly
plausible that he was not aware of any formal charges when he filled out his trust
5
application in 2003.  Applicant could not plausibly rely on the lack of notice of the 1997
charges, though, when he completed his 2005 SF-86.  For by this time, he had been
made aware of the pending 1997 larceny charge by the OPM investigator who
interviewed him and took his statement in 2004.  Only by a wilful refusal to look into any
pending 1997 charges could Applicant claim a continued lack of awareness of any
pending charges.
Wilful avoidance of the truth is insufficient to enable Applicant to sustain his
evidentiary claim to continued unawareness of the 1997 charge.  Neither his signed,
sworn statement nor the 1997 case docket corroborate Applicant’s unawareness claims.
So, while Applicant is able to credibly demonstrate that his omission of his 1997 larceny
charge in his 2003 trust application was inadvertent, he cannot avert inferences of
knowing and willful omission of the charge in his ensuing 2005 SF-86.
Credibility issues arise, too, with respect to Applicant’s multiple omissions of his
1999 trespass charge.  Omitting his 1999 trespass arrest on one clearance application
might plausibly be attributable to memory lapse and mistaken apprehension.  However,
his omission of his confirmed guilty plea on two separate applications covering the 1999
offense strains plausibility limits, and cannot credibly be attributable to memory lapse
and confusion under all off the circumstances extant at the time.  Based on the case
docket covering the 1999 offense, Applicant inferentially appeared in court to enter a
guilty plea to the criminal trespass charges, was credited with the payment of a fine, and
was privy to the court’s deferring of any findings in the matter (ex. 8).  Without any
probative documentation of a waived court appearance, inferences must warrant that
Applicant’s omissions of his 1999 criminal trespass in both his 2003 and 2005 clearance
applications were made knowingly and willfully.  
Applicant is well regarded by his supervisor, coworkers and friends (see ex. A).
They find him to be of good character and a reliable and trusted work provider and
asset to his family and community. 
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the Mitigating Conditions, if
any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
6
Criminal Conduct
      “The Concern. “Criminal activity create doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations” (Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 30).
Personal Conduct
    “The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process” (Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 15).
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue
an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do
so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated
in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security
clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence.  As
with all adversary proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis
       Applicant is a well regarded support technician with several criminal arrests and
convictions over a five-year span between 1994 and 1999.  Applicant’s arrest/conviction
history, while aged, raise initial security concerns over his eligibility to hold a security
clearance.  Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s omissions of his two
most recent incidents in his answers to a 2003 public trust application and an ensuing
2005 security clearance application.  
7
Applicant’s criminal history
Applicant’s three arrests/citation and indictment over larceny warrant initial
consideration of two disqualifying conditions of the  Adjudicative Guidelines for criminal
conduct: DC 31a, “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, “ and DC 31©),
“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged.”  While Applicant’s arrests/citation all resulted in guilty pleas and
convictions, his potentially more serious larceny offense for which he was indicted for in
1997 was dismissed by the court presiding over the case.  Because Applicant admits to
the underlying larceny charge of taking his employer’s wedding ring and later pawning it,
dismissal of the underlying charges does not moot the underlying conduct.  
Applicant may find no mitigation comfort in MC 32©), “evidence that the person
did not commit the offense” of the guidelines for criminal conduct.  His convictions
relative to all three of his arrests (i.e., in 1995, 1996, and 1999) are each admitted.
Applicant also admits his underlying conduct relative to his 1997 indictment.  It is
evident, too, however that  the underlying conduct that pertains to each of his arrests
are aged and bear less relevance to Applicant’s current clearance worthiness.  His first
line supervisor, coworkers, and friends who are familiar with his work, home, and
community commitments credit him with being conscientious, considerate, and helpful.
These collective impressions are probative in enabling Applicant to mitigate the
government’s criminal conduct concerns.  Taking  into account all of the facts and
circumstances developed in the record, favorable conclusions warrant with respect to
the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d of the SOR.
Whole person assessment also favors Applicant’s mitigation efforts.  Applicant’s
arrests and underlying offenses all occurred during Applicant’s high school years and in
the four years that ensued.  Since his last incident in 1999, Applicant has exhibited
responsible work in his work, home, and community.  His first line supervisor,
coworkers, and friends who are familiar with his work, home, and community
commitments speak positively of his reliability and trustworthiness.  Their impressions
warrant considerable weight to be accorded Applicant’s exhibited conscientious
behavior he has demonstrated in his work, home, and community over the past eight
years 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant succeeds in making a convincing
showing that he has both the maturity and seasoned resource support to avert any
recurrent problems with judgment lapses related to his past confrontations with law
enforcement. There is sufficient evidence to warrant safe assessments that he is no
longer at risk of judgment impairment associated with his past criminally-related
conduct.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d
of the SOR.
Public Trust/SF-86 omissions
Potentially serious and difficult to reconcile with the trust and reliability
requirements for holding a security clearance are the timing and circumstances of
Applicant’s failure to list all of his of his arrests/indictment/citation in his 2003 public trust
application and 2005 SF-86.  So much trust is imposed on persons cleared to see
8
classified information that the margins for excusing candor lapses are necessarily
narrow.
By omitting his 1997 indictment and 1999 trespassing citation in each of his
applications, Applicant failed to furnish materially important background information
needed by the government to properly process and evaluate his security updates.  His
claims of unawareness and misapprehension of the questions draw mixed inferences.
While his omission of his 1997 charges in his 2003 trust application is plausible and
credible under all of the circumstances considered, his omission of his 1997 charge in
his 2005 SF-86 and his omissions of his 1999 criminal trespass charge in both of his
applications are not. 
Applicant’s ensuing omission of his 1997 larceny charge in his 2005 SF-86
followed his being confronted with the charge in his 2004 OPM interview and could not
be plausibly omitted in his 2005 application without a determined disregard of the likely
existence of the 1997 larceny charge.  Based on his own account of his pawning his
employer’s wedding ring and his being confronted with a 1997 charge associated with
the incident by the OPM investigator who interviewed him in 2004, he was possessed of
enough personal information about the incident to confidently list the incident in his
2005 SF-86 or further acquaint himself with the details of the incident.
Applicant’s assurances of forgetting about the 1999 offense and treating it as an
administrative citation amenable to satisfactory disposition without a court appearance
are undermined by the case docket covering the offense. A plain reading of the case
docket makes quite clear that Applicant did appear for his arraignment in January 1999
and was privy to the court’s crediting him with payment of the ordered fine and deferring
of a finding in the matter.  Under these circumstances, Applicant’s claims of memory
lapse and confusion cannot be reconciled with the actual reports of the 1999 proceeding
in the case docket.
Applicant’s omissions of his 1997 larceny charge and 1999 criminal trespass
charges require application of a disqualifying condition (DC) for personal conduct of the
Guidelines: 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar form
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.”
Mitigation is difficult to credit Applicant with, because his omissions of his 1997
charge (in the SF-86 of 2005 only) and 1999 charges are neither isolated nor followed
by prompt and good faith corrections of his omissions.  Under these circumstances, he
cannot claim the benefit of any of the potentially applicable mitigating conditions. 
Addressing the availability of mitigating conditions to mitigate materials omissions
in a security clearance application (and implicitly in any trust application), the Appeal
Board has not only found the use of the predecessor to mitigating condition (MC) 17(c)
(which is A5.1.3.2) of the Adjudicative Guidelines for personal conduct (“the offense is
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on
9
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”) to be unavailable to
applicants seeking mitigation by treating the omission as isolated, but it has denied
applicants availability of MC 17(a) and its predecessor mitigating condition (“the
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the falsification before being
confronted with the facts”).  Compare ISCR Case No. 97-0289 (January 1998) with
DISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January1995).
 Considering all of the evidence produced in this record and the available
guidelines in the Directive (inclusive of the E2.2.2 factors), unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to subparagraphs. 2.a, 2/b, and 2.d of Guideline E.  Favorable
conclusions warrant as to sub-paragraph 2.c.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E 2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d: FOR APPLICANT
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2a: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.c: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.d: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
        In light  of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
 
