1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-----------, ----- -------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-25441
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant was born in Lebanon, resided there part-time while a minor living with
his parents, formerly held a Lebanese passport, and voted there once in an non-
government election. In context, these actions did not demonstrate preference for a
foreign country over the United States. Based upon thorough review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted. 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 18,
2004. On November 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline C. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 4, 2007. He answered
the SOR in writing (Answer) on January 2, 2008, and again on February 27, 2008, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on
February 27, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 11, 2008,
and DOHA assigned the case to me on March 13, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 17, 2008, and I convened the hearing
as scheduled on March 27, 2008. On March 12, 2008, Applicant waived his right to 15
days notice via an email to Department Counsel, and confirmed that waiver during the
hearing. (Tr. at 11-12.) The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. DOHA
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 4, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is married with
one young daughter. He was born in Lebanon, and first came to the United States with
his parents when he was about four years old. His father was a commercial architect
whose work was primarily in Lebanon, but the family came to the United States on
permanent resident visas and spent most of each year here to avoid the dangers of the
Lebanese civil war. They all became naturalized U.S. citizens in 1994. (Tr. at 41-45.)
Applicant was schooled in both Lebanon and the U.S., receiving his high school
diploma from a Lebanese school in June 1998. In September 1998, he moved
permanently to the U.S. and began college. He received his bachelor’s degree in June
2002, and his master’s degree in December 2003, both in electrical engineering. He
was hired by his present employer in January 2004, and was granted an interim security
clearance, without incident, until it was suspended in connection with the present
proceedings. He has subsequently earned an M.B.A. at company expense. (GE 1 at 2;
AE A; Tr. at 59.)  
During a family visit to Lebanon in 1997, when Applicant was 17 years old, his
parents were required by the Lebanese army to obtain a Lebanese passport for him in
order to leave that country to return to the United States. Applicant used that passport to
leave Lebanon on that occasion, but used only his U.S. passport thereafter. (Tr. at 36-
37, 56-58.) The Lebanese passport expired in 2002, and was destroyed in front of his
company’s security officer on March 30, 2007. (GE 2 at 15, 24.) Applicant admitted the
truth of SOR ¶ 1.a, concerning this passport, with this explanation of the circumstances.
Applicant also admitted the facts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, concerning his visits to
Lebanon, with explanations. As noted above, he lived intermittently in Lebanon and the
U.S. while a minor, depending on where his parents were at the time. Shortly before his
18  birthday, he moved to the U.S. full time in order to attend college. He visitedth
Lebanon twice in 2000 to visit his grandmother while she was sick with terminal cancer.
He visited again in 2001 to see his mother who was still there in connection with caring
3
for his grandmother. In 2004, he went to Lebanon to attend the wedding of a friend (who
is now a U.S. citizen residing in the U.S.). In 2005 and 2006 he made brief visits to
Lebanon during trips that were primarily for his honeymoon and his brother’s wedding in
Europe. He properly reported his foreign travel to security personnel due to his interim
clearance. He testified that he does not desire to return to Lebanon in the future, and
has no one left there that he considers family. His father is now retired. Although he has
one uncle and a few cousins still living in Lebanon, all of his immediate and close family
members are U.S. citizens and residents. (Answer; AE B; GE 2 at 23; Tr. at 28, 30-32,
38-41, 54-55, 58-59.)
While Applicant was in Lebanon in 2005, he was asked to, and did, vote in an
election in a church he was attending in his family’s former home town. The election
was for a church functionary, not a government official, and he was not required to be a
Lebanese citizen to cast the vote. He has voted in numerous U.S. elections, and has no
intention of ever voting in any future Lebanese election. He did not vote in Lebanon in
1998, and the SOR was amended to delete that portion of the SOR ¶ 1.c allegation at
Department Counsel’s request. (Answer; GE 3; Tr. at 38, 46-49, 67-68.) 
Applicant owns no property and has no financial assets in Lebanon. He and his
wife own their home and two (soon to be three) other investment properties in the U.S.,
purchased with his wife’s family’s assistance. He estimated his net worth here at
$430,000. He is willing to renounce his Lebanese citizenship, but is not sure how to do
so. He has no military service obligation in Lebanon, and never served in their armed
forces. (GE 2 at 10; Tr. at 39-40, 50-51, 59-62.)  His testimony during the hearing was
forthright and credible.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
4
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9, security concerns involving foreign preference arise because,
“When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country
over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member.  This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country;
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other
such benefits from a foreign country;
5
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements;
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial. or business interests in
another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and,
(7) voting in a foreign election;
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an
American citizen;
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in conflict with the national security interest; and,
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship.
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate those security concerns:
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a
foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the
individual was a minor;
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security
authority.
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and,
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States
Government.
Applicant did acquire a Lebanese passport in 1997, after becoming a U.S. citizen
in 1994. However, he did so only because the Lebanese army required him to do so in
order to leave Lebanon and return to the U.S. with his parents. That passport expired in
2002, and was later destroyed in the presence of his company’s security officer. All of
his subsequent travel has been done using his U.S. passport. He does not hold any
foreign passport, and has not done so since 2002. Applicant attended school in
6
Lebanon while he was a minor and resided part time in Lebanon with his parents. His
residence and all of his education since he turned 18, ten years ago, has been in the
United States. His residence in Lebanon was not to meet citizenship requirements,
since he was born there. He has not served in a foreign military, and has no obligation
to do so. His infrequent subsequent visits to Lebanon have been for family purposes,
but no close family remains there. He has no foreign business or financial interests, and
never sought or held foreign political office. He did vote once in Lebanon while visiting
there, but on balance the evidence shows that was not an act of citizenship. There is no
evidence that he ever acted in the interests of any foreign person, group, organization
or government, or made any statement or act showing allegiance to a foreign country. 
Applicant’s former possession of a Lebanese passport, part-time residence and
education there as a child, and casual vote while visiting there in 2005 could raise
security concerns under ¶¶ 10(a)(1), (3), (7) and 10(b) above. Under the circumstances
of this case, his actions would support only the most minimal concerns under those
criteria. Balancing against those concerns would be the mitigating effect of AG ¶¶ 11(a),
(b), (c), and (e), all of which are firmly established in this record. Once he was old
enough to live independent of his parents, he returned to the U.S. and has established
his entire life here, with only brief visits to Lebanon. His 2005 vote was not an exercise
of his Lebanese citizenship, which he acquired at birth and is willing to renounce. His
former passport is both expired and destroyed. Applicant’s allegiance is solely to the
United States. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern involves minimal, if any, expression of preference for a foreign country. Most of
7
the alleged concerns occurred when he was a minor and under his parent’s direction.
The only recent conduct of potential concern involved a casual vote in an unofficial
election there in 2005 while he was attending church. This he freely disclosed, but it
was not an exercise of citizenship. It is unlikely that he will exercise any rights or
privileges of Lebanese citizenship since all but a few remote relatives, and all his
business and personal interests, are in the United States. He does not intend to even
visit Lebanon again, and has demonstrated compliance with the obligation to report
foreign travel.  
On balance, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to fully mitigate reliability
and trustworthiness security concerns arising from his dual citizenship, old Lebanese
passport, time spent in Lebanon, and 2005 vote there. Overall, the record evidence
leaves no doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security
concerns arising under Guideline C, and his actions do not indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
