 
 
 
 
1
                                                             
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR No. 06-23655 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
  HISTORY OF CASE 
 
On November 4, 2004, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On November 24, 2005, he submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 15, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference), Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
 
 
 
 
2
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 8, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on April 22, 
2008, and issued a Notice of Hearing the same day. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on May 14, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GX) 1 through 9, which 
were received into the record without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Exhibits (AE) A and B that were admitted into the record without objection.  DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 27, 2008.  
 
PROCEDURAL RULINGS 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of certain facts relating to 
Jordan. (Tr. 19-20). The request and the attached documents are included in the record 
as Administrative Hearing Exhibits (Exh.) I through VII. Applicant did not object to 
consideration of those Exhibits. Hence, the facts administratively noticed are limited to 
matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated February 8, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.c, 2.b and 2.c of the SOR, and denied ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 2.a, 2.d, 3.a and 
3.b, and provided additional explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and through review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He was born in Jordan and attended grammar and high 
school there. He came to the United States in August 1977 on a student visa to attend 
college. In July 1980, he married his first wife, a U.S. citizen. He graduated in the spring 
of 1982 with a Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering and returned to Jordan in 
January 1983 without his wife. In May 1983, he and his first wife were divorced.  Upon 
returning to Jordan, the government drafted him into its army where he served from 
January 1983 to January 1985. He worked as an electrical engineer and sometimes 
served as a liaison to U.S. citizens assigned to work in Jordan. (Tr. 64). After 
completing the required two years of conscription, he received an honorable discharge 
and returned to the United States. In 1985, he married his current wife, who was born in 
Lebanon and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 1983. They have five children, 
all born in the United States. In February 1990, he became a U.S. citizen. 
 
 After moving back to the United States in 1985, Applicant worked for various 
private corporations and defense contractors. In May 2003, he began an engineering 
position with a federal contractor and completed a SF-86 in November 2004. (GE 1). 
 
 
 
 
3
About a year later, in October 2005, he changed jobs and started working as a senior 
engineer for his current employer, a defense contractor. In that position he supervises 
about ten people. (Tr. 35). He completed a second security clearance application (e-
QIP) in November 2005. (GE 5). 
 
 Both of Applicant’s parents were born in Palestine, but later became resident 
citizens of Jordan. His father died in February 2000 in Jordan. He was a tailor and 
owned his own business in Jordan. (Tr. 70). His mother subsequently became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen and resident in September 2000. She died in December 2007 
while visiting Jordan. Neither parent worked for the Jordanian government. (Tr. 71).  
 
 Applicant is one of five children, all born in Jordan. One of his two sisters is 
deceased and the other sister is a naturalized U.S. citizen, residing in the United States. 
One of his brothers is a naturalized U.S. citizen and resides in the United States. His 
other brother is a resident citizen of Jordan and works as a private physician in a 
government hospital. (Tr. 72) For the last 20 years, Applicant spoke to his brother once 
or twice a year. (Tr. 74). He spoke to him more frequently before his sister died in July 
2003. After his mother became ill while visiting Jordan in late 2007, he also had more 
contact with him. (Tr. 75). Since her death in December 2007, he has communicated 
with him about estate matters. (Tr. 76). Other than his brother, he does not have contact 
with anyone else in Jordan. (Tr. 86).  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law were born in Palestine. His mother-in-
law is deceased and his father-in-law is a naturalized U.S. citizen, residing in the United 
States.  
 
  Applicant is an heir to his parents’ estate, along with three siblings. The estate 
contains a piece of commercial real estate from his father’s business, estimated to be 
worth $500,000. (Tr. 79). He does not know when the probate of the estate will be 
completed, and is not responsible for taxes or expenses related to the building. (Tr. 79). 
He spoke to his brother, residing in Jordan, about the possibility of selling his interest in 
the estate to that brother for $20,000. He does not want his inheritance or ownership of 
the property to affect his employment. He stated, “I don’t want – if there’s anything that 
is affecting my life outside the United States, I don’t want to have anything to do with it. . 
. . This is my life here. I don’t need it basically, so I’m going to let it go.” (Tr. 77). He 
does not own any other property or assets in Jordan. (Tr. 83, 84).  He owns a home in 
the United States, worth about $150,000. He never voted in a Jordanian election since 
obtaining his U.S. citizenship. He votes in the United States and recently voted in the 
primary. (Tr. 60). 
  
 Applicant had a Jordanian passport that was issued in April 1985 and expired in 
April 1990. He renewed it in January 1990, one month before becoming a U.S. citizen, 
and it expired in January 1995. He renewed the Jordanian passport again in September 
1999, although he was a U.S. citizen. Around the time of the renewal, he and his family 
were in Jordan and decided to travel to a nearby country. He learned that “because we 
were traveling on U.S. passports, we would have all been charged a fee to re-enter 
 
 
 
 
4
Jordan.” [Sic]. (GE 6 at 5).  After paying the $350 fee, he was informed by the Jordanian 
officials that it would be less costly for him and his family to travel on one Jordanian 
family passport. He subsequently renewed the passport. He did not know that holding a 
foreign passport could jeopardize his employment. (Tr. 58-59). That passport expired in 
September 2004 and he no longer possesses it. (GE 6 at 6).  
 
 Applicant received his first U.S. passport in May 1990 and it expired in May 2000. 
(GE 6 at 16).  His current U.S. passport was issued in May 2000 and it expires in May 
2010. (GE 6).   
 
 Applicant traveled to Jordan several times after becoming a U.S. citizen in 1990. 
He used his U.S. passport for the trips he made in 1990, 1992, 1994, 1996, 1999, and 
2003. He used his Jordanian passport in February 2000 to attend his father’s funeral. 
(Answer). He did not use his U.S. passport because of the emergency nature of the trip, 
and he had checked a U.S. Government internet website advising travelers not to use a 
U.S. passport within nine months of its expiration date. (His passport was due to expire 
in May 2000). (Answer; Tr. 41-43).   
 
 In an October 2007 interview, Applicant stated that “I do not intend to renew my 
Jordanian Passport or obtain a new one. I do not intend to obtain any non-U.S. 
passport. I do not intend to use any Jordanian identification cards or travel documents. I 
intend to only use my U.S. passport and/or U.S. identification on all future trips.” (GE 6 
at 9). 
 
 In November 2004, Applicant submitted a SF 86, and in November 2005, he 
completed an e-QIP. In both applications, he disclosed that he had a Jordanian 
passport, issued in September 1999 and expired in September 2004. He also disclosed 
his previous trips to Jordan, including a trip home for his father’s funeral in 2000. After 
submitting his first application, he met with an investigator in June 2005 for an interview. 
”At the time, I mentioned that I took a visit to Jordan in 2000 as I took the passports with 
me to the interview. I don’t recall if the SA asked for them and/or made a copy of my 
foreign passports or not. I was trying not to hide or give any false information about all 
my visits to Jordan.”1 (Answer at 4). DOHA subsequently sent him a set of 
Interrogatories that he answered in January 2007, and another set of Interrogatories 
that he answered in February 2007. (GE 3 and 4).  
 
 The January 2008 SOR alleged that Applicant falsified his responses to one 
question on the January 2007 Interrogatory and one question on the February 2007 
Interrogatory. Both questions pertain to his possession and use of a Jordanian passport.  
Applicant denied that he intentionally falsified information on either document. (Answer). 
 
                                            
1 Applicant brought three Jordanian passports to the security clearance interview in June 2005. 
They were issued in April 1985, January 1990 and September 1999. Copies of those documents are 
included in the record and marked as GE 6, GE 7 and GE 8, respectively. The passport issued in 
September 1999 contains a stamp, dated February 20, 2000, indicating that he traveled to Jordan on it at 
that time. (GE 8). 
 
 
 
 
5
 SOR ¶ 3.a alleged that Applicant falsified his answer to Question 4 on the 
January 2007 Interrogatory that asked, “Do you currently have a passport from another 
country other than the United States?” In response, Applicant stated, “Haven’t used 
passport since 7/2/90. Been using U.S.A. passport since I became a citizen.” That 
answer was incorrect because he used his Jordanian passport once in 2000 after 
receiving U.S. citizenship. In his Answer, Applicant admitted that he answered 
incorrectly. In the October 2007 interview, he stated that he had forgotten that he used 
the passport for his 2000 trip. (GE 6 at 8).  While testifying, he explained he misread the 
questions and was confused by the sequencing. (Tr. 98-104). He asserted that he made 
an honest mistake. (Tr. 107).   
 
 SOR ¶ 3.b alleged that Applicant falsified his answer to Question 1 on the 
February 2007 Interrogatory that asked: “1. On your security clearance questionnaire 
dated 11/4/04, you indicated that you were issued a Jordanian passport on/about 
9/13/99 which was to expire on about 9/13/04. Likewise, you indicated that you obtained 
this passport in order to visit Jordan (you subsequently traveled to Jordan in February 
2000 for your father’s funeral). In your interrogatory response dated 1/10/07, you denied 
possessing a foreign passport since your naturalization on 7/2/90.” 
 
  Applicant interpreted said question to inquire whether he used his Jordanian 
passport for any trips, other than the 2000 trip, and he essentially answered no.  Based 
on my reading of the question and Applicant’s explanation, he answered it correctly.  
This allegation is found in his favor. 
 
 In response to the falsification allegations, Applicant denied that he intentionally 
falsified information to the Government. He said: 
 
“there was may some honest mistakes here and there, and I have no 
intention whatsoever to hide anything from my past, because there’s 
nothing in my past, that, you know, I should hide . . . So for these issues 
that were brought up, it’s either maybe the way that I explained myself. 
Maybe I didn’t do a good job there. I need to watch myself, more details, 
and absolutely possibility there’s nothing that I’m trying to hide or lie.” [Sic] 
(Tr. 108). 
 
 Applicant credibly asserted his pride of U.S. citizenship. “Except for that I was 
born and raised in Jordan and I decided by choice to live in the USA, I believe that’s a 
good indication that I don’t want to live in Jordan. You know, I want to associate myself 
here, you know. My kids are born here. This is our country. This is it for us, you know.” 
[Sic]. (Tr. 61).  
 
 Applicant submitted five letters of recommendation from his colleagues, who 
have known him for the past two years.  All of them comment favorably on his 
professionalism and integrity. One of Applicant’s co-workers stated that he has found 
Applicant “to be very professional in his communications as a team leader. His ethical 
 
 
 
 
6
standards and integrity was reflected in his objectives and the principle he set for 
himself and his peers.”  (AE B at 5).  
 
Jordan 
 
Jordan is a small, Middle Eastern country governed by a constitutional monarchy. 
Jordan has a pro-Western foreign policy, and has had close relations with the United 
States for more than forty years. Torture, arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention, denial of 
due process, and restrictions on freedom of speech are Jordanian human rights 
problems. Despite aggressive governmental action against terrorists, the threat of 
terrorism in Jordan remains high.  Terrorists in Jordan target U.S. interests to exploit 
and undermine U.S. national security interests. Terrorist groups conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as state intelligence services.     
 
POLICIES 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
 
 
 
7
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
ANALYSIS 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 AG ¶ 9 expresses the Government’s security concern about foreign preference: 
 When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 Under AG ¶ 10, two conditions could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;  
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; and 
* * * 
 (d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
When Applicant renewed his Jordanian passport in September 1999, after 
becoming a U.S. citizen in 1990, he met the conditions in AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and 10(d). He 
 
 
 
 
8
also served two years in the Jordanian army, raising another disqualification under AG ¶ 
10(a)(2). 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating 
condition. AG ¶ 11 lists two conditions that mitigate the security concern: AG ¶ 11(e) 
“the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated;” and, AG ¶ 11(c) “exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations 
of foreign citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor. The Jordanian passport, which was issued in September 1999, 
expired in September 2004 and is no longer valid. Applicant was not a U.S. citizen when 
he was conscripted into the Jordanian army in 1983. 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the Government’s concern about foreign 
influence is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;”2  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
                                            
2 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
9
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject 
the individual to heightened risk or foreign influence or exploitation. 
  
  Applicant has some telephonic contact with his brother, who is a resident citizen 
of Jordan and employed by a Jordanian-government owned hospital. Jordan is a pro-
Western country, ruled by a constitutional monarchy. It has had a close relationship with 
the United States for more than 40 years. Nonetheless, it also continues to have human 
rights issues and has been victimized by terrorist attacks. This fact creates a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion, and a 
potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
  Recently, Applicant and his three siblings became heirs to their parents’ estate, 
worth approximately $500,000. His potential interest is $125,000, a substantial amount 
of money.  That interest triggers the application of AG¶ 7(e).  
 
  Four Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to the disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant’s brother is a civilian physician working for a government-owned 
hospital. In that position, it is improbable that the brother would have any interest in 
acquiring protected information. Only his physical presence in Jordan creates a 
 
 
 
 
10
potential that the brother’s interest could be threatened to the point that Applicant would 
confront a choice between the brother’s interests and those of the United States. Based 
on Jordan’s long-term friendship with the United States and Applicant’s historic distant 
relationship with his brother, I find it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position 
of having to choose between the interests of the Jordanian government and those of the 
United States. AG ¶ 8(a) has some application.  
 
Applicant produced substantial evidence establishing the application of AG ¶ 
8(b). Based on his strong connections and feelings for the United States, he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. He has lived in 
the United States as a naturalized citizen since 1990. Prior to that time he attended 
college here for six years and earned his degree, before he returned to Jordan for two 
years. His family, including his wife and two siblings are naturalized U.S. citizens, 
residing in the United States. He has five children who were born in the United States. 
His father-in-law is a naturalized U.S. citizen and resides here. He owns a home in the 
United States. He has worked in the United States since 1985 and currently has a very 
good job. There is no evidence that he has connections or contact with any people in 
Jordan other than his brother.   
 
AG ¶¶ 8(c) has very limited application because Applicant’s communication with 
his brother appears to have increased in frequency since his mother’s illness and death, 
and the estate matters have arisen. Prior to the time his mother’s illness in December 
2007, he spoke to his brother once or twice a year.  
 
Applicant asserted that he is prepared to sell his share of his estate to his brother 
in Jordan for $20,000, because he does not want to jeopardize his employment here. 
Given that he is willing to forego a large share of his inheritance, it is unlikely that his 
interest in the property could be used to influence or pressure him. AG ¶ 8(f) has some 
application. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The Government’s security concern pertaining to personal conduct is set 
out in AG ¶ 15:       
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
One Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition is particularly relevant and 
potentially disqualifying in this case. Guideline ¶ 16(a) provides that the “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
 
 
 
 
11
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities” may raise a security concern. Applicant incorrectly answered one 
question on the January 2007 Interrogatories. He denied that he intentionally falsified 
his answers or attempted to deceive the Government.  
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the Government has the 
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in 
ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004). 
SOR ¶ 3.a alleges that Applicant falsified the January 2007 Interrogatory 
because he did not disclose the information about using his Jordanian passport in 2000 
to attend his father’s funeral. Applicant admitted the omission and acknowledged his 
mistake in his Answer to the SOR. During his testimony, he emphasized his confusion 
over the wording of the questions, and thought he was answering correctly. After 
listening to him and observing his demeanor, I believe that he may not have recalled the 
2000 trip initially and became very anxious and confused by the substance and 
sequencing of the questions.  
 
Prior to the January 2007 Interrogatories, Applicant truthfully disclosed the 
possession of the Jordanian passport and his 2000 trip on both security applications. He  
brought three Jordanian passports to his 2005 interview with the government 
investigator, in order to disclose all information about his travel to Jordan. The passport 
issued in September 1999 documented the 2000 trip to Jordan.  Applicant disclosed this 
information before being confronted by the Government and early in the investigative 
process. Those forthright disclosures, along with the fact that English is not his native 
language and his repeated assertions that he did not intend to falsify any documents, 
lead me to conclude that the omission on the 2007 interrogatories was negligent, but 
not intentional. The Government could have not have been able to formulate the 
interrogatory questions, but for Applicant’s production of the passport in June 2005. 
Hence, the evidence does not establish deliberate falsification. Accordingly, Guideline E 
is found in his favor and a discussion of mitigating conditions is not warranted. 
 
“Whole Person” Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors (APF) listed at AG ¶ 2(a): They are as follows:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
 
 
12
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”  
 
Because foreign influence does not involve misconduct, voluntariness of participation, 
rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress,” is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this 
adjudication.3 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a mature person, who came to the United States to further his 
education in 1977. He returned to Jordan in 1983 and was involuntarily conscripted into 
its army. Since 1985, he has lived in the United States, and has been a naturalized 
citizen for more than 17 years. He earned his degree at a U.S. university. He has 
worked in the United States since 1985 and established a successful career. His 
spouse is a naturalized citizen, residing with him in the U.S.  His five children were born 
in the United States. He has a strong sense of patriotism toward the United States. His 
ties to the United States are much stronger than his ties to one brother living in Jordan 
with whom he communicates infrequently. His Jordanian passport expired four years 
ago and he has no intention of renewing it. There is no evidence he has ever taken any 
action that could cause potential harm to the United States. His co-workers assess him 
as loyal and honest.  
 
 Five circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis.  First, 
there is a significant risk of terrorism and various human rights abuses in Jordan. More 
importantly for security purposes, terrorists are hostile to the United States and actively 
seek classified information. Terrorists, and even friendly governments, could attempt to 
use Applicant’s brother to obtain such information. Second, he had numerous 
connections to Jordan before he permanently immigrated to the United States in 1985. 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
 
 
 
13
Following his birth, he spent his formative years there, along with his family. He was 
conscripted into its army. Third, his brother is a resident citizen of Jordan, with whom he 
has some contact. Fourth, he has a financial interest in his parent’s estate there. Fifth, 
since becoming a citizen in July 1990, he made seven trips to Jordan, the last being in 
2003.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference, foreign influence and personal 
conduct.4 Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence, 
foreign preference and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
4I conclude that the whole person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of his security 
clearance. Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions 
articulated under AG ¶ 8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole person 
analysis standing alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
