 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-25928 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference and foreign influence security 
concerns arising from his relationship and contacts with Ecuadorian citizens. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 4, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts and security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The SOR 
informed Applicant that based on available information, DOHA adjudicators could not 
make a preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him access to classified information and submitted the case to an 
administrative judge for a security determination.1 On June 21, 2007, Applicant 
answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                          
 The case was assigned to me on September 4, 2007. Applicant is a resident of 
the Republic of Colombia (Colombia). On or about September 11, 2007, Applicant 
elected to have his hearing conducted via video tele-conference (VTC). On September 
21, 2007, a Notice of Hearing was issued convening a VTC hearing on October 10, 
2007. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The government presented two 
exhibits, marked GE 1 and 2, to support the SOR. At his hearing, Applicant testified on 
his own behalf and presented no witnesses or exhibits. I allowed Applicant additional 
time to present post-hearing submissions. He availed himself of the opportunity and 
submitted one exhibit, marked AE 1. DOHA received the transcript on October 18, 
2007. I issued a decision denying a clearance on November 20, 2007. 
 
APPELLATE LITIGATION 
 
 Applicant appealed my decision to deny his clearance. On April 9, 2008, the 
Appeal Board remanded Applicant’s case for a new decision.2 In his appeal, Applicant 
challenged some of my findings of facts contending they were not based upon 
substantial evidence. After reviewing the record as a whole, the Appeal Board resolved 
the issue against Applicant indicating that “to the extent that the Judge’s findings for fact 
contain error, it is harmless.”3 I will not restate in this decision the facts in the same 
detail as they were covered in my first decision. 
 
 The Appeal Board remanded Applicant’s case for the issuance of a new decision 
which discusses whether or not Applicant’s circumstances fall within precedent 
established by certain Appeal Board cases, and if so, to what extent. The Appeal Board 
has stated that: 
 
As a general rule, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security 
procedures and regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative 
value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security 
concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct 
or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 
13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR 
Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). However, the Board 
has recognized an exception to that general rule in Guideline B cases, 
where the applicant has established by credible, independent evidence 
that his compliance with security procedures and regulations occurred in 
the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant 
had made a significant contribution to the national security. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 
05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 3 
 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2  The briefs filed by the parties were not part of the file provided to me. 
 
3  ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2008). 
 
3 
 
 
(App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). The presence of such circumstances can give 
credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to 
recognize, resist, and report attempts at coercion or exploitation. Id. 
 
When an “Applicant has repeatedly been willing to assume a high level of 
risk on behalf of the U.S., [his behavior] constitute[s] important evidence 
that Applicant’s ties and sense of obligation to the U.S. could be 
sufficiently strong that he “[could] be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. .“ Directive ¶ E2.8(b). See ISCR Case No. 05-
03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006.) (Applicant’s work as an interpreter in 
Afghanistan occurred “in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which [he] made a significant contribution to the national 
security.”) See also ISCR Case No. 04-12363 (App. Bd. Jul. 14, 2006); 
ISCR Case No. 07-00034 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Apr. 9, 2008) (footnotes omitted). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of facts. After a thorough review of Applicant’s testimony and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of facts. 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a U.S. defense contractor providing 
support for a U.S. agency in Columbia. He was born, raised, and educated in Ecuador. 
He served approximately six years in the Ecuadorian military forces where he received 
the equivalent of a college education.  
 
 At age 25, Applicant studied in the United States for approximately one year 
under a student visa (Tr. 40). From around 1989 to 1991, he lived in Ecuador and 
worked for several Ecuadorian companies. His job allowed him to travel frequently to 
the United States. In the early 1990s, he moved to the United States to attend further 
education/training and to work for several U.S. companies. In September 2001, 
Applicant was undergoing training while working in the United States and was 
furloughed along with 3,000 other employees across the United States. Between 2001 
and 2003, he was forced to take other jobs to make ends meet. In 2003, he was hired 
by his current employer, a defense contractor, to provide services to a U.S. agency in 
Colombia. He moved his wife and three children to Colombia to be close to them. 
 
 Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in December 2003, and was issued 
his U.S. passport that same month. His wife is a citizen of Ecuador, a registered legal 
alien in the United States, and currently a resident of Colombia. He has one step-child 
born in Ecuador, who is a U.S. resident alien. Another child is a dual citizen of Ecuador 
and the United States, and the third child was born in the United States. Applicant and 
his wife have bank accounts in Ecuador and Colombia to pay for their day-to-day living 
expenses while they are living in one of these countries. They have approximately 
 
4 
 
 
$4,000 in a savings account in Colombia. They also have a $1,000 savings account in 
Ecuador, and his wife has a certificate of deposit for $10,000, resulting from the sale of 
her automobile (Tr. 34). 
 
 Applicant moved his family from the United States to Colombia because of his 
job for a defense contractor. Applicant bought a small apartment in Colombia with a 
value of approximately $150,000. Applicant and his wife do not consider Colombia their 
home. They reside in Colombia only because of his job. They intend to sell all their 
property in Colombia when he gets recalled to work for his prior U.S. employer. When 
that happens, he intends to return to live in the United States and to retire in the United 
States (Tr. 96). Applicant owns a condominium in the United States with an approximate 
value of $300,000. Additionally, he has approximately $9,000 invested in stocks in the 
United States (Tr. 83).  
 
 Applicant’s parents, most of his extended family members, his wife’s parents, 
and her extended family members are citizens and residents of Ecuador. His father 
retired after 21 years working for a U.S. agency doing business in Ecuador (Tr. 38). He 
currently works for several U.S. private companies doing business in Ecuador, and as a 
consultant. His father inculcated in Applicant the idea of coming to live in the United 
States and becoming a U.S. citizen (Tr. 37-38).  
 
 His father would like to live in the United States (Tr. 57). His mother is a 
homemaker. Applicant contacts his parents once a week via the Internet. His parents 
visited Applicant in Colombia in 2005. At least once a year since he left Ecuador, 
Applicant and his family have traveled to Ecuador to visit their family members during 
vacations, holidays and on special occasions. They allot their time in Ecuador visiting 
their respective family members and friends. 
 
 Applicant’s sister is a clothing high fashion designer. She is married to an 
Ecuadorian senior military officer who was Applicant’s classmate. The senior military 
officer has sensitive responsibilities in Ecuador (Tr. 59, 94). Applicant has contact with 
his sister and her family whenever he travels to Ecuador, at least two to three times a 
year, during holidays, birthdays, and special occasions (Tr. 61). His last visit was during 
the 2006 Christmas holidays (Tr. 60). Applicant and his wife contact her family at least 
twice a month, as well as during their trips to Ecuador, and during holidays, birthdays, 
and special occasions (Tr. 62). 
 
 On his father’s side, Applicant has 11 uncles and aunts; on his mother’s side he 
has three uncles and aunts. One of his uncles is a U.S. citizen, and another is a U.S. 
legal resident. His remaining relatives are all citizens and residents of Ecuador. To 
Applicant’s knowledge, none of his uncles or aunts works or has worked for the 
Ecuadorian government. Applicant keeps in contact with a friend who is a senior field 
grade officer in the Ecuadorian military. They keep contact with each other via e-mail 
approximately once every three months. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                     
 In 2005, when Applicant submitted his security clearance application, he 
disclosed he was in possession of a valid Ecuadorian passport. He used his Ecuadorian 
passport, in preference to his U.S. passport, to travel to Ecuador in December 2003 and 
June 2004. He was made aware of the security clearance concerns raised by his 
possession and use of an Ecuadorian passport. He promised his agency’s regional 
security officer he would not use his Ecuadorian passport again, and volunteered to 
surrender it and to renounce his citizenship, if necessary (Tr. 48, 98). Applicant was in 
possession of a valid Ecuadorian passport the day of his hearing. He volunteered to 
surrender his Ecuadorian passport at any time he was asked to do so (Tr. 51). There is 
no evidence he used his Ecuadorian passport after he was informed of the security 
concerns raised by it in 2005. At his hearing, Applicant reiterated his willingness to 
surrender the passport and to renounce his Ecuadorian citizenship. On October 22, 
2007, Applicant surrendered his Ecuadorian passport to his company’s facility security 
officer for safekeeping (AE 1).2 
 
 Applicant introduced statements from a supervisor and two U.S. government 
agency officials attesting to the significant and dangerous work Applicant has done on 
behalf of the United States. His program manager, a retired Army lieutenant colonel, 
manages a substantial contract for a government agency involved in sensitive 
operations. He closely supervised Applicant for approximately four years. He considers 
Applicant a highly skilled employee who has consistently performed in an outstanding 
manner. Applicant earned his manager’s trust and respect because of his character and 
highly ethical conduct. Applicant worked in a position of trust while performing critical 
operations that required the handling of classified information. His manager endorses 
Applicant’s clearance without hesitation.4 
 
 The first of the other two character references worked for a U.S. state police 
department for eight years, and has been working for a government agency for 10 
years. He has known Applicant for approximately two years. He is impressed by 
Applicant’s judgment, professionalism, and skills. Applicant has demonstrated 
unswerving dedication to the mission of the government agency and the United States. 
He commended Applicant for his judgment while literally making life and death decision 
during every mission.5  
 
 The third reference is a retired U.S. Navy Senior Chief, currently working for a 
government agency. He has known Applicant for approximately one year. He believes 
Applicant has unquestionable dedication to the United States and its mission. He 
considers Applicant to be completely trustworthy and a valued friend. Moreover, he 
2 I left the record open to allow Applicant additional time to submit information for my 
consideration. He submitted statements from three character references and a letter from his company’s 
facility security officer. Department Counsel did not object to me considering any of the documents. I 
marked Department Counsel’s forwarding memorandum, as well as the documents submitted as AE 1, 
and admitted them into the record. 
4  AE 1 at 3. 
 
5  AE 1 at 5. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                     
commended Applicant for serving the United States at the risk of his own personal 
safety.6 All of them consider Applicant a dedicated family man. 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts. Ecuador is a constitutional 
republic with a democratically elected government. The government generally respects 
the human rights of its citizens. However, the country continues to experience serious 
human rights problems including improper conduct by security forces, criminal activity in 
the National Police, corruption and denial of due process in the judicial system. The 
United States and Ecuador have maintained close ties based on mutual interests in 
maintaining democratic institutions; combating narcotrafficking; and cooperating in 
fostering Equador’s economic development by building trade, investment, and financial 
ties. 
 
 The United States has long enjoyed favorable relations with Columbia. The 
United States provides substantial support to the Colombian government’s counter-
narcotics efforts, and encourages the government’s efforts to strengthen its democratic 
institutions in order to promote security, stability, and prosperity in the region. Although 
the government’s respect for human rights continues to improve, serious problems 
remain, including: unlawful and extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, 
insubordinate military personnel who collaborate with criminal groups, torture and 
mistreatment of detainees, and other serious human rights abuses. Illegal armed groups 
and terrorist groups committed the majority of human rights violations–including political 
killings and kidnappings, forced disappearances, torture, and other serious human 
rights abuses. Violence by narcoterrorist groups and other criminal elements continues 
to affect all parts of the country, urban and rural, including border areas. Citizens of the 
United States and other countries continue to be victims of threats, kidnapping, and 
other criminal acts. Since 1998, at least ten U.S. citizens have been kidnapped near 
Ecuador’s border with Columbia. 
 
 The U.S. Secretary of State has designated three Colombian groups – the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army (ELN), 
and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) – as Foreign Terrorist 
Organizations. These groups have carried out bombings and other attacks in and 
around major urban areas, including against civilian targets. Terrorist groups have also 
targeted critical infrastructure (e.g., water, oil, gas, and electricity), public recreational 
areas, and modes of transportation. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.7 
 
6  AE 1 at 7. 
 
7  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
7 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                          
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”8 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
8  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
8 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under Guideline C the government’s concern is that “[w]hen an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then 
he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9. 
 
 Applicant considers himself a dual citizen of the United States and Ecuador. His 
military service in Ecuador was before he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2003. 
Since approximately 1991, he has made the United States his home. Applicant’s 
possession and use of an Ecuadorian passport in preference of his U.S. passport, 
however, constitute an exercise of dual citizenship and raises security concerns under 
Guideline C. Foreign preference disqualifying condition AG 10(a): exercise of any right, 
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the 
foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes . . . (1): possession of a current 
foreign passport, applies. 
 
 Since 2005, Applicant has stated his intent to surrender his Ecuadorian passport 
and to renounce his Ecuadorian citizenship. In October 2007, he surrendered his 
Ecuadorian passport to his FSO. By surrendering his passport, he forfeits the flexibility 
of unfettered and undocumented travel. Any attempt by Applicant to retrieve his 
Ecuadorian passport will be documented and reported to the U.S. Government. These 
facts warrant application of Foreign Preference Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 11.b: the 
individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; and AG ¶ 11e.: the 
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated. I find that Applicant’s FSO qualifies under the AGs as the 
“cognizant security authority.” Applicant has mitigated the foreign preference security 
concerns. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                     
AG ¶ 6.  
 
 AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. In this case, the most pertinent are: 
a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; . . ., 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and,  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.9 Applicant has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and/or obligation with his parents, sister, extended family 
members, friends in the Ecuadorian military, and his parents-in-law who are residents 
and citizens of Ecuador. His wife is a foreign national. He has property in Colombia. His 
connection to his family members and his wife’s family, as well as his relationship with 
several Ecuadorian military officers  create a potential conflict of interest because his 
relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to help 
them or the government of Ecuador by providing sensitive or classified information.  
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising four potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the government. 
 
  I considered five foreign influence mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 as 
potentially applicable to the disqualifying conditions in this case: 
9  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 
8, 2001). 
 
10 
 
 
                                                     
 
 (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority . . .;  
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
The evidence shows Applicant has strong feelings of affection and a strong 
sense of obligation to his spouse, parents, sister, extended family and friends in 
Ecuador, as well as to his in-laws. The closeness of the relationship is shown by 
Applicant’s frequent telephone and e-mail contacts. His frequent travels to Ecuador with 
his wife and kids to visit their family and friends underscores his deep feelings of 
affection and/or obligation to his family. Moreover, Applicant’s close contacts with senior 
Ecuadorian military personnel (his brother-in-law and his friends) increase the security 
concerns.  
In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Ecuador’s democratic form of government.10 I also considered that the 
United States and Ecuador have maintained close ties based on mutual interests in 
maintaining democratic institutions; combating narcotrafficking; and cooperating in 
fostering Equador’s economic development. There is no evidence that the government 
of Ecuador possesses an aggressive or hostile intelligence/security profile against the 
United States, or is otherwise engaged in efforts to acquire military, technical, or 
economic information from the United States. 
10  The focus is not the country or its people, but its rulers and the nature of the government they 
impose. This approach recognizes that it makes sense to treat each country in accordance with the level 
of security concern or threat it presents to the United States.  
 
 
11 
 
 
                                                     
Considering the totality of the circumstances, I find AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (c) apply but 
only to a certain extent. His frequent contacts and close relationships with his 
Ecuadorian family, in-laws, and Ecuadorian military officers could potentially force him 
to choose between the United States interests and those of Ecuador. Applicant did not 
fully establish it is unlikely he will be placed in a position of having to choose between 
the interests of his family and friends in Ecuador and the interests of the United States.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has a longstanding relationship and loyalty 
towards the United States. His father inculcated in him the desire to become an 
American. Applicant resigned his position in the Ecuadorian military to work in the 
United States, and he has been living in the United States with his wife and children 
since around 1991. The only reason he is currently living in Colombia is because of his 
job with a defense contractor providing services for a U.S. agency.  
 
Moreover, Applicant’s evidence convincingly established that he has been 
willingly assuming a high level of risk while working on behalf of the United States. He 
has demonstrated to several officials of another agency that he can be trusted to 
comply with security procedures and regulations while working on dangerous, high-risk 
missions for the United States. His past behavior convinces me that his ties and sense 
of obligation to the United States is sufficiently strong that he could be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.9 It also gives credibility to 
his assertions that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report attempts at 
coercion or exploitation from family and friends living in foreign countries.10 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) applies because Applicant’s financial/economic interests in Ecuador 
and Colombia are outweighed by the value of his financial interests in the United States. 
I find his financial/economic interests in both Ecuador and Colombia are not likely to 
result in a conflict of interest, and could not be used effectively to influence or pressure 
Applicant.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
9  Directive ¶ E2. 8(b). See ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006.) (Applicant’s 
work as an interpreter in Afghanistan occurred “in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in 
which [he] made a significant contribution to the national security.”) See also ISCR Case No. 04-12363 
(App. Bd. Jul. 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 07-00034 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
10  Id. 
 
12 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I have carefully weighed all evidence, and I applied the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as listed under the applicable AGs. I specifically considered 
Applicant’s testimony as well as his references’ statements. Applicant is a U.S. citizen 
and two of his children are U.S. citizens. I considered his age, occupation, the period of 
time he has been living in the United States, and his professed intent to make the 
United States his home and to retire in the United States. I considered Applicant’s 
outstanding job performance for his current employer, and that he is highly regarded for 
his unswerving dedication, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Applicant has established by credible, independent evidence that he has can be 
trusted to comply with security procedures and regulations while working on dangerous, 
high-risk missions on behalf of the United States. Applicant’s past behavior under these 
dangerous circumstances shows that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report attempts at coercion or exploitation from family and friends living in foreign 
countries. Applicant’s ties and sense of obligation to the United States is sufficiently 
strong that he could be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United 
States.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.w:    For Applicant 
 
 
13 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
