  This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 06-25719
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Greg D. McCormack, Esquire
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence concerns that arose in this case because
of his family ties to Sudan. 
On November 27, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence). Applicant’s
response to the SOR was received by the DOHA on January 9, 2008. Applicant admitted
all SOR allegations and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on February 1, 2008. That
administrative judge caused a notice of hearing to be issued on March 3, 2008, scheduling
the hearing for April 7, 2008. The case was reassigned to me on April 7, 2008, due to the
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
unavailability of the originally assigned administrative judge. I conducted the hearing as
originally scheduled. 
The government submitted 13 documentary exhibits that were marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-13. GE 1-3 were admitted into the record without objection.
Administrative notice was taken of the contents of GE 4-13 without objection. Department
Counsel submitted a document containing written comments on the contents of GE 4-13
for my consideration which was marked as Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex. I) and made part of
the record without objection. Applicant testified and submitted nineteen documentary
exhibits that were marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1-19, and admitted into the record
without objection. The transcript was received on April 17, 2008.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 39-year-old man who has been employed as a linguist by a defense
contractor since April 2004. Applicant possessed an interim security clearance from the
time he was hired in April 2004 until the SOR was issued in November 2007. No
allegations have been made that Applicant has ever mishandled or risked the compromise
of classified information. 
Applicant worked as a linguist with U.S. military forces serving in Iraq from June
2004 until April 2005. His duties included riding in roving military vehicles with military
security forces outside secure areas to serve as a translator when Iraqi nationals and other
Arab speaking individuals were to be questioned. In that role, Applicant was exposed to
the constant threat of encountering improvised explosive devices (IEDs). Additionally, he
was exposed to the constant threat of direct and indirect fire from enemy forces both while
on those patrols and within military bases in Iraq. One of Applicant’s friends was killed
while serving in Iraq.
Applicant has served as a linguist with U.S. military forces in another middle eastern
country since completing his assignment in Iraq. American military officers and senior
noncommissioned officers who served with Applicant and who have had the opportunity
to work closely with him wrote the following: 
professional and courteous (and) willing to go the extra step to get the
mission accomplished (AE 6); 
his poise and rapport with both American and foreign officials was integral
in continuing the support for the war-fighters in both Iraq and Afghanistan
(and) his trustworthiness, professionalism, and selfless sacrifice were
unwavering )and he) has always demonstrated a dedication to the United
States, even to the point of leaving his family behind to perform duties with
the United States military during wartime” (AE 7); 
3
I can personally attest to his outstanding work ethic and flawless character
(he) stands shoulder to shoulder with other professionals in supporting our
country’s beliefs and principles (AE 8);
 . . . he has done wonders to foster a [sic] positive relations between US and
host nation forces (AE 9); 
During my tenure as supervisor of (Applicant), I found him to be an extremely
reliable interpreter and he always displayed the coveted characteristics of
honesty and dependability (AE 12); and 
He constantly displays integrity, service and excellence as he carries out his
assigned duties with vigor . . . . He is a man of honor, character and passion
as this unit has been a part of his life for several years . . . . I have the utmost
faith and trust in him and do not doubt his ability to maintain his security
clearance in accordance with the intended use in support of the Department
of Defense. He is, without a doubt, a loyal and dedicated employee who
works side by side with members of our United States Air Force, displaying
the same level of dedication, commitment, pride and patriotism. One team -
one fight! (AE 13) 
Applicant has earned a number of certificates and letters of appreciation and recognition
(AE 14 & 16) and others mementos (AE 19) in consideration of the support he has
provided to U.S. military forces and personnel.
Applicant entered the United States from Sudan in 1993 on a visitor’s visa that
allowed him to remain in the U.S. for six months. He overstayed the visa and did not exit
the U.S. as required. He married a United States citizen in October 1995, and became a
naturalized U. S. citizen on August 22, 2001. This marriage ended by divorce in October
2002. Department Counsel’s questioning of Applicant and Applicant’s answers suggest the
first marriage may have been intended to allow him to gain U. S. citizenship. However,
there is no evidence to support such a finding.
Applicant worked as a cashier in a convenience store from April 1993 to February
1997. He enlisted in the U.S. Navy in February 1997, but received an entry level separation
in April 1997, based on a medical condition. Applicant worked as a cab driver, as a pizza
delivery man, and as a cashier from April 1997 until he was hired by his present employer.
Applicant married a Sudanese woman in Sudan in March 2003. He has a four-year-
old child and an eight-year-old stepchild from this marriage. His wife and stepchild are
Sudanese citizens with U.S. permanent resident alien status. His child is a U.S. citizen.
Applicant’s wife has applied for U.S. citizenship and his stepchild will automatically gain
U.S. citizenship along with his wife. Applicant, his wife, and children reside together in the
middle eastern country where he has been assigned by his employer.
Applicant’s mother, father, two brothers, and five sisters are all citizens and
residents of Sudan. His father is a retired cook who now drives a taxi cab part-time. The
entire family resides together in the same house. Applicant’s siblings, with the apparent
4
exception of one sister, are students. Applicant described the family support situation as
him having supported his one sister until she completed her education and she is now
responsible for supporting the other family members. (Tr. 86-87) None of Applicants family
members in Sudan have ever been a member of the military or employed by the Sudanese
government. 
Applicant visited Sudan for six months in 2000 to care for his ailing father. He
vacationed there for two months in 2001, and returned for three months in 2003, during
which visit he married his present wife. Since working for his current employer and being
stationed in the middle east, Applicant has visited his family in Sudan on four occasions,
with the most recent visit occurring in October 2007. Applicant notified his supervisors on
each occasion before traveling to Sudan and was granted permission for the travel. He was
briefed before and debriefed after each trip to Sudan. Applicant telephones his parents
about twice a month.
Applicant has possessed a U.S. passport since August 2001. He destroyed his
Sudanese passport once he became a U.S. citizen and considers the destruction of that
passport to be the equivalent of renunciation of his Sudanese citizenship. He credibly
denies any sense of loyalty or obligation to Sudan and has expressed a willingness to
never travel there again if such travel would interfere with his present employment. As
Applicant explained at the hearing, he has done everything he can for his family members
in Sudan, he must maintain his current job to provide his wife and children a better life, and
he will not under any circumstance travel to Sudan in the future. (Tr. 48) Applicant does,
however, hope to be able to eventually sponsor his entire family’s immigration into the U.S.
(Tr. 83-85) 
Applicant does not have any assets in Sudan. He earns about $4,100 per month
from his employment. He has minimal financial assets in the United States, consisting of
about $7,000 in a pension plan. (AE 1) His savings consists of approximately $30,000
worth of gold he has accumulated. (Tr. 98)
Sudan was designated a State Sponsor of Terrorism by the U. S. Department of
State on August 12, 1993. (GE 9) It backed Iraq when it invaded Kuwait and provided
sanctuary and assistance to Islamic terrorist groups. In the early to mid-1990s, Carlos the
Jackal, Osama bin Laden, Abu Nidal, and other terrorist leaders resided in Sudan, and in
1997, the U. S. imposed comprehensive economic, trade, and financial sanctions against
Sudan. In August 1998, in the wake of East Africa embassy bombings, the U. S. launched
cruise missile strikes against Sudan. (GE 4) 
The U.S. and Sudan entered into a bilateral dialogue on counter-terrorism in May
2000, and Sudan has provided cooperation against international terrorism since the
September 11, 2001, terrorism attacks in the U.S. However, while Sudan publicly
supported the international coalition actions against al Qaida and the Taliban, it criticized
the U.S. strikes in Afghanistan and opposed a widening of the effort against international
terrorism. (GE 4) On September 6, 2007, the U. S. Department of State warned travelers
that the U.S. had received indications of terrorist threats aimed at American and western
interests in Sudan. ( GE 6)       
 Applicant testified his family lives two to three thousand miles from Darfur and have never2
experienced the type of trouble that exists in that region of Sudan. (Tr. 57-58)
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
5
In Darfur government forces and rebel groups committed serious abuses in 2006,
including the killing of at least several thousand civilians. Numerous villages of African
tribes were razed and acts of torture and violence were directed against women by
government forces and others. Security remains a major problem in the region and reports
of violence were increasing during the latter half of 2006.  (GE 8)2
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline B (foreign influence) with
its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the6
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to7
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 Id at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
 The Appeal Board has stated: As a general rule, an applicant’s prior history of complying with13
security procedures and regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative value . . . . (citations
omitted) However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in Guideline B cases, where
the applicant has established by credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures
and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant had
6
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as
whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Applicant’s wife and stepchild are citizens of Sudan. They have permanent resident
alien status in the United States and reside with him in the middle eastern country where
he has been assigned by his defense contractor employer. His parents and siblings are all
citizens and residents of Sudan. Applicant traveled to Sudan on numerous occasions
between 2000 and 2007 to care for his father, to marry his wife, and to visit with his
relatives. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 7(a): contact with a foreign family member . . . or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
and DC 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion apply. 
Applicant credibly testified to his unwavering loyalty to the United States and lack
of any sense of loyalty or obligation to Sudan. His testimony is strongly supported by the
numerous letters of recommendation submitted by U.S. military officers and senior
noncommissioned officers who have worked closely with Applicant for the past several
years. It is further supported by his demonstrated willingness to place his life on the line
in support of the U.S. military effort in Iraq while possessing an interim security clearance.13
made a significant contribution to national security. (citations omitted) The presence of such circumstances
can give credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and report
attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
W hen an “Applicant has repeatedly been willing to assume a high level of risk on behalf of the U.S.,
[his behavior] constitute[s] important evidence that Applicant’s ties and sense of obligation to the U.S. could
be sufficiently strong that he [could] be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. Directive
¶ E2.8(b). See ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov 14, 2006) (Applicant’s work as an interpreter in
Afghanistan occurred “in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which [he] made a significant
contribution to the national security.”) ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Apr 9, 2008)
7
Mitigating Condition (MC) 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the
individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person . . . is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. applies.
 
Additionally, Applicant has complied with his employer’s reporting requirements, has
notified the employer before his travels to Sudan to visit with family members, and has
obtained the express approval of the responsible persons before undertaking such travel.
MC 8(d): the foreign contacts and activities . . . are approved by the cognizant security
authority applies.
 
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.  
Applicant is entitled to substantial consideration under the “whole person” concept.
For a period of ten months he placed himself in harm’s way by deploying to Iraq and
engaging in routine patrols outside secure areas with U.S. military units. He has continued
to serve in another middle eastern country with U.S. military forces and has earned high
praise and support of many military members. He has been recognized on many occasions
by the presentation of certificates and letters of appreciation and commendation and other
mementos. Having observed his appearance, demeanor and manner of testifying, I find
his assertions of undivided loyalty to the United States to be credible. Applicant is
additionally entitled to credit for the work ethic he has displayed as evidenced by his 15
years of uninterrupted employment since immigrating to the United States. His conduct in
overstaying a visitor’s visa and remaining in the U.S. after his required date of departure
is overwhelming outweighed by the totality of his actions since he immigrated to the U.S.
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, Applicant has mitigated the foreign
influence security concern that existed in this case. He has overcome the case against him
and satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. Guideline B is decided for Applicant. It is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
