 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-04847 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines K (Handling 
Protected Information) and E (Personal Conduct). Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns under Guideline K, but not under Guideline E. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on November 18, 
2002. On August 20, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny 
his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines K and E. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 27, 2007; answered it on 
September 14, 2007; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on September 19, 2007. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on December 31, 2007, and the case was assigned to me on January 2, 2008. 
The case was tentatively scheduled for February 29, 2008. Applicant retained a lawyer, 
who entered his appearance on January 29, 2008, and requested that the hearing be 
postponed until March 2008. His entry of appearance and request for a postponement 
are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HX I).  
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 27, 2008, scheduling the hearing for 
April 24, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 28 were admitted in evidence without objection. The testimony of one 
government witness was taken by video-teleconference (VTC), and two government 
witnesses testified in person at the hearing. Department Counsel’s request to present 
the testimony of one witness by VTC is attached to the record as HX II. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through Z, which 
were admitted without objection.  
 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until May 9, 2008, to 
enable him to submit additional documentary evidence.  Applicant timely submitted AX 
AA through DD, and they were admitted without objection. I granted requests from 
counsel for both sides to submit written closing statements. Department Counsel’s 
written closing statement is attached to the record as HX III, and Applicant’s counsel’s 
closing statement is HX IV. The record closed on May 9, 2008. DOHA received the 
transcripts of the VTC testimony and the hearing (Tr.) on May 15, 2008. The VTC 
testimony is in a separate transcript marked “VTC Transcript.”  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all the allegations. At the hearing, he 
admitted the facts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and his admissions are incorporated 
in my findings of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old mechanical engineer. He has held a security clearance 
since August 1967. He received a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering in 1980 and worked 
for a defense contractor until December 1998. He formed his own company in February 
1999 and works as a consultant to defense contractors in the field of underwater 
acoustics (Tr. 166). He is the president and sole owner of his company. He also is the 
Information System Security Manager (ISSM) and the Facility Security Officer (FSO). 
His daughter is the corporate secretary and his brother is the chairman of the board (Tr. 
174). 
 
 Applicant requested a facility security clearance in October 1999, and his 
company was granted a clearance in September 2000. The cognizant security agency 
(CSA) for Applicant’s company is the Defense Security Service (DSS), as executive 
 
3 
 
 
agent for the Department of Defense (Tr. 47). A DSS industrial security representative 
(ISR) conducted a security inspection of the facility in December 2000, and Applicant 
received an updated copy of Chapter 8 of the National Industrial Security Program 
Operating Manual (NISPOM) from DSS in February 2001 (AX W). The ISR acts for DSS 
in interpreting the NISPOM (Tr. 47). 
 
Applicant’s ISR testified he and Applicant had an open, cooperative, and cordial 
relationship (Tr. 73). He testified that establishing an information system (IS) for the first 
time in a small organization can be “fairly daunting,” but Applicant was receptive to 
advice (Tr. 76). The ISR had complained to his supervisors on “more than one 
occasion” about the difficulty of monitoring a company where the president, owner, 
facility security officer, and information security manager were the same person (Tr. 
113). 
 
The ISR normally corresponds by email. He works a normal 5-day week, and his 
workday ends at 4:30. His Blackberry shuts off at 4:30. He responds to emails received 
after 4:30 during the next duty day (Tr. 101-02). 
 
Applicant’s company received interim accreditation for processing classified 
information in September 2001 (AX L). After a number of discussions with his ISR and 
several modifications of his company’s draft Information System Security Plan (ISSP), 
his ISSP dated December 4, 2001, was approved and fully accredited by DSS on 
January 17, 2002 (GX 7; GX 21; AX M; Tr. 172). Although Applicant held a clearance 
for many years, this was his first experience developing an ISSP (Tr. 172). 
 
The ISSP recites that it was written in accordance with the NISPOM, Industrial 
Security Letter (ISL) 00L-2, and ISL 01L-1 (GX 7 at ¶ 1.1). ISL 01L requires that DSS be 
notified before any changes to an ISSP are implemented so a reaccreditation decision 
can be made. It also requires that classified processing be in an area where authorized 
contractor personnel can exercise constant surveillance and control. It must have an “an 
identifiable boundary (e.g., walls, signs, tape on floor, rope or chains) where it is 
obvious that the area is restricted to only authorized personnel.” The “identifiable 
boundary” for Applicant’s information system (IS) was the living room of his home, 
where he lives alone (Tr. 43).  
 
The ISSP designated Applicant as the ISSM and stated: “Management assures 
that the ISSM is trained to a level commensurate with the complexity of the facility’s 
[information system]. In this role, the ISSM shall carry out all duties as outlined in 
Section 8, 103 of the NISPOM.” (GX 7 at ¶ 2.2.) The NISPOM ¶ 8-103b states that the 
ISSM “[e]stablishes, documents, implements, and monitors the IS Security Program and 
related procedures for the facility and ensures facility compliance with requirements for 
IS.” The letter from DSS approving the ISSP reminded Applicant of his responsibility as 
ISSM “to ensure that any change in configuration, mode of operation or other 
modification is analyzed to determine its impact and to take appropriate action, including 
notification of this office, in order to maintain a level of security consistent with the 
requirements for this accreditation.” 
 
4 
 
 
 
The ISSP “Hardware Baseline” listed one laptop computer, a monitor, two 
printers, and two disk drives (GX 8, Attachment 3). Applicant used the laptop for both 
classified and unclassified processing by switching removable hard drives (Tr. 177). 
 
 On November 20, 2002, Applicant completed an on-line course of instruction 
from the DSS Academy entitled “Essentials of Industrial Security Management” (AX A). 
On December 1, 2002, he completed an on-line DSS course entitled “Protecting Secret 
and Confidential Documents” (AX B). He enrolled in a resident DSS course entitled 
“FSO Program Management” in February 2003 but did not attend the course because it 
conflicted with a scheduled briefing for a project (AX D; Tr. 175). He completed the 
“FSO Program Management” course in July 2003. 
 
 On Sunday, February 16, 2003, Applicant traveled across the country from his 
home to give a four-hour classified presentation to a defense contractor. He had 
prepared the presentation in his home office, the designated site in his ISSP (Tr. 180). 
The host contractor had agreed to provide a classified computer for the presentation 
(Tr. 181). However, on the evening of Friday, February 14, 2003, Applicant was 
informed by the host contractor’s security representative that he had been unable to 
obtain a computer for the presentation, and Applicant offered to use his computer in a 
classified mode if they could not find a suitable computer at the site of the presentation 
(Tr. 182).  
 
Applicant traveled to the site of the presentation with his laptop computer, a 
classified hard drive, and a compact disc classified SECRET. He arrived late at night 
and stored the classified hard drive and classified compact disc in a safe at the host 
contractor’s security office (AX BB). He kept his laptop in his possession, because there 
was insufficient space for it in the safe. He testified he did not think it was necessary to 
store the laptop in the safe because the classified hard drive had been removed and his 
laptop had several security seals on it (GX 12 at 3-4).  
 
 Applicant testified he believed the restrictions on removal of hardware in the 
ISSP applied only to doing classified processing outside his approved work space in his 
office (Tr. 183). He had taken his computer off-site on other occasions, but only with the 
shell of the computer and the unclassified hard drive. He would follow the downgrade 
procedure in his ISSP, remove the classified drive, and record the downgrade in a log 
(Tr. 185). The trip in February 2003 was the first time he had taken his laptop off-site to 
do classified work. He testified he did not contact his ISR for permission because he did 
not think it was necessary (Tr. 186). He also testified he did not contact his ISR for 
permission to bring classified material to the host-contractor’s site because he did not 
think it was required (Tr. 188). In his capacity as FSO, he signed the courier letter 
authorizing him to hand-carry the classified material to the host contractor’s site (AX 
AA). 
 
On Monday, February 17, 2003, after arriving at the host contractor’s site, he 
revised Attachment 2 to his ISSP, entitled “System Identification and Requirements 
 
5 
 
 
Specification, by adding the following sentence: “This IS contains a portable Laptop PC 
used in the Standalone mode for classified presentations and the processing of 
classified acoustic data at [Applicant’s company name] customer facilities capable of 
handling classified information up to the level of secret.” He revised Attachment 3, 
entitled “Hardware Baseline” to add a Sony memory stick. He saved the revisions on his 
laptop but did not print them. He testified he thought it was likely he would need to use 
his computer in a classified mode on the following day, and he used his free time on the 
evening of February 17 to make the changes to his ISSP. He did not consult with or 
notify his ISR about the changes. He denied making the changes in anticipation of 
someone at the host contractor’s site confronting him about his authority to do classified 
work on his computer at that location (Tr. 274-75). 
 
Because of inclement weather, the arrival of the attendees for the presentation 
was delayed and the time allotted for his presentation was cut from four hours to two 
(Tr. 192-93). 
 
On February 18, 2003, Applicant purchased the memory stick listed on 
Attachment 3 and copied his classified presentation onto it (GX 12 at 2; Tr. 198). He 
used his own laptop for classified work because the host contractor had been unable to 
timely provide him with a classified computer at its facility (Tr. 194). He did not notify his 
ISR that the memory stick had been added to his information system. 
 
On February 19, 2003, Applicant provided the Sony memory stick to a host 
contractor employee for use in a host contractor computer during his classified 
presentation. After his presentation, he mailed the Sony memory stick, classified hard 
drive, and classified compact disc back to his office. He hand-carried his laptop, without 
the classified hard drive, authorized by a courier letter he had signed as FSO (AX AA). 
 
On February 26, 2003, Applicant returned to the host contractor’s site. He hand-
carried the Sony memory stick containing his classified presentation and a classified 
compact disc. He used his memory stick in a host contractor’s computer for his 
presentation, and then hand-carried both the memory stick and classified compact disc 
back home on a commercial aircraft. Again, he signed the courier letter as FSO (AX 
CC). 
 
Applicant testified he did not believe the addition of the memory stick to his ISSP 
required reaccreditation, because it was removable media, like a CD or DVD. He has 
since learned that it is considered a hard drive and requires reaccreditation (Tr. 267). 
 
The ISR overseeing Applicant’s company since 2001 testified that accreditation 
is a government function, but that certification can be done by a contractor if DSS 
authorizes self-certification. Authority to self-certify must be requested as part of the 
ISSP, and DSS would determine whether the contractor has the technical experience 
and skills to convince DSS to allow self-certification (Tr. 30-32). The ISR testified that 
Applicant did not have authority to self-certify (Tr. 33, 69-70).  
 
 
6 
 
 
The ISR testified that Applicant’s relocation of his laptop computer and the 
addition of the memory stick were two changes requiring notification of the CSA and 
reaccreditation under NISPOM ¶ 8-104f (Tr. 50-51). This provision requires notification 
of the CSA “when an IS no longer processes classified information, or when changes 
occur that might affect accreditation.” NISPOM ¶ 8-202c provides, “All modifications to 
security-relevant resources (including software, firmware, hardware, or interfaces and 
interconnections to networks) shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with 
procedures prior to implementation.” ISL 01L-1, cited in Applicant’s ISSP, defines 
“security-relevant” hardware changes requiring review and approval as “any IS 
component that contains, or has the potential of containing classified information.” The 
ISR testified that if Applicant was unsure whether addition of the memory stick was a 
“security relevant” change, he was expected to contact his ISR for a ruling before he 
implemented it (Tr. 51). 
 
The ISR further testified that even the “shell” of a laptop, with the hard drive 
removed, is required to be kept within the perimeter of the site documented in the ISSP. 
If Applicant wanted to remove his laptop, even without the classified hard drive, he was 
required to notify DSS and obtain approval to remove it. If he later returned the laptop to 
the designated site, he was required to request reactivation of the prior approval, and 
DSS would determine whether an on-site inspection was required prior to reactivation 
(Tr. 55). The NISPOM ¶ 8-308a requires establishment of safeguards to detect 
“unauthorized modification of the IS hardware and software.” It further provides that 
“[h]ardware integrity of the IS, including remote equipment, shall be maintained at all 
times, even when all classified information has been removed from the IS.” The 
NISPOM ¶ 8-308b provides that “Classified information shall take place in a CSA-
approved area.” Applicant did not dispute any of the ISR’s interpretations of the 
NISPOM or ISL 01L-1. 
 
While Applicant was editing his classified presentation on his laptop on February 
18, 2003, he was asked by the host contractor’s FSO if he was authorized to process 
classified material outside his own facility. The evidence regarding his response is 
conflicting.  
 
During the ISR’s inquiry into the report of Applicant’s security violations in March 
2003, the FSO said she asked Applicant about his usage of his laptop to process 
classified information at their facility. She wanted to know if he had “signed DSS 
approval for his AIS plan allowing usage of that laptop at other facilities for classified 
processing.” She stated Applicant responded, “Yes, I do have approval from my DSS 
rep to use this company laptop at other facilities to process classified.” He also told her 
he had used his laptop to process classified material at other facilities. She asked 
Applicant to provide her with a copy of the DSS approval and he agreed (GX 20 at 14). 
Applicant admitted to the ISR that he said he had DSS approval even though approval 
had not been requested and he admitted misleading the FSO by telling her he had used 
his laptop to process classified material at other facilities because he wanted her to go 
away and stop interfering with his work. Applicant told the ISR that he had never 
processed classified materials on his laptop at other facilities (GX 20 at 5-6). 
 
7 
 
 
 
When the ISR interviewed Applicant, he was not sure Applicant knew he had 
committed a security violation (Tr. 93). However, the ISR came to the conclusion that 
Applicant’s violations were willful and knowing because he created the false document 
purporting to change the ISSP (Tr. 87). The ISR testified the document was false 
because Applicant represented it as having been approved by DSS, when it was not 
(Tr. 90). The ISR concluded there was no unauthorized disclosure of classified 
information (Tr. 109). 
 
In a statement to a security investigator in November 2003, Applicant stated the 
host contractor’s FSO wanted to see a copy of the DSS approval to process classified 
material on his laptop at their site, and he agreed to send it to her. Applicant told the 
investigator he did not remember saying he had used his laptop for classified work at 
other facilities. He admitted being unresponsive to her questions because she was 
interfering with his work (GX 12 at 2). 
 
 In an interview with another security investigator in April 2004, he admitted trying 
to mislead the host contractor’s FSO (VTC Tr. 11-12; GX 18). He admitted telling her he 
had DSS approval to use his laptop at other facilities and had done so in the past (GX 
18 at 2). 
 
In November 2005, another government agency notified Applicant of its intent to 
revoke his eligibility for access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). One of 
the allegations on which the intent to revoke was based was his admission that he 
intentionally misled the host contractor’s FSO by stating he had DSS approval to use his 
laptop at other facilities and had done so in the past. He responded to the notice of 
intent to revoke by stating, “This allegation is true, but there is an explanation.” He then 
described the host contractor’s failure to provide a classified computer, the need to 
revise the presentation on short notice, and his frustration and impatience when the 
FSO challenged him (GX 25 at 5). 
 
At the hearing, Applicant recanted his earlier admissions to intentionally 
misleading the host contractor’s FSO (Tr. 285). He testified the FSO asked if he was 
working on a classified information system and he told her he had DSS approval to use 
his laptop as a classified information system (Tr. 201). He testified he told her he was 
the ISSM and he had revised his ISSP to authorize working with classified information 
on his laptop at other facilities (Tr. 203). He testified he was confused about what she 
was asking for, because she was concerned about two issues—his authority to use his 
laptop for classified work and his authority to use his laptop at the host contractor’s site. 
He testified he did not intentionally mislead the host contractor’s FSO, and that he did 
not tell her he had DSS approval for off-site classified work on his laptop because he 
knew he did not have it (Tr. 214). He testified he did not intend to mislead her, but that 
his intention was “just to go back to work.” He believed he was answering different 
questions than she was asking and he did not understand what she was asking (Tr. 
291). He did not believe he told her he had used his laptop to process classified 
 
8 
 
 
information off-site on other occasions (Tr. 216). He testified the conversation was 
“curt,” and “not particularly” cordial (Tr. 215). 
 
At some time after February 18, 2003, the host contractor notified its local ISR 
about Applicant’s use of his laptop for classified work, and the local ISR notified 
Applicant’s ISR on March 10, 2003. The ISR conducted the administrative inquiry 
discussed above, and he concluded that Applicant knowingly and intentionally violated 
various provisions of the NISPOM, prepared a falsified ISSP, and falsely represented to 
the host contractor that the revised ISSP was approved by DSS. The ISR 
recommended the accreditation for Applicant’s ISSP be withdrawn, but his 
recommendation was not adopted. Applicant’s ISSP was reaccredited in November 
2004 (AX O) and June 2005 (AX Q). 
 
As a result of the administrative inquiry, the chairman of the board of Applicant’s 
company required him to execute a “letter of commitment” to full compliance with all 
applicable security measures, write a supplement to the security regulations applicable 
to the company, provide the chairman with copies of documentation pertaining to the 
processing, storage, and handling of classified information, and to pay a fine of one 
week’s pay, about $1,600. The money was donated to a high school scholarship fund in 
memory of a U.S. Marine killed in Iraq (Tr. 227; GX 14 at 3; AX Y; AX Z). Applicant 
testified he intends to transfer ownership of the company to his brother, the current 
chairman of the board, as part of the mitigation plan to retain his facility clearance (Tr. 
235). 
 
In May 2003, Applicant submitted a revised ISSP adding the Sony memory stick 
to his information system (GX 10, Attachment 8). He had submitted a revised ISSP with 
the authorization for off-site classified work on his laptop, but he removed that provision 
in accordance with his ISR’s guidance (Tr. 223). 
 
In an interview with a DSS agent in April 2004, Applicant admitted he used the 
same laptop for classified and unclassified work and that he took the laptop with him for 
almost all trips, as well as trips to his son’s house, daughter’s house, and his leased 
office space, a total of about 24 times until February 2003 (GX 15). At the hearing, he 
testified he believed it was permissible to remove the laptop from his designated work 
space without violating any rules, so long as he removed and secured the classified 
hard drive. When advised that it was a security violation to remove the laptop from his 
cleared facility, even if the classified drive was removed, he purchased a second laptop 
for unclassified work away from his cleared facility (Tr. 224). 
 
The NISPOM ¶ 1-201 requires that an FSO complete the security training 
specified in the NISPOM and “as deemed appropriate by the CSA.” At the hearing, 
Applicant admitted it was a mistake to delay his training as an FSO. He testified that 
what he learned in the FSO management course could have prevented “almost all of 
this stuff” from happening. He testified he cannot afford to make the same mistakes 
again. He has learned that there are requirements in the NISPOM that are unclear, and 
that he should discuss all changes with his ISR to avoid further mistakes (Tr. 236). 
 
9 
 
 
 
On March 28, 2008, Applicant’s personal security clearance was suspended 
because of a decision by another government agency to revoke his eligibility for access 
to (SCI) (AX T). The basis for the revocation of SCI access included the conduct alleged 
in the SOR (AX U). According to his ISR, Applicant was completely cooperative when 
the ISR came to his home office to clear out his safe (Tr. 85). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
 
10 
 
 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant willfully and deliberately violated the NISPOM by 
accessing classified information on his DSS accredited laptop at a host contractor’s 
facility without prior DSS authorization or approval (SOR ¶ 1.a); he willfully and 
deliberately violated the NISPOM by bringing a classified hard drive to a host 
contractor’s facility and downloading classified material onto a memory stick (SOR ¶ 
1.b); and he deliberately violated the NISPOM by altering classified material by 
obliterating the classified markings on 10 pages of a 50-page document without 
notifying his security manager (SOR ¶ 1.c). Department Counsel elected not to present 
evidence or otherwise pursue SOR ¶ 1.c (Tr. 4). 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline K is set out in AG & 33 as follows: 
“Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for protecting 
classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an individual's 
trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such 
information, and is a serious security concern.”  
The following potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant 
to this case: 
Collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or in 
any other unauthorized location (AG ¶ 34(b)); 
Loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
"palm" or pocket device or other adjunct equipment (AG ¶ 34(c)); and 
 
11 
 
 
Any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information (AG ¶ 34(g)). 
 Applicant’s removal of his laptop from its approved location, use of the laptop at 
an unapproved location, and use of an unapproved memory stick raise AG ¶¶ 34(b), (c), 
and (g). Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise these 
disqualifying conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing “so much 
time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so infrequently or under such 
unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” (AG ¶ 35(a).) This 
condition has three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It can be established 
if “so much time has elapsed,” or it happened “so infrequently” or “under such unusual 
circumstances” that it is unlikely to recur.  If any of the three conjunctive prongs are 
established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the behavior “does 
not cast doubt” on reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The first prong is 
established because Applicant’s behavior happened more than five years ago and has 
not recurred. The second prong is established because the violations occurred on only 
two occasions in February 2003. These were his only security violations during the 40-
year period in which he held a clearance. The third prong is established because the 
violations were the result of a confluence of unusual conditions that are not likely to 
recur: Applicant’s inadequate training for his responsibilities as ISSM and FSO, delay of 
the briefing by bad weather, a requirement to drastically edit the briefing when the 
allotted time was cut in half, and inability of the host contractor to provide a classified 
computer for the editing process.  
 
 The last prong, however, is not established because Applicant’s deceptive 
responses to the host contractor’s FSO, representation that DSS had approved his 
modified ISSP allowing off-site use of his laptop for classified work, and his recantation 
at the hearing of his prior admissions cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. The inconsistency between Applicant’s multiple 
admissions to intentionally misleading the FSO and his recantation of those admissions 
at the hearing means that either his earlier admissions or his recantation at the hearing 
were untrue. Either alternative would raise doubt about his reliability and 
trustworthiness. 
 
 I found Applicant’s recantation of his earlier admissions at the hearing not 
credible. He consistently admitted intentionally misleading the FSO during the inquiry by 
his ISR in March 2003, during an interview with a security investigator in April 2004, 
during an interview with another security investigator in April 2004, and in his response 
to the notification of intent to revoke his eligibility for access to SCI in November 2005. 
The evidence strongly suggests his recantation at the hearing was prompted by the 
 
12 
 
 
revocation of his SCI eligibility and the realization that his security clearance and ability 
to continue working as a consultant were in jeopardy.  
 
 Applicant’s recantation was not alleged in the SOR, however, conduct not 
alleged in the SOR may be considered: A(a) to assess an applicant=s credibility; (b) to 
evaluate an applicant=s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; 
(c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to 
decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) 
to provide evidence for whole person analysis under Directive Section 6.3.@ ISCR Case 
No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). I considered his 
recantation for the limited purposes of accessing his credibility, to decide whether the 
conduct alleged in the SOR casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment, and in my whole-person analysis set out below. 
Security concerns also can be mitigated by evidence that “the individual 
responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training and now demonstrates 
a positive attitude toward the discharge of security responsibilities.” (AG ¶ 35(b).) I am 
satisfied Applicant’s unauthorized use of his laptop for classified work at the host 
contractor’s site and his unauthorized use of the memory stick were inadvertent 
violations. He volunteered the use of his computer when it appeared that a classified 
computer would not be available at the contractor’s site. Because of his limited 
experience and lack of training as an ISSM and FSO, he believed he had authority to 
modify his ISSM. It was not until he was challenged by the contractor’s FSO that he 
realized he might need his DSS approval for remote use of his laptop for classified 
work. I found his explanation for using the memory stick, i.e., that he thought it was 
removable media that did not require DSS approval, was plausible and credible. He 
finally completed his FSO training, obtained DSS approval for his modified ISSP, 
acquired a second computer dedicated to unclassified work, and has had no further 
security violations. I conclude AG ¶ 35(b) is established. 
Finally, security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that 
“the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training.” (AG ¶ 35(c).) At 
the time of the violations, Applicant had completed online courses regarding the 
handling of classified information, and he appears to have complied fully with the 
NISPOM when he transported and secured his classified materials in February 2003. 
Although his ISSP was approved and accredited in December 2001, he still had not 
completed his FSO training when the violations occurred in February 2003.  He 
admitted at the hearing that the violations would not have occurred if he had timely 
completed the FSO hearing. However, while the inadequate training caused the 
violations, the fault lies with Applicant for not timely completing it. Applicant receives 
only limited mitigation under AG ¶ 35(c) because his culpable failure to attend FSO 
training was a major factor in causing the violations. 
 
13 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges the SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c as personal conduct under 
this guideline (SOR ¶ 2.a). It also alleges Applicant deliberately attempted to cover up 
his security violations by falsely stating he had DSS authority to use his laptop at other 
facilities (SOR ¶ 2.b) and by revising his ISSP to authorize using his laptop to process 
classified information at other facilities (SOR ¶ 2.c).  
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows: 
“Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness 
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” A potentially disqualifying 
condition under this guideline can be raised by “deliberately providing false or 
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security 
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative” (AG ¶ 
16(b).) Applicant’s false and misleading responses to the host contractor’s FSO and his 
representation that he had DSS approval for remote use of his laptop for classified work 
raise this condition. 
A potentially disqualifying condition also may arise from “credible adverse 
information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse 
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information.” (AG ¶ 16(c).) While Applicant presented substantial mitigating evidence 
regarding his security violations under Guideline K, his misrepresentations to the 
contractor’s FSO and his lack of candor at the hearing are sufficient to raise this 
disqualifying condition under Guideline E. 
Finally, a potentially disqualifying condition may arise from “credible adverse 
information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be 
sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all 
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information.” (AG ¶ 16(d).) This disqualifying condition 
encompasses “untrustworthy or unreliable behavior” and “a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations.” (AG ¶¶ 16(1) and (3).)  
On its face, AG ¶ 16(d) appears to cover only information “that is not explicitly 
covered under any other guideline.” The Appeal Board, however, has construed AG ¶ 
16(d) more broadly, holding: “(1) it continues the longstanding tenet that specific 
behavior can have security significance under more than one guideline and (2) by 
focusing on the concepts of questionable judgment and irresponsibility, it contemplates 
that behavior will have independent security significance under Guideline E in a broad 
 
14 
 
 
range of cases.” ISCR Case No. 06-20964 (App. Bd. Apr. 10, 2008), 2008 WL 2002589 
at *4. I conclude AG ¶ 16(d) is raised by Applicant’s misleading responses to the FSO 
and his false representation that DSS had approved his modified ISSP. 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant made no 
effort to correct his misrepresentations to the FSO until the host contractor’s ISR 
contacted Applicant’s ISR, who questioned him about the incident. I conclude this 
mitigating condition is not established. 
Security concerns also can be mitigating if “the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). This mitigating condition is 
not established for the reasons set out above in the discussion of AG ¶ 35(a) under 
Guideline K. 
Finally, security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated if “the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant initially acknowledged his misrepresentations to 
the FSO, but this mitigating condition is not established because he recanted his earlier 
acknowledgement of intentionally misleading her. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
15 
 
 
 
 Applicant is a mature, highly educated, very intelligent, very articulate person. He 
has held a clearance for more than 40 years. His security violations in February 2003 
were attributable to his lack of training and experience as a security manager and FSO. 
The organizational structure of his company, although approved by DSS, lacked 
effective safeguards against inadvertent security violations. It made him the ISSM and 
FSO, positions for which he had no training or experience. There is no evidence of 
efforts by DSS to compel Applicant to complete the required training in a timely manner. 
Since the security violations in February 2003, he has taken corrective action, 
completed the required training, and has had no further security violations. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged his misleading comments to the contractor’s FSO and 
attempted cover-up of his violations until another agency withdrew his eligibility for 
access to SCI. He then recanted his earlier admissions, and at the hearing he denied 
intentionally misleading the FSO. While his deceptive conduct with the FSO, standing 
alone, could be considered an isolated incident, his lack of candor at the hearing causes 
serious concern about his current reliability and trustworthiness. Although his lack of 
candor at the hearing is not alleged in the SOR, it may be considered as part of the 
whole person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327, supra. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines K and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on handling protected information, 
but he has not mitigated the security concerns based on personal conduct. Accordingly, 
I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
16 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
