 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-04161 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James W. Green, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by his drug involvement 
and security violations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On November 1, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement; Guideline K, Handling Protected Information; and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on November 27, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another Administrative 
Judge on March 13, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 9, 2008, 
scheduling the hearing for May 21, 2008. Applicant requested that the hearing be 
 
2 
 
conducted in a different location. The case was reassigned to me on April 15, 2008. 
Another notice of hearing was issued on May 20, 2008, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on June 4, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
June 16, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called four witnesses, and offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through R, which were received without objection. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until June 11, 2008, to submit additional matters 
through Department Counsel. One document was submitted immediately after the 
hearing, marked as AE S, and admitted. Applicant submitted three documents after 
June 11, 2008. The documents were marked AE T though V. AE U and V were admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel objected to AE T, a statement by Applicant 
dated June 13, 2008, on the basis that the statement amounted to additional testimony 
by Applicant without affording Department Counsel the opportunity to cross-examine the 
Applicant. The objection to AE T is overruled and it is admitted. The memo from 
Applicant’s counsel is Hearing Exhibit (HE) I; Department Counsel’s memo is HE II.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has a Master of 
Science degree awarded in 1983. He has been with his current employer since 1984. 
He is divorced with three children, ages 22, 20, and 15.1  
 
 Applicant first smoked marijuana when he was in his teens. He continued to use 
marijuana sporadically until about 1982. He was interviewed for a background 
investigation on October 2, 1984, and provided a signed statement. He admitted his 
drug use and stated “I do not intend to ever use any illegal substance again.” Applicant 
was granted a security clearance in about January 1985, and has held once since.2  
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana again some time after October 1984. He 
estimated that he started smoking marijuana again in about 1987. He submitted a 
Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on November 19, 2001. He admitted to using 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 79, 86, 100, 128; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 92, 101-102; GE 1, 2, 4. 
 
 
3 
 
marijuana while holding a security clearance “less than 168” occasions between May 1, 
1985 and May 1, 2001.3  He wrote: 
 
[T]he use was rare and infrequent and more of a spiritual or medical 
nature. I no longer do so. The number of times is an estimated maximum. 
Never was I under the influence during work. I never compromised 
national security or safety of others. I have diligently worked to promote 
the safety and security of my country.4 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation on June 13, 2003, 
and provided another signed statement. He discussed his marijuana use in the 
statement. He wrote: 
 
My drug use involved pot and was used to relax and reduce stress. I live 
where it is not considered a terrible thing. I no longer smoke and have 
found other ways to reduce stress and relax. Meditation and yoga work 
better and provide more clarity of mind. . . I did not get involved with 
growing, transport or sales of pot. If I use pot in the future it would need to 
be prescribed by my doctor.5 
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana again in about 2004. He smoked marijuana 
about once a month until April 2006. He would smoke in his house. Some of the 
marijuana was provided to him and some he purchased. Applicant submitted another 
Security Clearance Application on April 18, 2006. He admitted using marijuana on 84 
occasions between May 1, 2001 and the date of the SF 86. He wrote that the “[u]se was 
rare and infrequent and more of a spiritual/medical nature,” and that he “no longer [did] 
so.6  
 
 Applicant was evaluated on May 23, 2008, by a Doctor of Medicine (M.D.), who 
is certified by the American Society of Addiction Medicine. He found that Applicant met 
the criteria for cannabis abuse without physiological addiction. He wrote: 
 
He and I discussed this, and he recognizes his responsibility in his 
treatment. As such, it is very likely that he can succeed in a program of 
recovery, as highly functioning individuals (doctors and attorneys for 
instance, for whom there is good data) have an extremely high success 
rate in staying clean and sober. Such a program might require [Applicant] 
to be in weekly psychological counselling for 3-5 years, submit to random 
observed urine testing, attend 12-step meetings, and of course, agree not 
to use any mind altering substances. 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 103-107; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
4 GE 1. 
 
5 GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. at 109, 128; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
In summary, I believe [Applicant] has an excellent prognosis for recovery, 
as he clearly understands his need to embrace recovery to put his 
cannabis abuse in the past.7 
 
Applicant stopped drinking alcohol as he is aware that he must stop using all 
substances. He submitted to drug tests on April 15, 2008, and May 12, 2008. Both tests 
reported negative for alcohol and controlled substances, including marijuana. He 
regularly attends Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings and is on track to attend 90 
meetings within 90 days. He is in treatment with a psychotherapist and will meet every 
other month with the doctor who performed his evaluation. He testified that he no longer 
associates with anyone who uses drugs. He stated that he will never use illegal drugs 
again and signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation.8   
 
 Applicant works in a secured area. The area has four doors, each protected by 
two locks. One lock opens with the swipe of a card. The secondary lock is secured by a 
combination. The area also has an alarm system. When Applicant left the secured area 
on the evening of May 25, 2005, the card lock was secured and he engaged the alarm 
system, but he left the secondary lock unsecured. Another employee later in the 
evening did the same thing. No classified information was compromised. Applicant 
received additional training as a result of the security violation.9  
 
 Applicant was the last to depart the secured area on the evening of September 8, 
2005. He set the alarm, but again left the combination lock unsecured on one of the 
doors. There was no compromise of classified information. He was again directed to 
receive additional training.10 
 
 A Security Monitor and Alternate Security Monitor are assigned to the secured 
area each week. Their duties are to ensure that no classified materials are left 
unattended, verify that the safes are secured, verify that the individual room card 
readers are activated to prevent entry, secure the closed area by securing the 
combination spin dial door lock, test the card readers, activate the alarms, and issue the 
last-one-out badge ensuring the area is secured for the night. Applicant was assigned to 
be the Security Monitor on December 5, 2005. He again set the alarm, but left the 
combination lock unsecured on one of the doors. He also failed to issue the last-one-out 
badge. There was no compromise of classified information. He was again directed to 
receive additional training. Applicant has not had any subsequent security violations.11 
                                                          
7 AE R. 
 
8 Tr. at 93, 118-127; AE N-V. 
 
9 Tr. at 82-85,129; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 6-9. 
 
10 Id. 
 
11 Id. 
 
 
5 
 
 Three co-workers and Applicant’s sister testified on his behalf. Numerous 
character letters were also submitted. He is described as honest, intelligent, truthful, 
dedicated, trustworthy, and a man of integrity. His performance appraisals are 
excellent.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 19-77; AE A-M. 
 
 
6 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;   
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.13  
 
 Applicant purchased and used marijuana while holding a security clearance. That 
raises the above potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Three Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 
 
                                                          
13 Applicant was diagnosed with cannabis abuse, which could raise AG ¶ 26(d), “diagnosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or 
drug dependence.” This was not alleged in the SOR and is not considered for disqualifying purposes, but 
will be considered under the whole person. 
 
 
7 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
 Applicant admitted to using illegal drugs up until April 2006. His drug use was too 
recent and too extensive for him to receive the benefit of AG ¶ 26(a). He has not used 
drugs since April 2006. He no longer associates with people who use drugs. He signed 
a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. AG ¶ 
26(b) is applicable. Applicant has not completed a prescribed drug treatment program, 
but he has a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. AG ¶ 26(d) is 
partially applicable. 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information 
is set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and 
 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
 
 Applicant committed three very similar security violations in 2005. The above 
disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
8 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Handling Protected Information security concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 35. The following are potentially applicable: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
There is no evidence that the violations were due to improper or inadequate 
training. AG ¶ 35(c) is not applicable. It has been about two and a half years since the 
last violation. There has not been a recurrence of the problem. There are indications 
from the evidence, including the witnesses’ testimony and statements, that Applicant 
now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of his security 
responsibilities. AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 35(b) have been raised as factors for consideration. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant told DoD personnel on several occasions that he would not use illegal 
drugs in the future, and then went back to using them again while holding a security 
clearance. There is no evidence that he purposely lied in those statements. He simply 
was unable to keep his promises. It is, however, personal conduct that could create a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 16(e) has been established. 
 
9 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Personal Conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable: 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 The discussion under the guideline for Drug Involvement is equally appropriate 
for this guideline. Because of his repeated broken promises that he would refrain from 
drug use, I am unable to find the conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are 
not applicable. Applicant has been open and honest about his drug use and has not 
used illegal drugs in more than two years. This has reduced his vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is applicable.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant used illegal drugs for 
many years while holding a security clearance. On three separate occasions he stated 
he would not use drugs again, and then went back to using drugs. He now states for a 
 
10 
 
fourth time that he will not use drugs again. His assertions simply cannot be taken at 
face value. 
 
Applicant committed three security violations in 2005. Security violations are one 
of the strongest possible reasons for denying or revoking access to classified 
information, as they raise very serious questions about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information. Once it is established that an applicant has committed 
a security violation, he or she has a very heavy burden of demonstrating that he or she 
should be entrusted with classified information. Because security violations strike at the 
very heart of the industrial security program, an Administrative Judge must give any 
claims of reform and rehabilitation strict scrutiny. In many security clearance cases, 
applicants are denied a clearance for having an indicator of a risk that they might 
commit a security violation (e.g., alcohol abuse, delinquent debts or drug use). Security 
violation cases reveal more than simply an indicator of risk.14 The frequency and 
duration of the security violations are also aggravating factors.15 Despite his favorable 
character evidence, Applicant has not met his heavy burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to continue his security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use 
and security violations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 03-26888 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2006). 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 97-0435 at 5 (App. Bd. July 14, 1998). 
 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interest of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
