                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-08219
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
    
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On September 24, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 9, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on
April 8, 2008.  A hearing was held on April 8, 2008, for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny,
or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted
of two exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and two exhibits.  The transcript
2
(R.T.) was received on April 17, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified information is denied.
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of six
documents:  Background Note: China, U.S. Department of State (January 2007);
Intelligence Threat Handbook [Unclassified/For Official Use Only), Interagency OPSEC
Support Staff (IOSS) (June 2004); 2007 Report to Congress, U.S.-China Economic and
Security Review Commission (November 2007); Annual Report to Congress from the
National Counterintelligence Executive on Economic Collection, 2005-2006 (August
2006); Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006, China (March 2007);
Consular Information Sheet on China, U.S. Department of State (March 2007).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 2007); ISCR
Case No. 02-24875 (App. Bd. October 2006).  Administrative notice is appropriate for
noticing facts or government reports that are well known.   See Stein, Administrative
Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause shown, administrative notice was
granted with respect to the above-named background reports addressing the geopolitical
situation in China..  Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves,
consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evi.  This notice did  not foreclose
Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the
reports addressing Taiwan’s current state.  
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged to have (a) a spouse who is a citizen of
the PRC, (b) met his spouse on a web-site in 2005, ©) a step-son who is a citizen of the
PRC; (d) a mother -in-law who is a citizen and resident of the PRC; and (d) a father-in-
law who is a citizen and resident of the PRC.
For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR
with explanations.  He claimed to have initiated first contact with his spouse through an
internet dating service.  He claimed his spouse was already living and working in the
U.S. at the time while holding an H1B work visa.  He claimed his spouse and step-son
are lawful U.S. green card holders who he expects to apply for U.S. citizenship.  And he
claimed his mother-in-law and step-son (who have since returned to the PRC) were
visiting and living with Applicant and his wife when he was interviewed.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 36-year-old quality assurance engineer for a defense contractor
who seeks to retain his security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings
follow.
3
Applicant’s background
Applicant was born and raised in the U.S., and holds bachelors and masters
degrees in engineering from an accredited university.  He has worked for his current
defense contractor for over ten years and has held a security clearance since 2003.  
Applicant’s wife (W), who is 37 years old, came to the U.S. on a work visa in
2003.  W was born and raised in the PRC and attended a PRC university (R.T., at 40-
41).  She and her former spouse (who she met at the university they both attended)
reportedly started a business together in the PRC, which fell apart when they divorced.
To the best of Applicant’s knowledge, W never worked for the PRC government, but did
some work for a PRC controlled television station for several years before she married
her ex-spouse (R.T., at 45). 
Applicant met W on an internet dating service in October 2003 (R.T., at 34) and
dated for about a year before marrying her in October 2005 (R.T., at 34-35).  W left
behind a child to live with her parents when she relocated to the U.S. (R.T.,a t 48-49).
After their marriage, Applicant and W brought the step-son over to live with them (R.T.,
at 36, 47-48).  W has a green card and is pursuing U.S. citizenship (R.T., at 46).
Because her green card expires this year, Applicant will need to provide probative
evidence that W is still with him, and their marriage is legitimate (R.T., at 46).  Once her
green card is renewed, she will need to wait another year to satisfy eligibility
requirements for applying for U.S. citizenship as Applicant’s spouse (R.T., at 46).  In the
meantime, W has applied for the renewal of her PRC passport in her maiden name, and
provided copies of her marriage certificate and green card application (R.T., at 76-79).
While her renewed passport will be issued in her maiden name, it should include a note
that confirms her marriage and her husband’‘s sir name (R.T., at 75-76).  W expects to
pick up the new passport in April 2008 (R.T., at 79-80).
Applicant and his wife have no children.  W has no known benefits (like a
pension).  His wife’s parents are citizens and residents of the PRC (see ex. 1; R.T., at
51-54).  Applicant believes his father-in-law served in the PTC military, but does not have
any specifics about his military assignments during his service (R.T., at 70, 90-91).
Before his recent retirement, his father-in-law worked as a professor in a Chinese school
system (R.T., at 54-55).  Because his father-in-law does not speak English, Applicant
has never spoken to him (R.T., at 91).   Applicant believes his father-in-law receives a
pension based on his military service (R.T., at 55-56), but has no details.  
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a house-wife and does not work outside the home
(R.T., at 52).  Neither of his in laws have a computer at home.  W does speak to her
parents weekly (R.T., at 52-53, 56-57).  Besides her parents, W has a sister who is a
citizen and resident of the PRC.  W speaks to her sister once a month.  Applicant does
not know whether W’s sister is married, or has any children.   He knows she has several
cousins, but does not know of their whereabouts in the PRC.  Applicant is aware of
government monitoring in the PRC and does not foreclose the possibility of PRC
4
government officials monitoring his spouse’s telephone conversations with her family
members.
W has one sibling, a sister who is a citizen and resident of the PRC (R.T., at 58).
Applicant has no knowledge of what W’s sister does for a living.  W speaks to her sister
approximately once a month (R.T., at 58).  W also has uncles and cousins who reside in
the PRC.  But Applicant does not have any information on their identities (R.T., at 59).
Applicant has no reason to believe that any of his family members residing in the
PRC are at risk to pressure, coercion or influence from PRC intelligence or military
personnel (R.T., at 81-82).  While W knows the identity of Applicant’s employer and his
possession of a security clearance, Applicant does not believe W ever identified his
employer or security clearance to anyone residing in the PRC (R.T., at 82-83).  Applicant
expressed concerns, though, about his company’s outsourcing its sensitive equipment
and parts to the PRC (R.T., at 84-87).  
The PRC’s country status
Established in 1949, the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) with over 1.3 billion
people is the world’s most populous country.  Today it continues to undergo rapid
economic and social change.  Political power, however,  remains centralized in the
Chinese Communist Party (CCP) with little indication of any change in the foreseeable
future.  China’s 70.8 million country is authoritarian in structure and ideology and
possesses increasingly sophisticated military forces which continues to transform itself
from a land-based military power to a smaller, mobile, high tech military that eventually
will be capable of mounting limited operations beyond its coastal waters. See
Background Note: China, U.S. Department of State, at 14-16 (January 2007). 
While not a country acclaimed to be hostile to US persons and interests, the PRC
maintains a relationship that is more competitive than cooperative.  The PRC operates a
large and sophisticated intelligence bureau, entitled the Ministry of State Security (MSS).
See Intelligence Threat Handbook [Unclassified/For Official Use Only), Interagency
OPSEC Support Staff (IOSS), at 17 (June 2004).  These operations use clandestine
agents to collect intelligence on Western consortia investing in the PRC who are
suspected of involvement in attempts to democratize the PRC, as well as other pro-
democracy groups thought to be engaging in anti-communist activities.  See Intelligence
Threat Handbook, supra, at 72.
Based on past reports to Congress, the PRC is considered one of the most active
collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information.  See Annual Report to Congress
from the National Counterintelligence Executive on Economic Collection, 2005-2006
(August 2006) The PRC is known especially to use its intelligence services to gather
information about the US and to obtain advanced technologies. See Intelligence Threat
Handbook, supra, at 17.  The PRC actively monitors international communications
satellites from maintained intercept facilities, in addition to collecting information on US
military operations and exercises.  Examples of PRC economic espionage are cited in
5
the Annual Report to Congress from the National Counterintelligence Executive on
Economic Collection, 2005-2006, supra, at 10-12.  Most of the examples of illegally
exported technology to the PRC involved high tech equipment and devices used in
missile and aircraft guidance systems, highly sensitive weapons parts, infrared cameras
and missile microchips. 
 As a corollary of its authoritarian roots, the PRC has never been known for a
positive human rights record among Western nations and international human rights
groups.  Part of this can be explained in terms of the PRC’s lack of any cognizable
tradition for respect for developing democracies and the rule of law. State Department
country reports on the PRC cite the country’s poor human rights record.  Its noted
historical abuses include the suppression of political dissent, arbitrary arrest and
detention, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of prisoners.  See Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006, China (March 2007); Consular Information
Sheet on China, at 1-6 U.S. Department of State (March 2007).
Of growing concern to U.S. security interests are State Department’s latest  reports
of increased high profile cases in the PRC involving the monitoring, harassment,
detention, arrest, and imprisonment of journalists, writers, activists, and defense lawyers
seeking to exercise their law-protected rights.  See  Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices - 2006, supra, at 2-9.  The State Department cites a comprehensive, credible
accounting of all those killed, missing, or detained, reported incidents of deaths in
custody, disappearance, torture, and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment (see id., at 2-3).  While the PRC officially denies holding any political
prisoners, Western non-government organizations estimate that approximately 500
persons remained in prison in 2006 for the repealed crime of counterrevolution, and
thousands of others were either serving sentences or were being detained for counter-
revolutionary offenses (id., at 8).  State Department advisories caution American citizens
visiting or residing in China to take the normal safety precautions and remain aware of
their individual surroundings.  See Consular Information Sheet, U.S. Department of State,
at 2-9 (December 2007).  
In its November 2007 Report to Congress, the Security Review Commission
describes the PRC as a country intent on acquiring and exploiting the knowledge
developed by multiples of collection agents: legally, if possible, and otherwise illegally by
espionage.  See  2007 Report to Congress, U.S.-China Economic and Security Review
Commission, at 104-06 (November 2007).  The PRC’s concerted efforts to acquire
sensitive technology poses a considerable challenge to U.S. counterintelligence
measures.  Recent indictments of Chinese citizens for espionage have served to highlight
the PRC’s spying activities in the U.S. (see id.).  Violating  its own 2004 U.S.-China
agreement, the PRC oft-fails to schedule timely end-use inspection visits of dual-use
items licensed for export to the PRC.  Better export controls can be effective only if they
are multilateral in scope (see id.).  Without effective dual use export controls in place, the
PRC can be expected to acquire dual use technologies with military potential through the
U.S. and other source countries. 
6
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
administrative judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in
E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended to
assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism” (see Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6).
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that
to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in
the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance
depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all
adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the
7
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
ANALYSIS
Applicant is a U.S. citizen by birth who is married to a citizen of the PRC.  Security
concerns focus on  Applicant’s spouse and son from a prior marriage, in addition to her
immediate family (i.e., her parents and sister) who are citizens and residents of the PRC,
a country historically competitive with the U.S., and known for its reported record of
economic collection activities in the U.S and poor human rights protections.
Department Counsel urges security concerns over risks that W’s parents and her
son from a another marriage currently residing with them, might be subject to undue
foreign influence by PRC government authorities to access classified information in
Applicant’s possession or control.  Because W’s parents and sister reside in the PRC,
they present potential heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition  (DC)
7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,”
of the Adjudication Guidelines for foreign influence. The citizenship/residence status of
these in-laws and sibling in the PRC pose some potential concerns for Applicant because
of the risks of undue foreign influence that could compromise sensitive or classified
information under Applicant's possession and/or control. 
Because W’s father has prior military service (although aged for the most part),
some consideration of DC 7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group, government, or
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign
person, group, or country by providing that information,” is warranted as well.  Although
Applicant himself has virtually no contact with his in-laws (in part due to language
barriers), W maintains regular contact with them.  Her contacts afford her some potential
for accessing PRC officials who might be interested in proprietary, sensitive, or even
classified information that Applicant is privy to. It is this potential for information
exploitation that is security-significant; even though Applicant himself has no identified
affiliations or contacts with PRC officials currently known to be associated with
intelligence or military organizations interested in collecting proprietary or sensitive
information in the U.S.
8
To be sure, from what is known from the presented evidence, none of W’s
immediate family residing in the PRC have any political affiliations with the PRC’s
government or military, have any history to date of being subjected to any coercion or
influence, or appear to be vulnerable to the same.  With the exception of W’s father’s
government-funded pension, her parents and sister have no known financial interests
associated with the PRC government. 
Upon fully considering Applicant’s explanations about his step son and W’s parents
and sister, risks of undue foreign influence on Applicant, his step son, and/or W’s parents
and sister, appear to be substantial and ongoing, and clearly of the magnitude that could
make them subject to a heightened security risk of pressure or compromise under
Guideline B.
The PRC, a country reported to have targeted U.S. economic and proprietary
interests in the past, is a powerful communist state with an historically poor history of
respect for human rights and the rule of law.  Not only is the PRC a reported active
collector of economic intelligence in the U.S., but it has been known to use acquired
information to harm U.S. strategic interests.  Still, the PRC remains a pivotal trading
partner of the U.S. and is a member in good standing with the WTO.
The Adjudicative Guidelines governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se
results or mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are
citizens/residents of foreign countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable
risk in one foreign country may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by
practical necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for
referencing in the supplied materials and country information about the PRC. 
Unlike the old Adjudicative Guidelines, the new ones do take into account the
country’s demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in gauging
whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a
heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign
regime involved do matter.  As demonstrated, the PRC has long been known to target the
U.S. and its companies for economic and proprietary information, and remains  a country
with a known recent history of hostage taking or disposition for exerting undue influence
against family members to obtain either classified information, or unclassified economic
and proprietary data. 
As for security concerns associated with the presence of Applicant's extended
family members in the PRC (a country whose interests have recently been and continue
to be competitive with the U.S.), the potential heightened risk of a hostage situation or
undue foreign influence brought in the hopes of eliciting either classified information or
economic or proprietary data out of Applicant through his wife’s parents and sister
residing in the PRC is considerable for so long as they reside there.  In the past , the
Appeal Board has shown great reluctance to absolve applicants of security risks who
have family members of foreign-born spouses who reside in countries (like the PRC) who
present heightened risks.  See ISCR Case No, 01-10128 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2005).  Based
9
on his case-specific circumstances and the Appeal Board’s past guidance in dealing with
applicants with family members who reside in the PRC, MC 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.”  is not available to Applicant.  Neither W (a resident of the U.S. and citizen of the
PRC) nor her parents and sister (residents and citizens of the PRC) can be characterized
as sufficiently insulated from potential pressures and influence from PRC intelligence and
military officials to warrant application of this mitigating condition.
Of some benefit to Applicant is MC 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group,
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty,
patriotism, and professional commitments to the U.S., while considerable, are not enough
to neutralize all potential conflicts that are implicit in his relationships with his spouse, his
step-son and her parents/sister.  MC 8©), “ contact or communication with foreign citizens
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create risk for foreign
influence or exploitation,” has some applicability, too, based on Applicant own infrequent
contacts with his wife’s family members residing in the PRC.  Application of MC 8©) is
necessarily limited, though, because of W’s frequent exchanges with her parents and
sister.
Two other mitigating conditions have mixed application to Applicant’s situation.
MC 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or
organizations from a foreign country,” has some prospective value based on Applicant’s
assurances of reporting his travel plans for the PRC.  But there is really no documented
record of Applicant’s prior reporting of his contacts with members of W’s family to warrant
any more than minimal consideration at this time.  The same holds true with respect to
MC 8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used
effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.”  The extent of W’s
financial interests and expectancies (e.g., inheritance) in the PRC is for the most part still
unknown.  
Whole person assessment is not available either to minimize Applicant’s exposure
to conflict of interests with his PRC family members.  While Applicant is not aware of any
risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that any of his family members might be exposed
to, he acknowledges language barriers with W’s parents and sister and knows little about
their backgrounds and relationships with former associates.  So, in Applicant’s case, the
potential risk of coercion, pressure, or influence being brought to bear on his wife and/or
any of her family members remains considerable. 
10
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's spouse, step-
son, and her immediate family members residing in the PRC are insufficiently mitigated to
permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue
influence attributable to his familial relationships in the PRC.  Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline B.
In reaching my recommended decision, I have considered the evidence as a
whole, including each of the factors and conditions enumerated in E2.2.2 of the
Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
FORMAL FINDINGS
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a : AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.e: AGAINST APPLICANT
 CONCLUSIONS
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
11
