 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-02955 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kevin B. McCoy, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign preference and foreign influence security 
concerns arising from his possession of an Armenian special residency document, 
ownership of investment properties in Armenia, and his relationship and contacts with 
Armenian and Iranian citizens. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing on 
November 8, 2005. On July 13, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security 
concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence).1  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                     
 
 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on October 4, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on December 
19, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 24, 2007. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled on January 23, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, which were admitted without objection.2 Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
and presented 11 exhibits, marked AE 1 through 11, which were received without 
objection.3 DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 29, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.b, ¶ 2.a (in part), and ¶¶ 
2.b - d, and ¶¶ 2.f-i with explanations. He denied ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a (in part), and ¶ 2.e. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old electrical engineer working for a defense contractor. 
He was born in Iran. His family’s ethnic background is Christian-Armenian and he 
considers himself Armenian. In 1977, at age 16, he entered the United States under a 
student visa and has never been back to Iran (Tr. 22). He came to the United States 
seeking educational opportunities. His father paid for Applicant’s travel and educational 
expenses (Tr. 185). Applicant finished his last two years of high school in the United 
States. From 1979 to 1984, he attended a U.S. university where he received a 
bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering (Tr. 94). He was granted asylum in 1984, 
and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1994 (Tr. 21-22). He was issued a U.S. 
passport shortly thereafter.  
 
After college, Applicant worked 12 years as an electrical engineer for a 
construction company. He then worked two years as a project engineer for a U.S. state 
government. Between 1999 and January 2005, Applicant worked as a senior electrical 
engineer for a U.S. corporation, upgrading electrical systems on numerous U.S. 
overseas facilities (Tr. 24-25, 98). To have access to the facilities and perform his job, 
he was issued a secret security clearance in 1999, which was upgraded to a top secret 
security clearance in 2003 (Tr. 26). During this period, he traveled to 28 different foreign 
countries, including Middle East countries using an official U.S. government passport. 
He applied for the renewal of his top secret security clearance in March and November 
2005. 
 
While working overseas (from 1999 to 2003), Applicant owned a house in the 
United States and considered the United States his domicile. In 2003, Applicant was 
2  GE 3 was marked for identification and considered for administrative notice only. 
 
3  AE 11 was timely submitted post-hearing. I kept the record open to allow Applicant time to 
submit additional documentation. Department Counsel’s memorandum, stating no objections to me 
considering Applicant’s post-hearing submission is included in AE 11. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                     
traveling frequently and spending so much time outside of the United States that he 
decided he had no need for his own home. To save money, he sold his home and 
started using his sister’s address in the United States as his home address (Tr. 27). 
 
In January 2005, Applicant’s employer lost his contracts with the government. 
Applicant then entered into a one-year consulting contract with his former employer to 
perform the warranty work required of his former employer for all the overseas jobs they 
performed (Tr. 29). In February 2006, Applicant started working for his current 
employer, the government contractor who won the overseas contracts. He became a 
permanent employee in December 2006 (Tr. 40). Applicant’s employer encouraged him 
to live in Armenia because it was time efficient and cost effective for the contractor. His 
residence in Armenia allowed Applicant to use Armenia as a staging place from where 
to travel to the many different job sites throughout Europe (Tr. 41).4 
 
Applicant’s father passed away in Iran in 1993. He did not attend his father’s 
funeral. He believes he cannot go back to Iran because he left Iran before the Iranian 
Revolution; he is a Christian-Armenian, and he requested asylum in the United States. 
Applicant stated his intent never to return to Iran (Tr. 23). Applicant has no immediate 
family members in Iran. To his knowledge, none of his extended family members living 
in Iran work for the Iranian government, and they are practicing Christians.  
 
Applicant’s mother and two sisters were born in Iran. In 1996, his mother 
immigrated to the United States and became a naturalized U.S. citizen (Tr. 127-130). 
His mother has a brother and a sister living in Iran. Applicant believes his mother has 
contact with her siblings approximately twice a year, usually during the Christmas 
holidays (Tr. 138). However, he claimed not to know for sure since he does not live with 
his mother. Sister “A” immigrated to the United States in 1986 as a refugee. She 
finished college in the United States, became a dentist, and married a U.S. citizen (Tr. 
32-34). Sister “B” immigrated to the United States in 1999 and is in the process of 
applying for U.S. citizenship. She lives with Applicant’s mother and is employed by the 
same university the sister attends (Tr. 34-36). Applicant testified he has little or no 
contact with the Iranian community in the United States. He has no property or any 
financial interests in Iran.  
 
Applicant traveled to Armenia for the first time in 1994. His mother and sister 
travelled to Armenia from Iran to meet with him there. This was the first contact 
Applicant had with his mother since 1977 when he left Iran (Tr. 189). In 2000 and 2004, 
he travelled to Armenia with a friend (a naturalized U.S. citizen from Armenia) and 
stayed in Armenia for approximately 30 days during each visit (Tr. 28, 105, 108).  
 
During his 2004 visit, Applicant requested an “Armenian Special Residency 
Status Document,” which he received in January 2005. The document entitled Applicant 
to some of privileges reserved for Armenian citizens such as the ability to purchase land 
(Tr. 124), to open two bank accounts (Tr. 126), and to travel to Armenia without a visa 
4  AE 1 (Letter from current employer, dated 1/16/2008). 
 
4 
 
 
(Tr. 117). According to Applicant, the “Special Residency Status Document” was issued 
to him because he is of Armenian decent. He was not required to apply for Armenian 
citizenship, or to be an Armenian permanent resident for him to receive the Special 
Residency Status (Tr. 120). Applicant credibly testified he never applied for Armenian 
citizenship, and that he never was considered an Armenian permanent resident. 
Applicant convincingly testified he is a proud American citizen, and that he would never 
relinquish his U.S. citizenship (Tr. 121). Applicant’s “Special Residency Status 
Document” identified Applicant as a U.S. national (Tr. 36, AE 3). 
 
Applicant explained that the “Special Residency Status Document” was not an 
Armenian passport or an Armenian travel document because it could not be used to 
enter Armenia or any other country. It only allowed him to substitute it for an Armenian 
visa provided it was used in conjunction with his U.S. passport (Tr. 55). On numerous 
occasions during his hearing, Applicant expressed his willingness to surrender the 
Armenian document (Tr. 54, 182). On January 29, 2008, at Applicant’s request, his 
company’s facility security officer destroyed Applicant’s “Armenian Special Residency 
Status Document” (AE 12). 
 
Applicant lived in Armenia from January to August 2005, most of the year in 
2006, and from January to May of 2007. Applicant explained he liked the country and its 
people and wanted to explore his ancestral home. In 2005, when he started his 
consulting contract to perform the warranty work required for numerous overseas jobs, 
Applicant decided to expend time in Armenia and to use the country as his home base. 
Staying in Armenia in between jobs was less expensive and more time efficient than 
living and traveling from the United States.  
In October 2005, Applicant met his now wife. An Armenian friend living in the 
United States introduced him to an Armenian resident with the purpose of helping 
Applicant find an Armenian wife (Tr. 99, 101). Applicant felt an Armenian wife would 
have less trouble adapting to his work and travel schedule. His wife worked as a bank 
teller in Armenia. In November 2005, he took his mother to Armenia to meet his fiancé 
and formalize his engagement (Tr. 39). Applicant disclosed to the government 
contractor, and to the government, his foreign contacts as well as his intent to marry a 
foreign person (Tr. 46-47, AE 2). Applicant testified he was told it was okay to marry an 
Armenian citizen because they were from a country friendly to the United States (Tr. 
49).  
 
Applicant married his wife in Armenia in May 2006. She was granted a U.S. visa 
in June 2006 and they traveled to the United States in October 2006. Applicant’s wife is 
currently living in the United States. She has U.S. permanent resident alien status (Tr. 
56, AE 4). Applicant’s wife’s mother and two siblings are citizens and residents of 
Armenia (Tr. 140). Her mother and sister always have been homemakers (Tr. 58). His 
sister-in-law’s husband served two years in the Armenian army (Tr. 144). Since then, he 
has worked in a power plant (Tr. 146). Her brother is an auto mechanic. Applicant and 
his wife have telephone contact with her immediate family members and other relatives 
approximately twice a month (Tr. 148). 
 
5 
 
 
 
In 2005, Applicant bought five real estate properties in Armenia for investment 
purposes, these include:  
 
(a) A condo he purchased in January 2005 for $40,000, with a current estimated 
value of $54,000. Applicant lived in the condo while visiting Armenia. As of August 
2007, when Applicant and his wife left Armenia, the condo has been empty. Applicant 
has been actively attempting to sell the condo with the assistance of his brother-in-law 
(Tr. 159-162). 
 
(b) In May 2005, he bought a $175,000 plot of land with two other partners 
(Armenian born U.S. naturalized citizens). Applicant’s had a one-third share interest in 
the investment. Applicant sold the property in 2007 after receipt of the SOR (Tr. 163-
168). 
 
(c) In September 2005, Applicant bought a $20,000 property. He sold it for 
$37,000 after receipt of the SOR (Tr. 169-171). 
 
(d) In December 2005, Applicant purchased a $27,000 plot of land. As of the day 
of the hearing, the property was on the market for sale. 
 
(e) Applicant also purchased a $34,000 property with a cousin. His cousin is a 
citizen of Iran who has been living in the United States as a permanent resident alien 
since 1999. As of the day of the hearing, the property was on the market for sale (Tr. 
174-175). 
 
Applicant learned about the Government’s security concerns regarding his 
foreign investments and living overseas after receipt of the SOR in July 2007. He 
immediately placed all the properties for sale, and sold two of them between July and 
October 2007. He also gave his wife a power of attorney to sell the properties on his 
behalf so that he could surrender the Armenian Special Residency Status Document 
(Tr. 59-61). Applicant testified his brother-in-law is assisting with the sale of the other 
three properties.  
 
Around 2005-2006, Applicant opened two bank accounts in Armenia to facilitate 
his real estate transactions and living in Armenia. As of August 2007, both bank 
accounts were closed (Tr. 69, AE 6). 
 
Applicant has numerous extended family members (uncles and cousins) who are 
citizens and residents of Iran. He has had no contact with his extended family members 
in Iran since he left Iran in 1977, except for an uncle and a cousin who attended 
Applicant’s November 2005 engagement party in Armenia. Applicant testified both his 
uncle and cousin are practicing Christians. His cousin works as a secretary and his 
uncle a typewriter technician. Since 2005, Applicant has had telephonic contact with his 
uncle once a year during Christmas and New Year (Tr. 74-77). His last contact with his 
cousin was in the spring of 2006. Applicant called his cousin to congratulate her on her 
 
6 
 
 
engagement (Tr. 137). To his knowledge, his mother’s contacts with her family in Iran 
are infrequent. He has no reason to believe anyone in Armenia could exercise any 
influence over him of his wife to force him to act in a way contrary to U.S. interests. 
 
Applicant owns a $532,500 home in the United States which he purchased in 
August 2007. His equity in the home is over $200,000 (AE 11). Applicant also owns a 
vehicle with a value of around $14,000. Additionally, Applicant has liquid assets that 
include approximately $490,000 invested in U.S. bank accounts, IRAs, a retirement plan 
(401(k)), and money market accounts (AE 11). 
 
Applicant’s evidence included two statements; one from the vice president of the 
company he works for, and the other from a senior supervisor, both of whom have 
known Applicant for approximately two years. Additionally, he submitted statements 
from two friends who have known him for over 23 years. In their opinion, Applicant is a 
loyal American citizen who poses no risk to the interests of the United States. All of his 
references provided solid recommendations concerning Applicant’s moral character and 
overall behavior. All of them recommended Applicant for a security clearance. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Armenia is a constitutional 
republic with a developing economy. Historically, Armenia was the first nation to adopt 
Christianity as a state religion. More than 90% of its population is nominally affiliated 
with the Armenian Apostolic Church. Ethnically 95% of the population is Armenian. In 
the 1920, Armenia was invaded by the Red Army and became a Soviet Republic until 
the collapse of the Soviet Union. In 1991, it declared its independence from the Soviet 
Union. 
 
Since then, the United States has made a concerted effort to help Armenia in its 
transition to a democratic form of government and a free-market economy. These 
efforts include providing over $1.5 billion in humanitarian and technical assistance, 
participating in several trade agreements, and closely working with international 
financial institutions to help develop Armenia’s economy. 
 
Armenia’s human rights record is poor. Its government, military and police forces 
do not respect the human rights and freedoms provided for in its constitution. 
Additionally, there are concerns about Armenia’s elections being tainted with 
widespread corruption. 
 
Iran is a “theocratic Islamic republic in which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the 
key power structures.” Iran engages in clandestine efforts to acquire nuclear weapons 
and other weapons of mass destruction (WMD) in defiance of the International 
community, sponsors international terrorism, intervenes in the internal affairs of Iraq, is 
arming terrorists in Iraq, undermines the Middle East peace process, and violates the 
human rights of the Iranian people. The United States and its allies are attempting to 
block Iran’s goals of obtaining nuclear weapons and other WMD and to counter Iran’s 
efforts to destabilize Iraq and other the Middle East countries.  
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                     
Iran is one of the most active state sponsors of terrorism. The United States is 
concerned about the possibility that terrorists could eventually obtain WMD from Iran. 
Iran supports terrorists who attack Israel and Shiite militias who pursue sectarian 
violence in Iraq. Iranian born, naturalized U.S. citizens, should carefully consider the 
risks of travel in Iran because they are still considered Iranian citizens by Iranian 
authorities. Iran does not recognize dual citizenship. The Iranian government has 
harassed and detained dual citizens of the United States and Iran. 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.5 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”6 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
5  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
6  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
8 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under Guideline C the government’s concern is that “[w]hen an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then 
he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9. 
 
Applicant traveled to Armenia in 1994, 2000, and 2004. In 2003, he sold his 
home in the United States while working for a government contractor overseas because 
he was not using it. He was frequently traveling throughout Europe and the Middle East 
as part of his job. In 2004, based on his Armenian ethnic background, Applicant 
requested “Armenian Special Residency Status” to conduct business in Armenia. He 
was issued an Armenian Special Residency Status document that granted him special 
privileges and rights, i.e., to purchase land, open bank accounts, and enter the country 
without a visa.  
 
Between 2005 and 2006, Applicant used his Special Residency Status to open 
two bank accounts, and to buy five real estate properties, albeit for investment 
purposes. Applicant established his residence, and lived in Armenia for most of the year 
during 2005, 2006, and almost half of the year in 2007. The Armenian Special 
Residency Status document, in conjunction with his U.S. passport, allowed Applicant to 
travel in and out of Armenia without need for an Armenian visa.  
 
Applicant’s actions raise security concerns under Guideline C. Foreign 
preference disqualifying condition AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign 
citizenship of a family member. This includes . . . (3): accepting educational, medical, 
retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country, and AG ¶ 10 (b) 
action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American citizen.” 
 
9 
 
 
                                                     
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualification conditions 
in AG ¶¶ 10(a)(3) and 10(b), and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
and prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never 
shifts to the Government.7 
 
 Applicant credibly testified he never intended to show allegiance to Armenia, to 
renounce his U.S. citizenship, or to become an Armenian national. Applicant merely 
wanted to minimize his travel time and improve his efficiency while working overseas for 
a government contractor by using Armenia as a convenient stop in between jobs. 
Concerning the properties, he explained he bought them as an investment. 
 
  AG ¶ 11 provides for six foreign influence mitigating conditions that are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority. 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
 None of these six mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 11 are directly applicable to 
the facts of this case. Notwithstanding, I find that Applicant’s actions after being made 
aware of the security concerns mitigate the Foreign Preference security concerns. On 
January 29, 2008, at Applicant’s request, his company’s facility security officer shredded 
Applicant’s “Armenian Special Residency Status document.” Applicant credibly testified 
he was not aware his investments in Armenia or his living in Armenia could raise 
security concerns. After made aware of the security concerns, Applicant immediately 
moved back to the United States with his new wife, closed his two Armenian bank 
accounts, and began to dispose of his real estate investments in Armenia. He sold two 
of the properties and is diligently attempting to sell the remaining three properties.  
7See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
10 
 
 
                                                     
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 6.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and , 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned, or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.8  
8  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
11 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                          
 
Applicant has frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and/or 
obligation with his wife, and as a consequence with his wife’s mother and siblings. The 
closeness of the relationship between his wife and her family is shown to some extent 
by his wife’s contacts with her mother and siblings. These contacts create a risk of 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that 
Armenian agents or terrorists may exploit the opportunity to obtain information about the 
United States. His connection to her family members also creates a potential conflict of 
interest because his relationship is sufficiently close to raise a security concern about 
his desire to help his wife or his wife’s family by providing sensitive or classified 
information. Applicant also has numerous extended family members (uncles and 
cousins) who are residents and citizens of Iran 
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising these four potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the government. 
 
  Four Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and, 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that Applicant’s favorable information is sufficient to mitigate the Foreign 
Influence security concerns.  
 
Applicant’s close relationship with his wife and his wife family creates a risk of 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. However, in light of Armenia’s history and 
current diplomatic and economic relationship with the United States, I do not believe 
Applicant’s contact with his wife and her family members in Armenia create a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Available information suggests Armenia’s government does not have a history of 
targeting American citizens to obtain U.S. information. Armenia and the United States 
have diplomatic and economic relations, and the United States is currently assisting 
Armenia with billions of dollars in economic and technical aid. Also, there is no evidence 
Armenia’s government has ever collected or is collecting U.S. military, economic, or 
technical information. Under the circumstances of this case, it is unlikely that Applicant 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual or government and the U.S. interests. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has developed a sufficient relationship and 
loyalty to the United States, that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States’ interests. He has lived in the United States for approximately 
31 years, during which he finished high school and attended college. He has been a 
naturalized U.S. citizen for 14 years. Applicant’s mother and two siblings live in the 
United States. All of his financial and business interests were in the United States until 
2005 when he decided to make some investments in Armenia and to live in Armenia for 
his personal convenience and that of his employer, a U.S. contractor providing services 
to the U.S. government overseas. Applicant has established himself as a proud 
American citizen and a successful engineer. He has worked hard for two U.S. 
contractors overseas for approximately nine years, and has established a track record 
of diligent labor. Immediately after being made aware of the government’s security 
concerns, Applicant diligently started the process of divesting himself of the foreign 
bank accounts and investments. More importantly, Applicant immediately returned to 
the United States with his wife to make the United States their home. 
 
Applicant’s extended family members (uncles and cousins), who are residents 
and citizens of Iran, raise a more serious security concern. The nature of Iran’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States. The hostility of Iran to the United States places a 
“very heavy burden of persuasion” on Applicant to demonstrate that his extended family 
members in Iran do not pose a security risk and that it is unlikely he will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of the United States and the interests 
 
13 
 
 
d (b) apply. 
                                                     
of his Iranian family members.9 With its adversarial stance and its negative human 
rights record, it is likely that Iran would target any citizen in an attempt to gather 
classified or sensitive information from the United States. AG ¶¶ 7(a) an
 
Applicant has had limited or no contact or communication with most of his Iranian 
relatives since he left Iran in 1977. He has maintained some contact with the uncle and 
a niece who attended his 2005 engagement party in Armenia. Since then, Applicant has 
had telephone contact with his uncle once or twice a year during the holidays. Overall, I 
find Applicant’s contact with his extended family members is so casual and infrequent 
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation. I 
also considered that none of his relatives work for the Iranian government or military or 
any news media. AG ¶¶ 8(b) and (c) apply. 
 
Concerning Applicant’s financial investments in Armenia, as of the hearing date, 
he owned three real estate properties with a combine value of approximately $115,000. 
He has no other foreign investments. Comparing the value of his foreign investments 
with his U.S. investments, Applicant owns significantly larger investments in the United 
States. These include a $532,500 home with an accumulated equity of over $200,000, 
and approximately $500,000 in liquid assets in a 401(k) retirement plan, IRA, mutual 
fund investments, and bank accounts. I favorably considered that after Applicant 
learned about the Government’s security concerns regarding his foreign investments 
and his living in a foreign country, he immediately placed all of his real estate 
investments for sale, and closed his two foreign bank accounts.  
 
Although the security concern remains because Applicant still owns investment 
properties in Armenia, his diligent actions to divest himself of the investments, and 
moving back to the United States weigh in Applicant’s favor. I also considered in 
Applicant’s favor that his employer, a government contractor, encouraged him to live 
abroad in order to improve efficiency in the delivery of services to the government and 
to reduce financial expenses. Considering the record as a whole, I find the value and 
nature of Applicant’s foreign investments, when viewed in light of his actions and value 
of investments in the United States, are such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict 
of interest and could not be effectively used to influence, manipulate or pressure 
Applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) applies. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 3 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005) (stating an applicant has “a very 
heavy burden of persuasion to overcome the security concerns” when parents and siblings live in Iran).  
See also ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (articulating “very heavy burden” 
standard when an applicant has family members living in Iran).   
 
14 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
Applicant credibly averred his loyalty to the United States, his desire to help the 
United States, and his desire never to surrender his U.S. citizenship. Applicant has lived 
in the United States for close to 28 years and has been a naturalized citizen for 14 
years. When he became a U.S. citizen, he swore allegiance to the United States. He 
finished high school and obtained his college degree in the United States. Since then, 
he has been a productive member of the American society and worked diligently for 
government contractors for close to nine years. Applicant has not travelled to Iran since 
1977 and has casual and infrequent contact with extended family members in Iran. His 
mother and one of his sisters are residents and citizens of the United States. His other 
sister and Applicant’s wife live in the United States and are in the process of applying 
for naturalization. After being made aware of the government’s security concerns, 
Applicant diligently started the process of divesting himself of the foreign bank accounts 
and investments. More importantly, Applicant returned to the United States with his wife 
to make the United States their home.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference and foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    For Applicant 
 
 
15 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
