1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-----------, --------- --------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-03852
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s has substantial delinquent debt that he cannot afford to repay. He
falsified information about his debts on his security clearance application. Based upon a
thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access
to classified information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86), on
October 20, 2005. On August 14, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns
under Guidelines F, E, and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 23, 2007. After being
granted an extension of time to respond, he answered the SOR in writing on October
12, 2007, and requested a hearing before an administrative udge. On November 28,
2007, DOHA informed Applicant that he had failed to admit or deny the allegations in ¶¶
2.a through 2.c of the SOR. Applicant responded again on January 17, addressing
those allegations but failing to formally admit or deny either the falsifications alleged in
those paragraphs or the criminal conduct aspect of them alleged by reference in SOR ¶
3.a. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 25, 2008, and DOHA
assigned the case to me on February 28, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 11, 2008, and Applicant
acknowledged receiving it at least 15 days before the hearing. (Tr. at 12.) During a
three-way telephone conference with Applicant and Department Counsel on March 19,
2008, I denied Applicant’s verbal request for a 30-day continuance. He said he was
scheduled to work on the day of the hearing, but would also be scheduled to work a
month later, so he did not demonstrate good cause for the delay. He did not have
difficulty arranging the time off to attend the hearing, and was ready to proceed. (Tr. at
16-17.)  I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 27, 2008. Department Counsel
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were admitted without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through
E, which were admitted without objection. I granted  Applicant’s request to leave the
record open until April 10, 2008, in order for him to submit documentation supporting his
claims to have made some payment arrangements and paid some of the alleged debts.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 4, 2008. On April 7, 2008,
Applicant submitted a note and copies of two pay record documents, one from each of
his jobs, to Department Counsel. He did not submit any further evidence, and
Department Counsel forwarded Applicant’s submission without objection to its
consideration on April 10, 2008. These documents were marked AE F, and the record
was closed.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom he has
worked, with a security clearance, for 32 years. He and his wife of twenty years were
divorced in December 2003. They have three children, ages 22, 19, and 15. (GE 1 at §§
2, 11, 13, 14(8-10).) 
In his original Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the delinquent
debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1, except for those listed in ¶¶ 1.h and 1.l. The 11 debts to
which he admitted total $105,115.38. Some of these debts became delinquent during
each year from 2003 to 2006. They include a federal income tax debt of more than
$18,000, toward which he is making monthly payments of $234, and a child support
payment delinquency alleged in the amount of $71,477 that had increased to $75,353
by November 2007. His February 2008 credit bureau report (CBR) (GE 8.) showed an
outstanding balance of $69,068 in delinquent child support with monthly payments by
payroll deduction. He testified that he formerly paid $300 per month toward his tax debt,
3
but negotiated the lower amount because it was all he could afford. The only payment
for which he submitted any evidence was one in February 2008. Neither a copy of his
settlement agreement nor his current balance were provided despite a statement that
he would do so. (AE C; AE D; Tr. at 44-47.) 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h resulted from the voluntary repossession of
Applicant’s former automobile. He was unclear about the details of this transaction, but
recalled returning the vehicle to the dealer when he could not afford to make the
payments. He testified that it was a used 1999 Chrysler Sebring convertible, and the
dealer resold it soon after he turned it in. The record CBRs show that he borrowed
$23,219 to buy the car in February 2002. On September 14, 2004, his CBR reported
that he was 60 days and two payments past due, in the amount of $1,679, with an
outstanding loan balance of $21,541. (GE 2 at 1.) After the car sold, Applicant’s
outstanding balance due on the loan was $12,648, which was eventually charged off in
January 2005. (GE 3 at 2.) His reason for denying the debt in his Answer was that he
was trying to settle the matter with the lender, and he supplied no evidence of any
payment toward the debt.
Applicant claimed that he had paid the $384 delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l,
and provided a copy of an offer to settle the debt for $230. (GE 6 at 21.) When
questioned about proof of payment, he said it had been a money order and he had a
receipt that he would provide. (Tr. at 57-59.) He did not provide any proof of payment,
and his most recent CBR shows the debt as an unpaid collection item. (GE 8 at 1.)
Applicant’s second Answer discussed his resolution of the one debt that he had
listed as being delinquent more than 90 and 180 days in § 28 of his SF 86, but did not
address his failure to list any of his other debts that had been or were so delinquent at
that time. His September 2004 CBR reflects numerous delinquent debts that remained
delinquent on his January 2006 CBR, including about $44,000 in delinquent child
support that grew to about $58,000 during that period. (GE 2 at 4; GE 3 at 2.) These
debts should have been listed when he completed his SF 86 in October 2005. When
specifically asked, during the hearing, why he did not list the other delinquencies in § 28
of his SF 86, he stated:
Well, the reason why, because I thought I was meeting some of those
obligations at the same - - at the time, you know. I was getting in contact
with the peoples [sic] and I was trying to make arrangements to pay them.
So it wasn’t like I was trying to - - you know, I might have been delinquent
on them but it wasn’t I was trying not to pay them.
(Tr. at 62-63.) Applicant also responded “No” to the question in § 27 of his SF 86 asking
whether any of his property had been repossessed during the past 7 years. He
explained in his second Answer and in testimony at the hearing that he did not reveal
the repossession of his car because he turned it in before it was repossessed and was
told it would not be reported as a repossession. (Answer, dated Jan. 17, 2008, at 1; Tr.
at 59-61.)     
4
Applicant submitted a letter from his union president and another letter from his
department Chief, both attesting to his consistent and trustworthy performance of his
responsibilities. (AE A and B.) He also submitted a creditor list and proposed payment
plan that was prepared for him by a credit counseling service and included eight debts
totaling $12,274. (AE E.) He testified that he had not implemented the proposed
repayment plan because his available assets are consumed by payments toward his
delinquent taxes and child support. (Tr. at 31, 36-37.) Finally, Applicant submitted pay
records showing biweekly net pay of $851 for Applicant’s main job, and $361 for his
second job, which would average $2,626 per month. His gross biweekly pay from these
two jobs is $3,662, but a combined $1,400 is deducted from that for court-ordered child
support payments, in addition to other taxes and dues. (AE F.) In his personal financial
statement, he listed $2,870 in regular monthly expenses, not including debt repayments.
(GE 6 at 16.) 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
5
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Of these nine different disqualifying conditions, the Government asserted
that two were raised by Applicant’s financial circumstances (Tr. at 82.): “(a) inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
The evidence shows that Applicant has incurred at least 13 outstanding, SOR-
listed delinquent debts totaling in excess of $118,000. His monthly net income falls
about $240 short of being sufficient to pay his reported regular living expenses, which
did not include any debt repayments. These debts became delinquent between 2003
and 2006, with the only demonstrated repayment being small amounts going toward his
$18,000 tax lien and roughly $70,000 in delinquent child support. Substantial security
concerns are raised under both AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The five
potentially pertinent conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
6
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented roof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose during the last five years, and a substantial
number and amount remain delinquent at present. His family budget is such that he
does not have the means to repay them, and is likely to incur additional delinquent debt.
Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to his divorce, but that was more than 5
years ago and his situation has steadily worsened. Applicant offered no evidence that
he followed the minimal financial counseling he sought, or that he has any
comprehensive plan to address his debt. He has not contacted most of his creditors to
arrange repayments despite statements of intent to do so. He said that he disputes the
amount claimed after his car was repossessed, but showed no evidence that he
followed through with the creditor about that liability. There is no indication in this record
that his financial issues are either under control or likely to improve in the foreseeable
future.
This evidence establishes minimal mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through (e).
Applicant remains financially over-extended to a significant extent. He is well regarded
at work, but that is insufficient to overcome other record evidence concerning his
trustworthiness, reliability and good judgment. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
7
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The disqualifying condition alleged in the SOR and raised by the evidence
in this case is:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Given his level of financial and legal sophistication, Applicant testified credibly
that he did not realize the voluntary surrender/repossession of his vehicle was a
repossession that would meet that definition as used in § 27 of his SF 86. Accordingly, I
conclude that his omission of that information was not a deliberate attempt to conceal or
falsify relevant information. However, he obviously understood his obligation to report
delinquent debts under parts a and b of § 28, since he did list one small debt. He
provided no credible explanation for the omission of a very large number and level of
delinquent debt. Based on the evidence, including his demeanor and testimony, I
conclude that he deliberately omitted that information in an attempt to conceal it and
deceive the Government about its existence. He has held a security clearance for
decades, and neither asserted nor demonstrated ignorance of the security significance
of his financial situation.  
Two personal conduct mitigating conditions might apply to security concerns
raised by this deliberate omission. AG ¶ 17(a) (“the individual made prompt, good-faith
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with
the facts”) does not apply in this case because Applicant made no effort to correct his
omission of debt information. AG ¶ 17(c) (“the offense is so minor, or so much time has
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”) also does not apply, since the falsification
occurred on the security clearance application currently under adjudication and it
continues to create doubt about his reliability and trustworthiness. Given his 5-year
history of significant delinquent debt, his willingness to falsify his SF 86 about that
situation establishes significant concerns about his candor, judgment and willingness to
follow rules and regulations. On balance, any mitigating effect supported by Applicant’s
evidence is insufficient to overcome those concerns. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
8
rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying, including: “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses;” and “(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” 18 U.S.C. § 1001
states: 
 
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, whoever, in any matter
within the jurisdiction of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the
Government of the United States, knowingly and willfully--
(1) falsifies, conceals, or covers up by any trick, scheme, or device a
material fact;
(2) makes any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or
representation; or
(3) makes or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to
contain any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or entry;
shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years...
Applicant’s deliberate omission and concealment of his substantial delinquent
indebtedness, as discussed above, constituted a violation of this statute. This, as a
felony, is a serious offense within the meaning of AG ¶ 31(a), and does call into
question Applicant’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Applicant neither asserted nor introduced any evidence that would support application
of any criminal conduct mitigating condition as set forth in AG ¶ 32.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
9
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern involves substantial delinquent debts that he cannot afford to repay, and
falsification about those debts on his security clearance application. Applicant is a
mature, experienced adult who is accountable for his decisions and conduct. His debts
arose over a lengthy period, and persist to date. There is ongoing potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation or duress since he remains financially overextended. 
Applicant’s  good reputation at work and within his union is commendable, but
insufficient in itself to mitigate security concerns arising from his conduct. His
falsification concerning his debts took place on his present application for a clearance,
and was done to conceal relevant negative information. His indebtedness is quite likely
to continue in the foreseeable future. In light of his lengthy indebtedness and continuing
financial over-extension, recurrence of attempts to conceal adverse matters was not
shown to be unlikely.  
On balance, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to mitigate reliability and
trustworthiness security concerns arising from his failure to satisfy debts, history of not
meeting financial obligations, and falsification on his clearance application. Overall, the
record evidence leaves substantial doubts as to Applicant’s present eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations, personal
conduct, and criminal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
10
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:            AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a:                                 For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b:                                   Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c:                                   Against Applicant 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:                       AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a:                                   Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
