                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
         
 
 
  
 ) 
In re: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXX, XXXX ) ISCR Case No. 07-02456 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 ) 
 
 
 
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Foreign Preference and 
Foreign Influence. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 7, 
2004. On September 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines 
C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence) for Applicant. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
 
 2
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 1, 2007. He answered 
the SOR in writing on November 1, 2007, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on November 13, 2007. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 9, 2008, and I received the case 
assignment on January 10, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 16, 
2008, scheduling a hearing for March 11, 2008. DOHA issued an amended notice of 
hearing on February 21, 2008, rescheduling a hearing for March 27, 2008. The hearing 
was held as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered three documents, which were admitted without 
objections as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. The Applicant offered one 
documents, which was admitted without objection as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf. 
 
I held the record open to afford Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
material. Applicant timely submitted one document, which was admitted without 
objection as AE B. DOHA received the transcript of the hearings (Tr.) on April 4, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request Exhibit (Ex.) I(A) that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts relating to Nigeria contained in Exs. I through V. As 
requested and without objection, I took administrative notice of Exs. I(A) through V. Tr. 
17. 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) 
(listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to Nigeria 
were derived from documents offered by Department Counsel under subheading 
“Nigeria” of this decision. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of 
Fact, below.  
 
 
 
 
 3
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR dated November 1, 2007, Applicant admitted the 
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b. through 1.d., and 2.a. and 2.b., but denied the factual 
allegations in 1.a. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old armed security officer. He has been employed by his 
government contractor employer since November 2001. Tr. 46, GE 1. He is a first-time 
applicant for a security clearance and seeks a clearance to enhance his employment 
potential within his company. Tr. 46-47, 62.  
 
Applicant was born in March 1977 in the U.S. to Nigerian parents and as such 
holds dual citizenship with the U.S. and Nigeria. Applicant’s father was completing 
graduate work in the U.S. from 1973 to 1977. Applicant is the second of four children 
born to his parents. Applicant’s older brother was also born in the U.S. in May 1973. 
Applicant has two younger siblings, a sister and a brother, who were born in Nigeria 
after his parents returned home in 1977. 
 
At the time Applicant moved with his parents to Nigeria, he was less than a year 
old. He was raised, educated, and spent his formative years in Nigeria. Applicant 
describes his upbringing in Nigeria as middle class. His father was a university 
professor and recently retired. Tr. 39-40. His mother is a career civil servant and 
expects to retire in the near future. Tr. 41. His father is 64 years old, and his mother is 
57 years old. Tr. 41. Applicant’s parents are financially secure and not dependent on 
him for financial support. Tr. 41-42. Applicant also described both of his parents as 
being in good health. Tr. 65-66. None of Applicant’s family members are agents of the 
Nigerian government. 
 
In 2001, at age 24, Applicant moved back to the U.S. permanently to pursue 
higher education and find a job. Tr. 39. His older brother had previously returned to the 
U.S. to do the same and known owns his own medical equipment company. Applicant 
lives relatively close to his older brother and has frequent contact with him. Applicant’s 
younger sister lives in Canada and is employed as a customer service representative 
for a cell phone company, and his younger brother is a full-time student and lives with 
his parents in Nigeria. Tr. 52-53, 67-68. Applicant estimates he communicates with his 
parents about every two to three months by telephone. Tr. 53-55, 68-69. 
 
Since arriving in the U.S., Applicant earned an associate’s degree from a 
community college in May 2007. He is currently attending college on a part-time basis 
and anticipates earning a bachelor of science degree majoring in business 
administration in 2010. Tr. 56, 60-61. 
 
SOR ¶ 1 alleged security concerns under Guideline C, specifically that Applicant 
is a dual citizen of Nigeria and the U.S., that he possesses a Nigerian passport, that he 
used his Nigerian passport in 2004 in lieu of his U.S. passport when traveling to Nigeria, 
 
 4
                                                          
and maintains a bank account in Nigeria with a balance of approximately $1,500.00. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.d.) Noted above, Applicant was born in the U.S. to Nigerian parents 
and returned to Nigeria with his parents as a very young child. As such, Applicant’s dual 
citizenship is based solely on his parents’ citizenship. Applicant categorically stated he 
would be willing to renounce his Nigerian citizenship. Tr. 59-60. Applicant’s parents 
obtained Nigerian and U.S. passports for him when he was a minor. Applicant 
surrendered his Nigerian passport to his Facility Security Officer on March 11, 2008. AE 
A. Applicant stated at the time he used his Nigerian passport in 2004 when traveling to 
Nigeria, he was unaware that such use was a security concern. He closed his Nigerian 
bank account, which he estimated had a balance of approximately $600 to $700, on 
April 8, 2008. AE B, Tr. 57-59, 70. 
 
Since moving to the U.S. in 2001, Applicant has visited Nigeria in August 2004 
and December 2005. Tr. 50. Both visits were to visit family and a woman he had met in 
December 1999 while a student in Nigeria, who would later become his wife. He 
became engaged during his December 2005 visit. Tr. 24-25.  
 
Applicant married his fiancée in the U.S. in September 2006. His wife came to 
the U.S. in July 2006 on a fiancée visa and has a two year “conditional green card.” Tr. 
24.  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and five siblings live and reside in Nigeria. Her father 
passed away when she was nine years old. Tr. 26-27, 33. She communicates with her 
family in Nigeria by telephone about every two weeks. Tr. 35. None of her family 
members are agents of the Nigerian government. Applicant’s wife currently attends a 
community college where she is studying English as a Second Language (ESL). Upon 
completion of her ESL coursework, she plans to pursue a nursing degree. Tr. 23. Her 
stated intention is to become a U.S. citizen when eligible. Tr. 31. 
 
All of Applicant’s assets are in the U.S. He is registered to vote in the U.S. and 
exercises all rights of citizenship. Tr. 63-64. 
 
Nigeria1  
 
Nigeria is a federal republic composed of 36 states and a capital territory. The 
government’s human rights record is poor, and government officials at all levels commit 
serious abuses including politically motivated and extrajudicial killings, torture, arbitrary 
arrest and detention, infringement on privacy rights, freedom of speech, and press. 
Areas of the country are marked by serious instability and outbreaks of armed conflict 
between religious, political, and ethnic factions. The lack of law and order in the country 
poses considerable risks to travelers. 
 
The Nigerian government provides strong diplomatic support to U.S. government 
counter-terrorism efforts. It has condemned terrorist attacks against the United States 
and supported military actions against the Taliban and Al-Qaida. It also has played a 
leading role in forging an anti-terrorism consensus among states in their region. The 
1 The contents of the Nigeria section are from Exs. I(A) through V. 
 
 5
                                                          
United States provides the people of Nigeria with substantial financial assistance in 
areas such as public health, education, and in their efforts of developing effective 
institutions of democratic governance. Nigeria is an important trading partner of the 
United States. There is no evidence of economic competition with the United States, or 
that Nigeria has or ever had an intelligence gathering program targeting U.S. economic, 
industrial, or military critical technologies.  
 
Policies 
 
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge must 
consider the “Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information” (Guidelines). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each 
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines are divided into Disqualifying Conditions (DC) and 
Mitigating Conditions (MC), which are used to determine an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. Guideline ¶ 2. An administrative judge’s over-
arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. Because the 
entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole 
person concept,” an administrative judge considers all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
Guideline ¶ 2(c). 
 
 Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at Guideline ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
  
 Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the 
final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” Guideline ¶ 2(b). In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”2 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
 2 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might 
accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the 
record.” ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ 
 
 6
                                                                                                                                                                                          
a case which demonstrates, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to 
classified information. Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a 
disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant to present “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving 
a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 
5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).3 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions under this Directive include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
  
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism.  Executive Order 10865, § 7.  
 
Analysis 
  
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Guideline ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern about “foreign contacts and 
interests” stating, “if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he 
 
E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of 
drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] 
finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime 
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 
380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
3 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both 
favorable and unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light 
of pertinent provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his 
burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.”  ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. 
July 6, 2006).  
 
 
 7
                                                          
or she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or 
coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the 
foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information 
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” 
 
Guideline ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and,  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.4 Applicant has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and/or obligation with his parents and brother, who are resident 
citizens of Nigeria. These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation because there is always the possibility that Nigerian agents or criminals 
may exploit the opportunity to obtain information about the United States. His 
connection to his family members also create a potential conflict of interest because his 
relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to help 
them by providing sensitive or classified information. Applicant’s wife is a Nigerian 
citizen who is a resident alien and intends to file for U.S. citizenship at the earliest 
opportunity.  
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising these three potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. As previously indicated, the burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
4 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-
0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 8
                                                          
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and, 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant established “it is unlikely [he] will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of [his parents and brother] and the interests of the U.S.” 
His frequent contacts and close relationship with his family do not establish that he 
could potentially be forced to choose between the United States and Nigeria. He did 
meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationship with his family] 
could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  The closeness of the 
relationship is shown by Applicant’s telephone contacts with his parents, and his travels 
to Nigeria.  I do not believe Applicant’s relationship with his parents and younger brother 
in Nigeria creates a heightened risk for foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
 In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Nigeria’s form of government.5 Nigeria is a developing country that, so far, 
possesses no intelligence, economic, or industrial threat to the United States. 
Notwithstanding Nigeria’s poor human rights record, there is no evidence its 
government seeks classified and industrial/economic information from the United 
States. Nor is there evidence of the Nigerian government mistreating relatives of U.S. 
citizens or U.S. citizens to obtain such information. Additionally, given the existing 
relationship between the governments of the United States and Nigeria, it is unlikely 
Nigeria would risk losing an important trading partner and the financial support of the 
United States. 
 
 5 The focus is not the country or its people, but its rulers and the nature of the 
government they impose. This approach recognizes that it makes sense to treat each 
country in accordance with the level of security concern or threat it presents to the United 
States.  
 
 
 9
It is noted Applicant’s father is retired and his mother plans to retire soon, and his 
family live a low key life in Nigeria. The evidence did not show any connection between 
Applicant’s parents and the internal ongoing problems in Nigeria. They are financially 
independent and Applicant does not provide them with financial support. 
 
Applicant and his in-laws do not appear to have a particularly close relationship 
and what relationship he has is a vicarious one through his wife. No evidence was 
developed suggesting his relationship with his mother-in-law or in-laws was anything 
other than casual and infrequent. His limited and infrequent contacts do not present a 
security concern placing Applicant in the unlikely position of having to choose between 
his in-laws and the interests of the United States.  
 
Guideline ¶ 8(b) applies because Appellant is sufficiently vested through family, 
personal property, and socialization in the U.S.  As such, he is expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. Although raised in Nigeria, he and his 
older brother chose to take up permanent residency in the U.S. when they reached 
adulthood. He has lived in the United States since 2001. He and his older brother are 
native born U.S. citizens. Applicant has earned his associate’s degree in the U.S. and is 
working towards his bachelor’s degree. His older brother owns his own business in the 
U.S. and lives relatively close to Applicant. His contacts and linkage to the U.S are 
greater than his linkage to Nigeria as demonstrated by to his permanent return to the 
U.S. in 2001. He has staked his future on his life in the U.S. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Guideline ¶ 9 explains the Government’s concern  “[w]hen an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then 
he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the Unites States.” 
 
 Guideline ¶ 10 indicates one condition that raises a security concern and is 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
 Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 11 are 
potentially applicable to this disqualifying condition: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
 10
                                                          
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.  
 
 Applicant submitted documentation confirming he surrendered his Nigerian 
passport to his Facility Security Officer. He also expressed a willingness to renounce his 
Nigerian citizenship. At the time he used his Nigerian passport when traveling to Nigeria 
in 2004, he was unaware such use had the potential to create a later security concern. 
When he became aware his holding a Nigerian passport was a security concern, he 
promptly surrendered it to his Facility Security Officer. Applicant also closed his Nigerian 
bank account. AGs 11(a) through (e) are applicable. In light of Applicant’s affirmative 
steps to comply with the Directive and explanations provided, this concern is deemed 
mitigated. 
 
Whole Person Analysis  
 
 In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to 
the whole person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole person concept, 
the Administrative Judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life 
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
circumstances.”6 The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) which are 
used for “whole person” analysis.  Because foreign influence does not involve 
misconduct, voluntariness of participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the 
eighth APF, “the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ 
E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this adjudication.7 In addition to the 
eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”  
Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  Ultimately, the clearance decision is “an overall common sense 
determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3.     
 
 The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
6 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 
02-01093 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 
2007) (citing Raffone v. Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate 
events may have a significance that is missing when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an 
analysis under the eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was 
sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is 
eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of 
clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for exploitation”), but see 
ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that eighth APF 
is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
 
 11
                                                          
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs towards grant of Applicant’s security 
clearance. He is a U.S.-born citizen and returned to the U.S. as a young adult to attend 
college and has lived continuously in the U.S. for seven years. His older brother is also 
U.S-born resident citizen.  His father is retired and his mother is about to retire, and his 
family in Nigeria lead a low key life. His ties to the United States are stronger than his 
ties to family members in Nigeria. There is no evidence he has ever taken any action 
which could cause potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United 
States seriously, and he has worked diligently for a government contractor since 
November 2001. There is nothing in the record to suggest he is anything but a loyal, 
trustworthy, conscientious, responsible, and a mature individual, who is making a 
contribution to society and the U.S. No derogatory evidence was presented which 
supported denial of his security clearance nor was any derogatory information 
presented about him. Applicant has fully cooperated in the process and taken all 
reasonable and achievable steps to mitigate security concerns raised.  
    
 “Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it 
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by 
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990).  After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence and foreign preference.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”8 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has 
not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he 
is eligible for access to classified information.        
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant    
Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
8 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006). 
 
 12
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
