1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-05425
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Thomas S. Hartzell, Esquire
                           
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information must be denied.
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November 9,
2005. On October 9, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 25, 2007. He answered
the SOR in writing through counsel on December 1, 2007, and requested a hearing
AE A through U are attached to his response to the SOR. AE V was not admitted into evidence.1
2
before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request in early December 2008.
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on December 20, 2008. DOHA assigned
this case to another administrative judge on December 27, 2007. For case load
management, this case was transferred to me on January 9, 2008. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on January 22, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on
February 13, 2008. The government offered two exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were
received and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and two witnesses
testified on his behalf. He submitted ten exhibits (AE) V through EE, which were
received and marked. AE W through EE were admitted into evidence without objection.1
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice on April 1, 2008. (Tr. 6-7.) At the hearing, I
advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before
the hearing. After consulting with counsel, Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15
days notice. (Tr. 6-7.) 
Motion to Amend SOR
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding the following
allegations:
¶ 1.l “Your three brother-in-laws and one sister-in-law are citizens and
residents of Syria.”
¶ 1.m “Your two sister-in-laws are citizens of Syria and residents of
Kuwait”
 
(Tr. 127-131, 134).
Applicant’s counsel objected to the motion, arguing that Department Counsel had not
shown attenuation and lack of notice for failing to raise the allegation sooner. He also
argued that the lack of notice denied Applicant his due process rights. 
I granted Department Counsel’s request to amend the SOR and allowed the
parties additional time to develop the evidence as noted above. Tr. 131-133,165.
Applicant’s counsel decided to file a written response to the new allegations. On March
4, 2008, I received the response and three additional exhibits, which have been marked
and admitted as AE FF through HH. Department Counsel requested additional hearing
testimony from Applicant. DOHA issued a second Notice of Hearing on March 19, 2008.
I convened the second hearing as scheduled on April 10, 2008. DOHA received the
transcripts of the hearing (Tr.) on February 22, 2008 and April 18, 2008 respectively.
GE 1 (Applicant’s security clearance application, dated November 14, 2005) at 2, 9, 32-33; Tr. 86-88.2
GE 1, supra note 1, at 2-4, 8, 14-16, 21-22; AE HH (Daughter’s birth certificate).3
GE 1, supra note 1, at 19-28; Tr. 43-46, 54-79.4
3
Department Counsel submitted a written closing on April 24, 2008. Applicant’s counsel
submitted written closing argument on May 8, 2008. Department Counsel did not submit
any rebuttal argument. The record closed on May 15, 2008.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to Syria, Kuwait and Qatar, but withdrew its request that I take
administrative notice of certain facts related to Saudi Arabia. (Tr. 13-18, 133-135.) The
request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence, but were
included in the record as Administrative Exhibit I through XIII. Applicant’s counsel
argued that the facts administratively noticed must be limited to matters of general
knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute.  The facts administratively
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated December 1, 2007, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.e, and 1.g-1.j of the SOR, with explanations. He
denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.f and 1.k of the SOR. He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.  
Applicant, who is 44 years old, works for a Department of Defense contractor, as
an electrical engineer. He began his employment with this contractor in August 2005.
He completed his security clearance application shortly thereafter. Applicant previously
held a security clearance in the late 1990s without incident.    2
Applicant was born and raised in Syria. He immigrated to the United States
(U.S.) in 1984 at the age of 20. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1990. He
travels on his U.S. passport. He attended a major university in the U.S., from which he
received a Bachelor of Science degree in electrical engineering in 1995. He married his
present wife in 1997 and has three children, two sons and a daughter. His children are
U.S. citizens by birth and his wife is a naturalized citizen. 3
Applicant’s father became a U.S. citizen in 2004. He was born and raised in Syria
and retains his Syrian citizenship. Applicant’s mother, eight brothers, and two sisters
were born in Syria and are citizens of Syria. One brother lives and works in Qatar as a
chef. His other siblings live and work in Syria.  4
Id.5
Tr. 97-102, 109.6
Id. 54-79, 90.7
AE A through AE K; AE L (Letter, dated August 16, 2006); AE N through AE U.8
4
One of Applicant’s sisters works as a secretary for the Syrian government and
one brother works as an escort to foreign trucks, which travel through Syria from Turkey
to Jordan. His father worked as an attorney for the Syrian government. His father retired
from his government position and receives a pension from the Syrian government.  His
mother is a homemaker. His other sister is a homemaker married to a medical doctor.
Two brothers are medical doctors, one brother is a music teacher, one brother works as
a laboratory technician in a hospital, and two brothers are in the restaurant business.5
Under Syrian law, men are required to serve in the military. In the alternative,
men can pay a specific monetary amount not to serve in the military. Applicant’s father
never served in the military because he paid the required fee. Four of Applicant’s
brothers served in the military for the minimum required service. None of his immediate
family members made the military a career. Under a Syrian presidential law, Applicant
was not required to serve in the Syrian military when he visited Syria for a few months.6
Applicant paid the costs of medical school for two brothers. He talks with his
parents on the telephone twice a month. When he calls, he may talk with one of his
siblings who live with his parents or are visiting. His telephone conversations with his
siblings occur one to two times a year on birthdays and holidays. He does not regularly
talk with his siblings, especially those who live away from his parents home. His family
does not know where he works or what type of work he does as he does not discuss his
work with his family when he visits them.  7
Applicant’s father wants to bring Applicant’s mother and siblings to the United
States. Several of Applicant’s brothers have applied for visas to come to the U.S., but
the U.S. consulate denied their requests because Applicant lived in the U.S. and the
consulate expressed concern that Applicant’s family members would not return to Syria.
Applicant’s father filed a request to immigrate to the U.S. on behalf of Applicant’s
mother in 2007 and all his siblings in 2006. The U.S. has not acted on the family’s
request to immigrate to the U.S.8
Applicant’s mother-in-law, father-in-law, three-brothers-in-law, and three sisters-
in-law were born in Syria and are citizens of Syria. Except for two sisters-in-law who live
in Kuwait, his in-laws all live in Syria. His mother-in-law visited in 1999 to be with her
daughter when their first child was born. None of his other in-laws have visited the U.S.
and have not demonstrated an interest in moving to the U.S. Applicant’s wife talks with
her parents by telephone once a month. She talks with her siblings one or two times a
year, when the sibling happens to be at her parents home. For a few months earlier this
year, Applicant’s wife communicated with one sister by e-mail on a frequent basis,
Tr. 137-146.9
Id. 27-40, 158-162.10
5
discussing children and babies. His wife started limiting the frequency of these
communications because she had too much work to do at home raising her children.
Applicant traveled to Syria in 1997 to marry. He also traveled to Syria in 2000
and 2001 to visit his family and to introduce his family to his children. He attended the
wedding of one of his brothers in Syria in 2003 and his sister-in-law’s wedding in 2004.
Each trip, he remained in Syria three to four weeks, except in 2004 when he remained
in Syria for three months. Just before this trip, his then employer laid him off. He has not
traveled to Syria since 2004. During these trips, he visits with all his family members in
Syria and with his in-laws.9
Applicant’s present supervisor and his section head testified on his behalf. Both
have or do interact with Applicant at work, but not outside of work. Both recommend him
for a security clearance.10
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Syria has an authoritarian
government. Although the government has not formally stated support for Hezbollah or
other terrorist groups, the government allows terrorist groups to establish their base of
operations in Damascus and permits the entry of volunteer militant fighters into Syria. It
allows Iran and other countries to transport weapons through its countryside to terrorists
groups in nearby countries. In 2004, Syria began to scrutinize Arab males entering at
the border. Syria treatment of arrested political activists and political detainees does not
meet international human rights standards. Evidence regarding Syria’s treatment of
ordinary citizens does not exist. The evidence of record does not show or even hint at
mistreatment of ordinary citizens. The U.S. and Syria have an uneasy relationship
because of differences in policy over conflicts in the middle east. Currently, direct aid to
Syria is banned.
Qatar became an independent state in 1971 and is a constitutional monarchy.
The Qatar constitution provides its citizens with rights similar to those given to U.S.
citizens. Freedom of the press is not the same as in the U.S., with the government
maintaining tight controls over the media, but not individual expression of views.
Women are allowed to run for elected office. Qatar and the U.S. have a strong and
expanding relationship.
Kuwait is an oil-rich constitutional, hereditary emirate ruled by princes. Kuwait
held free and fair elections in which women participated in 2006. Kuwait has many
government sponsored social programs. Since 1991, Kuwait and the U.S. have had a
strong relationship. Kuwait is an important partner against international terrorism,
although it is reluctant to confront domestic extremists. Foreign workers comprise ninety
percent of Kuwait’s labor force.
6
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
7
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in
AG & 6:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism. 
Under the potential disqualifying conditions described in AG ¶ 7, the following
conditions could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
Applicant has a large family in Syria. He maintains a normal personal relationship
with his family members who reside in Syria. His wife also maintains a normal personal
relationship with her family in Syria. These relationships are not per se a reason to deny
Applicant a security clearance. The government must establish that these family
relationships create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion or would create a potential conflict of interest between his
obligations to protect sensitive information and his desire to help his family members.  
In determining if a heightened risk exists, I must look at Applicant’s relationship
and contacts with family members as well as the activities of the governments of Syria,
Kuwait, and Qatar. See ISCR Case No. 07-05809 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008). Applicant
ISCR Case No. 07-02485 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008); ISCR Case No. 07-02715 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 11
8
paid for two brothers to go to medical school at a time when he had the financial
resources. He regularly talks with his parents. He talks with his siblings when they are
visiting his parents or answer the telephone when he calls. He and his wife visited family
in Syria four times between 1999 and 2004. During these visits, they saw all his and her
family members, except for family members who were living outside of Syria. His wife
maintains regular contact with her family members. The contacts with family outside
Syria are generally more limited. The governments of Qatar and Kuwait do not support
terrorism and the active collection of intelligence or proprietary information. I do not find
a heightened concern exists as to Applicant’s family members in Qatar and Kuwait.
However, given the frequency of Applicant and his wife’s contacts with their
family members in Syria and Syria’s strong support of terrorist activities, the government
has established the existence of a heightened risk that the government of Syria could
place pressure on Applicant to provide classified information by threatening harm to his
family members. AG ¶ 7 (a), (b), and (d) apply.11
In deciding if Applicant has submitted evidence of mitigation, under AG ¶ 8 (a), I
must consider: 
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual,
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.
and under AG ¶ 8(b), I must consider if
 
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests
Applicant’s maintains a normal relationship with his family members. While this
relationship is not a basis to deny him a security clearance, his burden of proof on
mitigation requires more than statements about the limited scope of his conversations
with family members and family members lack of knowledge about his employment.
Two of his family members work for the Syrian government, a factor which works
against mitigation. His father receives a pension from the Syrian government, another
factor which supports a finding against mitigation.  Because the Syrian government
provides financial resources to these individuals, it raises the possibly that the Syrian
government could pressure them for classified information from Applicant, should it
learn about Applicant’s work.
9
Finally, ¶ 8 (c) permits mitigation if the “contact or communication with foreign
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk
for foreign influence or exploitation.” Applicant’s twice a month contacts with his parents
are not casual and infrequent. In contrast, his once or twice a year contacts with his
siblings qualify  as casual and infrequent. His very short and brief telephone calls with
his in-laws are casual, but may not be infrequent. His wife’s contacts with her parents
and at least one sister are not casual and infrequent.  He does visit with all family
members who live in Syria when he travels to Syria. Overall, his contacts and his wife’s
contacts with family members do not allow for mitigation. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. After arriving in the U.S. in 1984.
Applicant chose to remain in this country. Applicant became a U.S. citizen nearly 19
years ago. During his more than 23 years as a U.S. resident and citizen, he has
complied with its laws and lived a quiet and unassuming life. His children are U.S. born
and raised. His wife is now a U.S. citizen. He clearly has established strong connections
to the U.S. His work recommends him for a clearance, an indication of their trust in him.
His family in Syria, however, remains a serious concern, particularly since Syria
strongly supports the terrorist activities in the middle east. Syria and the U.S. have a
strained relationship because of their differing policies towards terrorist. Three of
Applicant’s family members rely on the Syrian government for income, a fact which the
Syrian government could use to coerce them into forcing Applicant to reveal classified
information. Applicant’s father applied for immigrant status for all his children in 2006
and his wife in 2007. The U.S.  government has not yet approved the family’s request to
immigrate.  As long as Applicant’s family remains in Syria, a concern exists about the
10
ability of the Syrian government to coerce, pressure or exploit Applicant. His contacts
with his family reflect a close personal relationship with his family in Syria, which is
sufficient to raise security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
