                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-09452
SSN: ---------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Brian Cruz, Esquire, 
McKenna Long & Aldridge
June 23, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(eQip), on August 14, 2006.  On November 3, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guidelines B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on November 21, 2007, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on March 20, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on March 27, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for April 22, 2008.  At the hearing the Government presented
two exhibits.  The Applicant presented twenty-two exhibits and testified on his own
behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on May 5, 2008.  Based upon a review
of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
2
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political conditions in Taiwan.  Applicant had no
objection.  (Tr. p. 27).  The request and the attached documents were not admitted into
evidence but were included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out
in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 52 years of age and has a Masters Degree
in Electrical Engineering.  He is employed as a Corporate Engineer for a defense
contractor.  He seeks a security clearance in connection with his employment in the
defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Taiwan in 1955.  He came to the United States in
1983, at the age of twenty-eight in pursuant of higher education.  He received his
permanent residence in 1985, and became a United States citizen in October 1991.
(Applicant’s Exhibit E).  He currently possesses a valid United States passport.  In 1983,
he married a woman from Laos who has since become a United States citizen.
(Applicant’s Exhibit F).  She is employed as a United States Postal worker.  (Tr. p. 39).
They have two children who were born in the United States.  One is attending an Ivy
League University, the other is still in high school.  The Applicant, his wife, and his
children are committed to the American way of life and have made it their permanent
home.     
The Applicant’s mother was a resident and citizen of Taiwan.  She passed away
in April 2007.  (Applicant’s Exhibit V).  While she was alive, at times, the Applicant sent
as much as $3,000.00 a year to assist in his mother’s living expenses.  When she died,
he inherited nothing.        
The Applicant has two living family members in Taiwan; a younger brother and
older sister.  His brother manages and teaches courses at a private night school.  (Tr. p.
44).  He has no knowledge that the Applicant is applying for a security clearance.  He is
married and his wife is a high school teacher.  (Tr. p. 45).  The Applicant’s sister is a
retired housewife.  (Tr. p. 47).  Her husband runs a small window shop of produce and
noodles. They receive no benefits what so ever, nor do they participate in any political
activities concerning the Taiwanese Government.  (Tr. p. 48).  The Applicant is not
close to his siblings, and speaks to them on holidays, only once or twice a year.  (Tr. p.
46).   
3
Over the past ten years, the Applicant traveled to Taiwan on four separate
occasions.  The purpose for each of the four trips involved his mother’s health.  He
traveled to Taiwan in 1998, 2006, in April 2007, to attend his mother’s funeral, and in
March 2008 to memorialize the one year anniversary of his mother’s death.  On each of
these trips, he reported to his security department that he was traveling to Taiwan.  (Tr.
p. 50).  
The Applicant understands the responsibilities associated with holding a security
clearance.  He has also received a Foreign Travel Defensive Security Briefing and
understands the unique responsibilities associated with his job.  (Applicant’s Exhibit U).
Furthermore, he indicated that if he were ever approached by anyone seeking
information from him of any sort, he would report it to the proper authorities, (his
security department) and to the American consulate.  (Tr. pp. 49 and 52)
The Applicant has no assets in Taiwan and never plans to retire there.  He owns
a home in the United States valued at approximately $500,000.  (Applicant’s Exhibit R).
He has retirement accounts, including a 401K and an IRA, valued at approximately
$600,000.  (Applicant’s Exhibits O through Q).  He and his wife have checking accounts
and savings, CD’s, and E-Trade investment accounts valued at approximately
$300,000.  (Tr. p. 54, and Applicant’s Exhibits H, I, J, K, L, M, N).    
Letters of recommendation from the Director of Corporate Facilities and Security,
several Senior Directors, and the Vice President and Chief Technology Officer at the
company, as well as customers who work with the Applicant, all attest to the Applicant’s
high standard of character, strong technical skills, loyalty, hard work ethic and kind
heartedness.  The Applicant is said to always follows the rules, is extremely
conscientious in handling classified information, and has never violated any security
procedures involving classified or proprietary materials.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A, B, C ,D,
S and T). 
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning the Taiwan.  Taiwan
is a multi-party democracy with a population of about 23 million. It is one of the most
active collectors of sensitive United States information and technology.  Numerous
individuals and companies have been subjected to civil penalties and or prosecuted for
illegally exporting, or attempting to illegally export, sensitive United States technology to
Taiwan.  One United States official was recently convicted of crimes relating to his
improper relationship with a Taiwanese intelligence official.
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
4
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8.  (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.;
8.  (c) Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
5
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign influence ad has foreign connections
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign passport raises legitimate
questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the interests of the
United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government must be able to
place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security
rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
6
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  However,
Mitigating Conditions 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S, and 8(c) Contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation also apply.
Although the Applicant’s has two siblings who are residents and citizens of
Taiwan, the Applicant is not close to them and except for holidays, rarely has contact
with them.  There is no evidence of a close bond or strong evidence of affection.  In fact,
to the contrary, the Applicant’s only speaks to them on holidays.  The Applicant’s deep
and abiding ties are here in the United States.  For the past twenty years he has worked
hard to establish himself as a responsible, educated, American citizen.  His wife and
children, are all citizens and residents of the United States.  His advanced education,
employment with the DOD, assets, that include his home, many investments and
retirement benefits are all in the United States.  The Applicant essentially cut all ties
from Taiwan when he moved to the United States and made it his permanent home for
the past twenty years.  
It is noted that the current political situation in Taiwan elevates the cause for
concern in this case.  However, the evidence shows that the Applicant has no bond and
affection with his foreign siblings or to any foreign individual or to Taiwan in any way
that could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Therefore, there is no possibility of
foreign influence that exists that could create the potential for conduct resulting in the
compromise of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is not vulnerable to
foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has met the mitigating conditions of
Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.  
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subparas. 1.a.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.b.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.c.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.d.: For the Applicant
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
