1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )     ISCR Case No. 07-07619
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on April 20, 2006. On March 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the
security concerns under Guideline H and Guideline E that provide the bases for its
decision to deny Applicant access to classified information. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 17, 2008. He answered
the SOR in writing on March 31, 2008, and requested a decision without a hearing. On
April 24, 2008, the government submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM) consisting
of five exhibits (Items 1-5). DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant and
Presumably, the government meant hallucinogenic mushrooms or psilocybin.1
2
instructed him to respond within 30 days of receipt. On May 23, 2008, Applicant
submitted his rebuttal to the FORM consisting of his statement (Ex. A), to which the
government did not object. On June 9, 2008, the case was assigned to me to consider
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security
clearance for Applicant. Based on a review of the government’s FORM and Applicant’s
response, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
DOHA submits under Guideline H, drug involvement, that Applicant used LSD 50
times, “mushrooms,”  mescaline, and cocaine three times each, and ecstasy two or1
three times from approximately 1967 to 1971 (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he used marijuana from
1967 to June 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.b); and that he indicated during a January 31, 2007,
interview with a Department of Defense investigator that while he had no definite plans
to use marijuana in the future, he expected to continue his current pattern of use one to
two times per year (SOR ¶ 1.c). Under Guideline E, personal conduct, Applicant was
alleged to have used marijuana in June 2006 after he had submitted his security
clearance application (SOR ¶ 2.a). Applicant admitted the allegations with explanation
while expressing his disagreement with any suggestion of concern about his personal
candor. After consideration of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of
fact.
Applicant is a 55-year-old cavity production manager, who has worked for his
current employer, a defense contractor, since September 1999 (Item 4). The available
record does not show that he has ever held a security clearance.
Applicant began using marijuana on a daily basis with small groups of friends
when he was 14 years of age, and he continued that abuse through high school. He
purchased marijuana from friends at school about once a month. During that same
period, from about 1967 to 1971, Applicant “in the spirit of exploration or self-discovery”
(Item 2) also used other illegal drugs with small groups of friends: LSD about 50 times,
most of it before 1969; psilocybin mushrooms approximately three times; mescaline
also about three times; cocaine two to three times; and “a chemical precursor” to the
synthetic drug ecstasy once. He obtained these drugs from school acquaintances. (Item
5).
After 1971, his illicit drug involvement was limited to marijuana. He reduced the
frequency of his abuse of marijuana and had stopped using other drugs “in the context
of a culture in which everyone around [him] was continuing to use psychedelics and
were using marijuana several times a day.”  Applicant used marijuana about ten times
per year until fall 1980 when he went to college full time. For the first year or so he
continued his involvement with the drug once or twice a year, and refrained from any
use of marijuana between 1982 and 1984. He resumed using marijuana, no more than
3
once or twice per year and usually when on fishing trips with a certain group of friends,
with a latest use in June 2006 (Items 2, 5).
In June 1984, Applicant went to work as a cathode operations manager at his
present work location. In December 1987, Applicant married his spouse. From July
1997 to September 1999, Applicant was employed as a senior process engineer for a
commercial company. Applicant and his employer had mutual disagreements about the
methodologies for solving problems or time management for hourly wage personnel,
and Applicant left the job at the request of his direct manager. In September 1999, he
assumed his present employment. On April 20, 2006, Applicant completed an Electronic
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) that was entered into the e-QIP
system electronically. He certified that his statements on the Questionnaire for National
Security Positions (SF 86 Format) were “true, complete, and correct to the best of [his]
knowledge and belief and [were] made in good faith.” (Item 4). A printed form of the
completed e-QIP was not included in the file for review.
A Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86) was prepared and then printed
out on April 27, 2006, with a “YES” response to question 24A, “LAST 7 YRS, ILLEGAL
DRUG USE?” and indicating use of marijuana seven times from April 1999 to June
2005. Item 4 of the FORM includes the SF 86 with Applicant’s signature forms from the
e-QIP attached. There is no information of record as to how the signature forms for the
e-QIP came to be attached to the SF 86, which does not contain a signature block.
On January 31, 2007, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) investigator for the Department of Defense about his drug use.
Applicant detailed his history of illegal drug use, including his involvement with
marijuana once or twice per year since he was 30 (1983) to a latest use in June 2006.
When asked about his future intentions, Applicant had no definite plans but expected to
continue to use the drug moderately, in his current pattern. Applicant indicated that his
spouse, mother, friends, and one coworker are aware that he had used drugs other than
marijuana in the past. His use of psychedelic drugs was at a time and place where they
were widely used, and generally more accepted than at present. The thinking at the
time was that psychedelic drugs in particular could expand one’s consciousness, and he
used them primarily for that purpose. He averred he was “long disillusioned” from that
way of thinking and denied any intent to use any illegal drug other than marijuana in the
future (Item 5). Marijuana use fostered for him “a quiet introspective view of life once in
a while.” He did not view it as something illegal and thought that as long as he was
totally honest with the Department of Defense about his intentions, it would address the
primary concerns of the defense community (Item 2).
As of March 2008, Applicant denies any intent to use any illegal drug in the
future. He now realizes that any expressed intent to use marijuana in the future is “an
impediment to holding a security clearance.” (Item 2). 
4
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: “Use of an illegal
drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability
and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.”  Applicant began using illegal drugs with friends when he was only 14. He
tried psilocybin, mescaline, and cocaine three times each, and an ecstasy equivalent
two to three times. He also ingested LSD about 50 times and used marijuana daily. He
purchased marijuana once a month. His drug abuse after 1971 was limited to
marijuana. Applicant used it about ten times per year until fall 1980 when he went to
college full time. For the first year or so, he continued his involvement with the drug
once or twice a year, and refrained from any use of marijuana between 1982 and 1984.
He resumed using marijuana, no more than once or twice per year, until June 2006.
Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” and AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” are clearly pertinent to an
assessment of his security suitability.
The government also argues persuasively for consideration of AG ¶ 25(h),
“expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly
commit to discontinue drug use.” During his subject interview of January 2007,
Applicant expressed no definite plan to use marijuana in the future, but also his
expectation that he would continue to use the drug in its current pattern, which was
once or twice a year.
In contrast, Applicant expressed an unequivocal denial of any intent to resume
involvement with other dangerous controlled substances. While his LSD use was
extensive even for a time and place historically given to experimentation with mind-
altering drugs, there has been no recurrence of any drug use apart from marijuana
since 1971. Yet, AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” cannot apply in
mitigation. His abuses of LSD, psilocybin, mescaline, cocaine, and the ecstasy
equivalent are part of his long history of illegal drug involvement and cannot be
assessed separately from his marijuana abuse. Applicant’s marijuana use continued
until at least June 2006, which is considered relatively recent given that he used
marijuana throughout most of his adult life, albeit with limited frequency. 
Since receiving the SOR, Applicant has forsworn any future marijuana
involvement as well. His record of candor concerning his past drug use and future
intentions leads me to find him credible when he states that he has no intention of using
any illegal drug after being granted a clearance. The salient issue is whether he will be
able to abide by this very recent resolve to abstain from a drug that for him “fostered a
6
quiet introspective view of life” for so many years. AG ¶ 26(b) provides some of the
factors that demonstrate an intent not to abuse any drugs. In recent years, Applicant
has used marijuana usually on fishing trips with certain friends, including in June 2006.
There is no evidence of record that he has taken steps to dissociate himself from these
friends, so AG ¶ 26(b)(1), “disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts”
does not apply. Nor is there any indication that Applicant has informed these friends that
he is no longer using drugs (see AG ¶ 26(b)(2), “changing or avoiding the environment
where drugs were used”), so the potential for Applicant again being around others using
marijuana and being offered marijuana cannot be discounted. As for “an appropriate
period of abstinence” (AG ¶26(b)(3)), two years is not long enough to guarantee against
recurrence when viewed in light of marijuana use over the course of some 35 years.
His denial of any future intent is in writing and notarized, so it fulfills AG ¶ 26(b)(4), “a
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation,” but
is not enough to overcome the Guideline H concerns.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Applicant exercised poor judgment raising personal conduct concerns when he
smoked marijuana on at least one occasion, in June 2006, after he had applied for a
security clearance. While AG ¶ 15 is implicated, I am not persuaded by the
government’s contention that AG ¶ 16(c) and ¶ 16(d) apply. AG ¶ 16(c) on its face is
pertinent only when there is “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline.” AG ¶ 16(d) is appropriately considered only when there is “credible adverse
information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline.” The use of
marijuana is already covered under AG ¶ 25(a) and sufficient for an adverse
determination, as discussed in Guideline H, supra. The government has not alleged or
proven that Applicant understood fully the concerns raised by marijuana use when he
completed his e-QIP and that he deliberately disregarded those concerns thereafter by
using marijuana. Applicant explained that he had long ceased viewing marijuana use as
illegal, and he assumed any security concerns were assuaged by his full disclosure (“It
has been my guiding principle throughout this entire investigation that personal honesty
is crucial to the DOD being able to make an accurate assessment of my eligibility for a
clearance.” Item 2).  While this is a naive view, it is consistent with his admission in
January 2007 that he expected to continue to use marijuana in the future.
7
His failure to fully appreciate that his marijuana use was inconsistent with his
obligation to obey the law raises in and of itself judgment concerns that cast doubt
about whether he can be counted on to comply with security practices and procedures.
Those judgment concerns are not fully mitigated in the absence of credible efforts to
discontinue his friendships with those involved in criminal drug use (see AG ¶16(g),
“association with persons involved in criminal activity”). None of the Guideline E
mitigating conditions apply. His illegal drug involvement was not minor and not enough
time has passed to favorably consider AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that is it unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” His decision to refrain from marijuana use
after being granted a security clearance is a very recent development forced on him if
he wants to obtain the clearance and not borne predominantly of any desire to conform
his behavior to the law.  It falls short of the positive changes sufficient to apply AG ¶
17(d), “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors,
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.”
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s drug abuse was heaviest
during his youth (see AG ¶ 2(4)), but he did not leave it behind once he reached
adulthood. He abstained for a time in college only to return to marijuana as an aid to
introspection and on occasion while socializing with friends. He clearly enjoyed its
effects and had long since lost sight of its illegality by the time he applied for a security
clearance at age 53. As of January 2007, he expected his use of marijuana to continue.
8
His abstinence for the past two years is some proof of his ability to abstain,  but it is not
enough to overcome the serious security concerns. Based on the record before me, I
am unable to conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
access.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
________________________
ELIZABETH M. MATCHINSKI
Administrative Judge
