                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-05825 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is an Iraqi born, naturalized U.S. citizen, who has lived in the United 
States since 1998. He supported military operations in Iraq on multiple occasions 
deploying with U.S. Army unites. He has substantially more connections to the United 
States than to Iraq. Applicant’s mother and brother are citizens of Iraq residing in the 
U.S. Applicant has a brother and three sisters who are citizens and residents of Iraq. 
After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and evidence, I conclude 
Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under guideline 
B, foreign influence. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
 1
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 18, 2007, detailing security 
concerns under Foreign Influence.  
  
 On November 7, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On January 31, 2008, I was assigned the case. On May 
7, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on May 19, 2008. 
The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through F, which were 
admitted into evidence. The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional matters. On June 2, 2008, additional documents were received. Department 
Counsel did not object to the material and it was admitted into evidence as Ex. F. On 
June 5, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) I─V. 
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with explanations, the factual 
allegations of the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old translator who has worked for a defense contractor 
since September 2005, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Applicant received 
a letter of recommendation for his work with the U.S. Army. (Ex. A) He was a language 
linguist and document translator whose “work entailed long hours in austere conditions 
with an ever present risk of hostile fire.” (Ex. A)  Applicant was a team player always 
willing to sacrifice his own time and creature comforts to ensure that the mission was 
accomplished. His language skills, keen personal insights, and cultural acumen enabled 
the Task Force to accomplish its mission in a timely manner. He received three 
Certificates of Appreciation and a Letter of Appreciation for his support of the mission. 
(Exs. B, D, E, and G)  
 
 As a linguist translating and analyzing captured documents, Applicant helped in 
the review and translation of thousands of captured documents. (Tr. 26)  Applicant 
sacrificed his home, family, and his own personal safety and security, to travel to Iraq. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 2
(Ex. C) He was recognized for his professionalism, work ethic, maturity, eagerness to 
contribute, willingness to be flexible, and natural ability to mentor younger contractors. 
(Ex. C and D) He was instrumental in locating the top Al-Qaeda operative in Iraq. (Tr. 
23) Applicant believes he is helped in his job by being born in Iraq and knowing Iraqi 
slang, which other translators did not know. (Tr. 41)  
 
 In 1988, his father, then age 46, who worked for a car parts company died. His 
father was conscripted to do work with the Iraqi Army. The Iraqi army had the power to 
simply grab people off the street and conscript them to labor for the army. His father 
suffered from a kidney problem and had surgery scheduled a week from the day he was 
conscripted. (Tr. 81) He was gone for two months with no communication with his 
family. His family did not know his whereabouts and feared he was dead. His father was 
allowed to return home after two months, but died a week after his return.  
 
Applicant was 16 years old at the time. At age 18, Applicant was required to do 
mandatory military duty with the Iraqi Army. He served from April 1990 until July 1990. 
When Hussein invaded Kuwait in August 1990, Applicant deserted. (Tr. 32) Had he 
been caught, he would have been executed. Two years earlier, his brother had 
deserted, was captured, but was able to bribe his captors and instead of being executed 
was sentenced to two years imprisonment. (Tr. 83, 112) His brother was jailed from 
1986 to 1988.  
 
In 1991, Applicant and his brother, surrendered to the U.S. Army and went to a 
POW camp in Saudi Arabia. (Tr. 33) He was there for one year and four months, from 
April 1991 to August 1992, before coming to the U.S. as a refugee. (Tr. 33)  Leaving as 
a refugee, Applicant lost his Iraqi citizenship. (Tr. 77) In October 1998, he became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. He describes the day as an excellent day and as “the happiest 
day of his life.” (Tr. 120) In February 2004, he was hired by a language resource firm. 
From February 2004 until August 2004 he prepared for his first deployment. From 
November 2005 to November 2006, December 2005 to January 2006, and in February 
2007 until his clearance was removed in October 2007, he served in Iraq with the U.S. 
Army as a translator. (Exs. 2, B, D, and E, Tr. 27, 28) During his three deployments to 
Iraq, Applicant had no contact with any of his relatives living in Iraq. When his siblings 
ask about his job, he tells them he is a cook. (Tr. 38, 93) 
 
Applicant’s mother has been a resident of the U.S. since 2000. His mother has 
no desire to return to Iraq. She wants to stay in the U.S. and have her family join her 
here. (Tr. 70, 124) His mother applied to bring four of his seven siblings who are living in 
Iraq to the U.S. (Tr. 67) His siblings dream of coming to the U.S. (Tr. 124) Applicant has 
three sisters who are citizens and residents of Iraq and do not work outside the home. 
He has not seen his sisters since he left Iraq in 1991. He talks with two of his sisters 
twice a month and the other sister four times a year. (Ex. 3) Applicant’s mother usually 
calls his relatives in Iraq and Applicant may talk with his siblings. (Tr. 118-119)  
 
Applicant’s one sister, whose husband sells cars part-time, was a former bank 
clerk. Her husband is also an engineer working for the Iraqi Navy in oil sales. (Tr. 102-
103) Applicant last talked with this brother-in-law in 2004. (Tr. 118) He has a sister, who 
 3
was widowed in 2004, who lives in Iraq and is unemployed. At one time, he sent funds 
to help his widowed sister. Since 2006, he has sent no funds. (Tr. 47) His brother in 
Germany now supports this sister. (Tr. 85, 98) His youngest sister is divorced, lives with 
her sister, and is also unemployed.  
 
Applicant’s oldest brother living in Germany also left Iraq as a refugee. His 
brother was a cook who wants to open a grocery store, but since August 2006 has 
worked for a spice company. (Tr. 86) Applicant has a brother who lives with him in the 
U.S. and is working to become a U.S. citizen. His brother must be a U.S. resident for 
five years before he can apply for citizenship. His brother just married and is returning to 
school. Since leaving Iraq in 1991, he has seen his brother who lives in the U.S. He saw 
his youngest brother who he saw in 1999 when Applicant visited Syria. (Tr. 115) In 
2004, Applicant saw his brother in Germany when Applicant was deploying to Iraq and 
had a nine hour delay at the airport. (Tr. 116)  
  
Applicant has a brother who works on a farm in Australia and has become an 
Australian citizen. (Tr. 99) His youngest brother lives in Iraq and was working in an 
electrical equipment store, but is now a student studying computer science. (Tr. 102, 
117) 
 
 In 2001, Applicant’s father-in-law who was a store owner died. His mother-in-law 
is unemployed and lives in Iraq. (Tr. 107) His wife has two brothers and a sister living in 
Iraq. His sister-in-law is an in home tutor. One of his brothers-in-law is in the Iraqi Army 
working forthe U.S. forces. (Tr. 108, 134) His other brother-in-law is a barber. His wife 
has telephone contact with them every two weeks to once a month and is trying to get 
them into the U.S. as permanent residents.  
 
 In May 1999, Applicant visited Syria and Jordan where he visited his family who 
had traveled from Iraq. This was the first time he had seen his mother in seven years. 
(Tr. 36) Only his youngest brother was able to see him. His other brothers were 
restricted from leaving the country. (Tr. 36) He was out of the U.S. for 24 days. In June 
2000, he went to Syria to see relatives who traveled from Iraq for his marriage in 
Jordan. He had first met his wife when he was 16 years old. (Tr. 88)  
 
 In July 2000, Applicant married an Iraqi citizen who is working on obtaining her 
U.S. citizenship. They have three children all born in the U. S., a son born in August 
2001, a daughter born in 2006, and a son born in 2008. Applicant has no foreign 
investments. (Tr. 61) Their home is worth $160,000. Applicant also owns a rental unit 
worth between $80,000 and $100,000. (Tr. 60) Applicant has no loyalty to Iraq. (Tr. 32) 
He believes Iraq never gave him “anything, no respect, no freedom, nothing.” (Tr. 33) 
The only passport he has is his U.S. passport. (Tr. 77)  
 
 Applicant wants to become an Iraqi Advisor, which involves assisting and 
advising U.S. military commanders and staff. (Ex. F) It requires the ability and 
willingness to work in close supporting units, operation centers, with other advisors to 
facilitate meetings between U.S. and Iraqi government officials. (Tr. 43-44)  
 
 4
 
Iraq 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Iraq is a constitutional, 
parliamentary democracy with a federal system of government. (Hex I) It is a republic 
with a freely elected government led by a Prime Minister. (Hex I) The 2005 Iraqi 
Constitution guarantees all Iraqis basic rights in many areas. Iraq’s legislative branch 
consists of an elected Council of Representatives. Iraq’s judicial branch is independent, 
and is under no authority but that of the law. The focus of the United States policy in 
Iraq remains on helping the Iraqi people build a constitutional, representative 
government that respects the rights of all Iraqis and has security forces capable of 
maintaining order and preventing the country from become a safe haven for terrorists 
and foreign fighters. The ultimate goal is an Iraq that is peaceful, united, stable, and 
democratic, with institutions capable of providing just governance and security for all 
Iraqis and is an ally in the war against terrorism.  
 
The risk of terrorism directed against U.S. citizens and interests in Iraq remains 
extremely high. (Hex III) The Department of State continues to strongly warn U.S. 
citizens against travel to Iraq, which remains very dangerous. (Hex V) There is credible 
information that terrorists are targeting civil aviation. All vehicular travel in Iraq is 
extremely dangerous. The government was only recently able to diminish violent 
attacks, although large efforts were made to implement better security measures. (Hex 
V) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 5
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, 
or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign 
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations 
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain 
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (AG & 6) 
 
Applicant mother and seven siblings were citizens of Iraq. His mother now 
resides in the U.S. as does one of his brothers. Another brother is now an Australian 
citizen living in Australia and another brother lives in Germany. He has three sisters and 
one brother who are citizens and residents of Iraq. Applicant left Iraq fleeing the 
Hussein regime by going to a POW camp in Saudi Arabia. In 1992, he came to the U.S. 
as a refugee. In 1998, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has been deployed to 
Iraq three times working with the U.S. military forces. Having considered all of the 
Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, applicable conditions that could possibly 
raise a security concern are AG & 7(a) “contact with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” and AG & 7(b) “connections to a 
 6
 7
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual=s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual=s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information” apply. 
 
The new Iraqi government relies upon the U.S. for support as it moves forward 
with its new form of government. While Iraq=s human rights record under Saddam 
Hussein was very dismal and some problems continue, its human rights record is slowly 
improving under the new government.  
 
In every case where a sibling lives overseas, there is a risk of pressure on this 
relative and through them upon the holder of a security clearance. Under the facts of 
this case, a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, manipulation pressure, or 
coercion is not substantiated. Applicant has significant ties to the U.S. and few ties to 
Iraq. While he still has a brother and three sisters living in Iraq, he lives with his wife and 
mother in the U.S. He has no financial or property interests in Iraq. His three children 
were born in the U.S. He owns a home and a rental house in the U.S. Applicant=s ties 
with the U.S. are much stronger than his ties with Iraq. 
 
Applicant’s work as an interpreter supported the U.S. military mission in Iraq. He 
has gone to Iraq three times to work with the U.S. military. He worked long hours in 
austere conditions with an ever present risk of hostile fire. The Army holds his work in 
high regard. He provided more than language interpretation skills. He explained local 
cultural nuances and practices which greatly assisted the military in accomplishing its 
mission. During his time in Iraq, he worked very hard to help the Army and developed a 
high level of trust with the Army. In part due to his efforts, the highest ranking Al-Qaeda 
leader in Iraq was located and killed and information obtained adversely impacted on 
the remaining Al-Qaeda members in Iraq.  
 
If a heightened risk exists because he has siblings in Iraq, he has mitigated that 
concern under AG & 8(a) “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.” and AG & 8(b) “there is no 
conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” 
 
Applicant’s older brother, works for a spice company in Germany, another 
brother works on a farm in Australia and is an Australian citizen, a third lives in the U.S. 
and his youngest brother is a student in Iraq. His three sisters do not work outside the 
home. He has a brother-in-law who is employed by the Iraqi Navy, but Applicant has not 
talked with him since 2004. None of his siblings are involved with organizations which 
seek to harm the U.S.  
 
 
 
 
8
                                                          
During the three deployments Applicant was in Iraq, he did not contact his 
siblings. They have not experienced any repercussions from any source because of 
Applicant. There is little likelihood that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of the U.S. and a foreign entity. Likewise, because of his 
close ties and his loyalties to the U.S., he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor 
of the U.S. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iraq and the heavy burden 
an Applicant carries when he has family members in a foreign country.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
In the more than 17 years since he left Iraq, Applicant returned three times, each 
time working closely with the U.S. military as an interpreter. Because he guided the 
Army personal on local customs and nuances related to the spoken word, translated 
captured documents, and responded very well in highly dangerous situations, the Army 
views him as a valuable resource in helping it achieve its mission in Iraq.2 With his long 
absence from Iraq, he has few contacts in the country outside of his four siblings.  
2In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov.14, 2006), the Appeal Board recognized an 
exception to the general rule in Guideline B cases when “an applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and regulations occurs in the context 
of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the 
 
 
 
9
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
While danger certainly exists for all who go to Iraq, Applicant and his siblings are 
in no greater danger than any other individual living and working in Iraq. The U.S. and 
Iraq governments have developed a close and positive working relationship. Iraq 
depends upon the U.S. to help in its fight to combat the developing insurgency and 
terrorist forces. The Iraq government is moving forward with democracy and developing 
a rule of law, with the assistance of the U.S. 
 
Applicant has no love for the former brutal regime. The Hussein regime killed his 
father, imprisoned his brother, and he and his brother were able to escape the country 
only by surrendering to the U.S. military and going to a POW camp. When he left Iraq, 
he was no longer an Iraqi citizen. Frequently, Applicant went in harms way to assist 
U.S. special forces in performing their duties in Iraq. He did this not once, but during 
three different deployments. The only reason he is not there now is because he lost his 
clearance because of his siblings living in Iraq. 
 
I have carefully weighed the evidence in favor of Applicant against the 
government=s concerns about Applicant=s ability to protect classified information. I find 
that there is little potential for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, or exploited because 
he has four siblings living in Iraq. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
national security . . . [and therefore he] can be relied upon to recognize, resist and report a foreign 
power=s attempts at coercion or exploitation.” 
