                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-03090 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) February 14, 2006.  On September 25, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
for financial considerations, personal conduct, and criminal conduct under Guidelines F, 
E, and J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 2, 2007. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 10, 2007.  He admitted five 
and denied five of the allegations under Guideline F and denied the allegations under 
Guidelines E and J.  He provided an explanation for his admissions and denials, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  Department counsel was prepared 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
to proceed on January 31, 2008, and the case was assigned to another administrative 
judge on February 1, 2008, and reassigned to me on February 21, 2008.  DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on March 18, 2008, for a hearing on April 29, 2008.  I convened the 
hearing as scheduled.  The government offered five exhibits, marked government 
exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 5, which were received without objection.  Applicant 
submitted three documents, marked Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A-C, which were 
received without objection.  Applicant and one Applicant witness testified on his behalf.  
The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional documents.  Applicant timely 
submitted three documents, marked App. Ex. D-F.  The documents were admitted into 
the record without objection (Gov. Ex 6).  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on May 14, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 51 years old and has worked for over 25 years as a pipefitter in a 
Navy shipyard.  He has held a security clearance for over 22 years.  In the past year, he 
has been working more than 25 hours per week overtime.  Applicant and his wife have 
been married for over 30 years.  She is a certified nursing assistant at a local hospital.  
They have two children, a 27-year-old daughter and a 24-year-old son, who had lived 
on their own but are now back in the house with Applicant and his wife.  Their daughter 
has two children, ages eight and ten, living with them.  Applicant and his wife had no 
financial issues until their children created problems for the couple when they went on 
their own (Tr. 56-61; Gov. Ex 1, Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing 
(e-QIP), dated February 14, 2006).  
 
Applicant’s wife handles the family finances and pays their bills.  Applicant and 
his wife have a combined monthly income of $5,800, and combined monthly expenses 
of $3,000.  They have approximately $2,800 in discretionary funds each month (Tr. 58-
60).  They have discussed their financial issues with friends and co-worker who are 
knowledge about business affairs but they have not received formal financial counseling 
(Tr. 16-23). 
 
Credit reports and the SOR list ten delinquent debts: a collection for $7,217 
(SOR 1.a); a delinquent phone bill for collection for $2,749 (SOR 1.b); a medical debt in 
collection for $5,657 (SOR 1.c); a judgment for $40,672 (SOR 1.d); a charged off 
account for $3,033 (SOR 1.e); four delinquent medical accounts to the same hospital for 
$49.15, $146.36, $139.47, and $78.41 (SOR 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j); and a television 
service collection account for $264 (SOR 1.h) (Gov. Ex. 2, credit report, dated March 
17, 2006; Gov. Ex. 3, credit report, dated March 8, 2007; Gov. Ex. 4, Interrogatory, 
dated April 18, 2007; and Gov. Ex. 5, credit report, dated April 22, 2008).  Applicant 
admitted the allegations in SOR 1.a-1.e but denied the remaining five allegations. 
 
Applicant’s wife co-signed for a car loan for a used car for their daughter.  The 
daughter defaulted on the loan, so Applicant’s wife as co-signer is responsible, which 
makes Applicant also responsible for the debt.  Applicant and his wife recognize their 
 
3 
 
 
responsibility on the debt and are working to establish a payment plan (Tr. 33-35, 47-49, 
62-64).  
 
The delinquent cell phone collection account (SOR 1.b) also belongs to 
Applicant’s daughter.  His wife co-signed for the phone plan and both Applicant and his 
wife are responsible for the debt that their daughter did not pay.  There are no payments 
being made on this debt (Tr. 30-33; 48-49). 
 
The medical collection account listed in SOR allegation 1.c for $5,657 is for 
Applicant’s son’s medical treatment from injuries received in an automobile accident.  
The son was treated at the hospital where Applicant’s wife works.  Since the son was 
unable to sign the discharge documents because of his injuries, Applicant’s wife signed 
the papers making her responsible for the debt.  Their son had no health insurance.  
The debt is being paid by payroll deduction from Applicant’s wife (Tr. 30-33; App. Ex. B, 
payroll records, April 29, 2008).  
 
SOR allegations 1.d, is for a mobile home that Applicant’s wife co-signed for their 
daughter.  Their daughter ceased to make payments, so the mobile home was 
repossessed and sold.  Applicant is waiting to receive information from the creditor 
concerning the amount owed after the repossession so a payment plan can be 
established (Tr. 25-30). 
 
SOR allegation 1.d is a debt of $3,033 for a credit card used by Applicant’s 
daughter and co-signed by his wife.  Applicant and his wife have settled the account 
with the creditor for $2,000, and are making payment according to the settlement plan 
(Tr. 24-25; App. Ex D, Letters, dated May 13, 2008). 
 
SOR allegations 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i are hospital bills for treatment of Applicant’s 
wife.  The debts have been paid by payroll deduction since Applicant’s wife is an 
employee of the hospital (Tr. 35-39; App. Ex. B, Payroll records, dated April 29, 2008). 
 
SOR allegation 1.h is for satellite television service for $264 incurred by their 
daughter.  Applicant’s wife paid this debt in full (Tr. 36-38; App. Ex. E, Bank statement, 
dated October 29, 2007).   
 
Applicant’s latest credit report show most of his debts are paid as agreed, except 
for the credit card in SOR allegation 1.e discussed above, the car loan in SOR 
allegation 1.a, the mobile home repossession in SOR allegation 1.d, and a collection 
account for $2,417 (App. Ex A, credit report, dated March 17, 2008).  Applicant 
presented documentation that there was an agreement to settle the account by paying 
$307 monthly.  The account settlement was paid in full for $6,111.73 (App. Ex. C, 
letters, dated February 15, 2007; App. Ex. F, Paid judgment, dated November 21, 
2007). 
 
In response to questions on his security clearance application concerning his 
finances, Applicant listed the mobile home repossession debt as having been in the last 
 
4 
 
 
seven years more than 180 days past due.  He also listed a wage garnishment as well 
as the mobile home repossession in response to questions pertaining to garnishments 
and repossessions.  He did not list any debts as currently more than 90 days past due.  
Applicant credibly testified that he did not fully read the question or think about all of the 
debts caused by his children when he completed the security clearance application.  He 
did not intend to deceive when completing the form but made a mistake in not reading 
the question carefully or remembering all of his debts.  He answered the questions as 
best he could (Tr. 77-82). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
 
5 
 
 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Consideration: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18).  Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an Applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance.  An Applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  Applicant’s delinquent debts he admitted and that are listed in credit reports 
are a security concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) 
¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC ¶ 19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations).  Even though most of the delinquent debts were caused 
by Applicant’s children but attributed to him because his wife had co-signed the 
documents for their children, Applicant is responsible for the debts. 
 
 Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment) has some application.  While six of the debts have 
been paid, four are still being discussed with the creditors, so these debts are current.  
While the debts were mainly caused by the actions of Applicant’s children, there are a 
variety of debts from medical bills, a repossession, an automobile loan, and a cell phone 
bill.  Applicant has delinquent debt because his wife co-signed for their children.  The 
children are now living with Applicant and his wife and Applicant knows not to sign again 
for his children.  Co-signing for their children is unlikely to recur.  I gave consideration to 
these unusual circumstances leading to some of the delinquent debts.   
 
 FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual 
 
6 
 
 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies.  Applicant and his wife managed 
their personal finances appropriately.  Their financial problems were caused by the 
irresponsible actions of their children and their desire to help the children by co-signing 
for certain loans and arrangements.  Applicant acknowledges his legal responsibilities 
as a co-signer and is making payments or arrangements to pay the debts.  He acted 
reasonably under the circumstances.  
 
FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies.  For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay.  A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed.  
Applicant has the ability to pay the debts, has shown a strong desire to pay them, and 
has shown a good effort to pay them.  Applicant paid five of the delinquent debts.  His 
wife is paying a medical debt for their son by payroll deduction.  They reached an 
agreement with the creditor and are paying on that loan.  They are working with other 
creditors to establish payment plans on the remaining debts.  Applicant and his wife 
managed their own finances appropriately.  Their troubles were caused by their 
children, not by them.  Applicant acted responsibly towards his debts, and established 
his good-faith efforts to resolve his debts.  He mitigated security concerns for his 
financial situation 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.  The security 
clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information.  
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  Applicant’s incomplete answers to a 
question on his security clearance application concerning his past due debts raises a 
security concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a) 
(the deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, to determine security eligibility or trustworthiness). 
 
 Appellant denied intentional falsification.  Applicant listed a wage garnishment 
and repossession in the appropriate sections of the form.  He listed only one debt that 
was over 180 days past due, and none that were currently over 90 days past due.  
Applicant credibly testified that when he completed his security clearance application, 
he listed the debt that he knew were security concerns.  He was not aware of all debts 
 
7 
 
 
caused by his children’s actions.  He acknowledged that he did not read the questions 
carefully and made a mistake not including all of the debts on the application.  While 
there is a security concern for an omission, concealment, or falsification of a material 
fact in any written document or oral statement to the government when applying for a 
security clearance, every omission, concealment, or inaccurate statement is not a 
falsification.  A falsification must be deliberate and material.  It is deliberate if it is done 
knowingly and willfully.  Since Applicant listed the financial concerns he was aware of, 
and he was not reasonably sure of other delinquent debts, the available information 
shows his failure to list all delinquent debts was not knowing and willful.  Applicant 
established he did not deliberately provide false information on the security clearance 
application with intent to deceive.  I find for Appellant as to Personal Conduct.  Since 
there is no intention to deceive, there is no violation of federal law and no criminal 
conduct.  I also find for Applicant as to criminal conduct. 
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall 
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered Applicant has worked 
for over 25 years in a Navy shipyard and successfully held a security clearance for 22 
years.  I considered that Applicant and his wife manage their personal finances 
appropriately and meet their personal financial obligations.  Applicant’s financial 
problems were created by his children and the desire to help them.  Applicant 
acknowledges his legal obligation to pay the outstanding debts created by his children.  
Applicant lives within his means, satisfied his personal debt, and meets his personal 
financial obligations. His actions do no indicate poor self control, lack of judgment or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations.  He is not financially overextended.  
Applicant’s finances do not create a security concern.  He did not provide incomplete 
information on his security clearance application with the intent to deceive.  He provided 
the information he knew which should alert security investigators to any financial issues.  
His action did not amount to a personal or criminal conduct security concern.  Overall, 
on balance the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from financial considerations, 
personal conduct, and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
