KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s reliance on the unenforceability of his debts under a state statute of
limitations fails to demonstrate that the Judge erred.  Security clearance decisions are not
controlled or limited by such statutes of limitation.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-09966.a1
DATE: 06/25/2008
DATE: June 25, 2008
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-09966
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
 
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 24, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested the case be decided on the written record.  On March 12, 2008, after considering the
record, Administrative Judge Erin C. Hogan denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s failure to mitigate the
Guideline F security concerns is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse decision should be reversed because the Judge did
not give sufficient weight to Applicant’s mitigating evidence.  Applicant contends that the
outstanding debts listed in the SOR have been paid off, successfully disputed, or charged off and are
unenforceable due to the Arizona statute of limitation.  Applicant also states that he should have
requested a hearing instead of having his case decided on the written record because he believes that
Department Counsel was present during the Judge’s consideration of his case.  Applicant’s
arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred.
The Judge found that Applicant’s financial difficulties began when Applicant and his wife
bought a house in 1987 that they could not afford.  Their two children later developed serious
medical problems.  Applicant’s financial difficulties became severe in 2001.  The SOR listed eight
unpaid debts.
Applicant admitted the debts listed in the SOR.  In response to DOHA interrogatories and
the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Applicant sent documentation regarding his debts.  In his
appeal brief, Applicant attempts to further explain his attempts to settle his debts.  To the extent that
the explanation contains information not presented before the Judge reviewed the record, it cannot
be considered on appeal, since the Board cannot consider new evidence.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel
the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to
weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable
evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-06553 at 2 (App. Bd. April 30, 2008).  An
applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a
different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
With regard to Applicant’s choice to have his case decided on the written record rather than
requesting a hearing, Applicant has not shown that he was disadvantaged by that choice.  In this case,
Department Counsel had no objection to Applicant’s response to the FORM, but did attach a one-
Cf. ISCR Case No. 00-0345 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 12, 2001) (discharge of a debt in bankruptcy does not preclude1
consideration of an applicant’s history of financial problems); ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)
(although an applicant legally may rely on the running of a statute of limitation to avoid paying a debt, such reliance does
not constitute a good faith effort to resolve debts within the meaning of the Directive).
3
paragraph argument in rebuttal to it.  There is no indication that Department Counsel had any further
contact with the Judge  or otherwise influenced the Judge’s decision.   
Applicant’s reliance on the unenforceability of his debts under the Arizona statute of
limitations fails to demonstrate that the Judge erred.  Security clearance decisions are not controlled
or limited by such statutes of limitation.  A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed
at collecting an applicant’s personal debts.  Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  Accordingly, even if a delinquent debt is
legally unenforceable under state law, the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and
circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a
timely manner.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003).1
The federal government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in
persons granted access to classified information.  Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n. 6
(1980).  Security clearance decisions are not an exact science, but rather involve predictive
judgments about an applicant’s security eligibility in light of the applicant’s past conduct and present
circumstances.  Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528-529 (1988).  The federal
government need not wait until an applicant mishandles or fails to safeguard classified information
before it can deny or revoke access to classified information based on an applicant’s conduct or
circumstances that raise security concerns even in the absence of security violations.  A history of
financial difficulties raises security concerns.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 96-0454 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb.
7, 1997) (discussing negative security significance of a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties).  In light of his financial situation, Applicant had the burden of presenting
evidence to demonstrate extenuation or mitigation sufficient to warrant a favorable security clearance
decision.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  Based on the documentation Applicant provided, the Judge discussed
Applicant’s efforts to improve his financial situation, but explained why the evidence he had
provided was insufficient to overcome all the government’s security concerns.  See, e.g.,ISCR Case
No. 07-06553 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 30, 2008).  Given the record evidence in this case, it was not
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law for the Judge conclude that Applicant had not met his burden
of persuasion so as to warrant a favorable security clearance decision under the clearly consistent
with the national interest standard.  Directive ¶ E2.2.  Applicant has not demonstrated error on the
part of the Judge.
4
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Michael D. Hipple           
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin            
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
