                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-09813 
 SSN:  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
On January 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 25, 2008, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on April 11, 2008. The FORM was 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant on April 18, 2008, and it was received on April 28, 2008. Applicant 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant responded by sending the entire FORM package 
back with no additional information. The case was assigned to me on June 2, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and denied the allegations under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since 1964. 
Applicant admitted he owes the debts alleged in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 
and 1. g. The debt in ¶1.a is for an account that was placed for collections. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he was making payments on the debt and it would 
be paid soon. He provided a document, dated February 18, 2008, that shows he made 
one payment of $200, thereby reducing the delinquent debt from $729 to $529. No other 
documents were provided regarding this debt. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is a collection account for cable service that Applicant 
stated he is working on and claimed his credit report was not updated. The amount 
listed in the SOR is $357. He provided a receipt for payment of $200, dated February 
22, 2008, and another receipt dated February 29, 2008, for $157. It is unclear if this 
debt is paid in full because Applicant also provided a document from Equidata showing 
four delinquent debts, including the same creditor listed in ¶1.b with a balance owed as 
$447. Handwritten notations next to the debt state “make payment” and “paid full.” No 
other receipt of payment for the remaining balance was provided.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶1.c is a collection account for sanitation services. Applicant 
stated he paid the debt and provided a receipt of payment. He provided an Equidata 
document that shows he owes $34.55. On this document is a handwritten notation that 
says “paid full.” No receipt of payment was provided.  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are medical bills in the amount of $14 and $11. 
Applicant provided a medical bill receipt, dated February 22, 2008, for $100. The 
payment receipt shows a remaining balance on a medical debt of $31.77. It is unclear if 
the payment Applicant made was for the same debt as alleged in the SOR. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is a bank debt in the amount of $720 that was charged off. 
Applicant stated he made a payment on the account and is still “trying” to pay it. He 
provided no proof of payment. 
 
 The debt in SOR.¶ 1.g Applicant stated was discharged in Bankruptcy on 
September 27, 2004. This debt is not listed in his bankruptcy documents. Applicant’s 
 
3 
 
 
off.   
                                                          
2008 credit report shows this account was opened in November 2004, two months after 
his debts were discharged in bankruptcy.1 
 
 Applicant completed a personal financial statement and provided copies of four 
months of his pay stubs. Along with his regular pay, Applicant worked overtime hours. 
His personal financial statement shows that he has a negative cash flow at the end of 
each month. Despite his overtime pay, he is not meeting his expenses and does not 
have a budget to pay his delinquent debts.2  
 
 Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) on April 7, 2006. 
On it, when asked if he had any debts more than 180 days delinquent or 90 days past 
due, Applicant answered “no.” He also answered “no” when asked if he had filed a 
petition under any chapter of the bankruptcy code. Applicant also answered “no” when 
asked if he had any judgments against him. He failed to divulge he had three judgments 
against him from Capitol One Bank, Household Finance, and CitiFinancial. 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated he did not deliberately fail to disclose 
the bankruptcy in 2004. He stated he “did not think about it at the time and it happened 
awhile [ago] and I forgot.”3 He stated the reason he did not list the judgments was 
because they were included in his bankruptcy and were discharged.4 His explanation 
for failing to list his delinquent debts was because he is paying the debts or ha[s] paid 
them 5
 
 Appellant claimed he forgot about his 2004 bankruptcy when he completed his 
2006 SCA. He also claimed that he failed to list his judgments because they were 
discharged in bankruptcy His explanation is inconsistent and not credible. It is clear he 
was having financial problems and difficulty paying his bills. It is unreasonable to believe 
that Applicant was unaware he had any debts that were delinquent. Based on his 
obvious false answers to the bankruptcy and judgment questions, I find the remainder of 
his explanations lack credibility. I also find Applicant intentionally and deliberately 
provided false answer on his SCA. 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant alludes to conditions that were beyond his 
control, such as a hurricane that presumably occurred in 2003 and unexpected medical 
conditions. He did not provide any amplifying information that related to his failure to 
pay his debts. 
 
 
1 Item 2, 6 and 10.  
 
2 Item 9. 
 
3 Item 2. 
  
4 Id. 
 
5 Id. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them, especially AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Applicant had his 
delinquents debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2004. Since then he has accumulated 
more debts that have become delinquent. I find both disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions. I especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”); (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”); (c) (“the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”); and (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”).  
 
 Applicant made statements and provided some documents that he made 
payments on some of his debts, but he failed to provide proof that the debts are 
sufficiently satisfied. He alluded to conditions that he claimed were beyond his control, 
but failed to articulate what specifically happened, how it affected his ability to pay his 
debts, and how he acted responsibly under the circumstances. The hurricane he 
referred to occurred in 2003, approximately five years ago. Applicant did not provide 
evidence that he received financial counseling or that there is a clear indication that the 
problem is being resolved. He showed he made a couple of payments on some debts, 
but it does not rise to the level of a good faith effort to repay the creditors or otherwise 
resolve his debts. Applicant had his delinquent debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2004, 
thereby allowing him to have a clean financial slate. He has since accumulated new 
 
6 
 
 
delinquent debts. Therefore, considering all of the facts, I find mitigating conditions (a), 
(b), (c) and (d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct. “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.” 
I have considered all of the personal conduct disqualifying under AG ¶ 16 and 
especially considered (a) (“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities”). Applicant intentionally and deliberately falsified information 
on his SCA by failing to divulge his bankruptcy, judgments and delinquent debts. 
Applicant’s debts were discharged in bankruptcy in 2004. He completed his SCA in 
2006, a mere two years later. It is incomprehensible that he would forget such an event. 
In addition, he stated he failed to list judgments entered against him because he 
believed they were included in his bankruptcy, the same bankruptcy he claimed he 
forgot to list. These judgments were not included in his bankruptcy, but were incurred 
after it. It is simply unbelievable that he did not know he had any delinquent debts. I find 
Applicant’s explanations are disingenuous and I find his omissions were intentional and 
deliberate. Hence, I find the above disqualifying condition applies. 
I have considered all of the personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
16. Under the factual evidence and circumstances of this case, I find none of the 
mitigating conditions apply.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
 
7 
 
 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a history of financial 
irresponsibility. Despite having his debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2004, he again 
failed to pay or manage his debts. He deliberately and intentionally lied about his 
financial situation on his SCA. Applicant failed to provide sufficient information to 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Overall the record evidence leaves me with 
serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
