1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-09499
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on May 24,
2005. On February 15, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F and J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on April 10, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 14, 2008,
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 7, 2008. The Government offered
Exhibits (GE 1-7), which were received without objection. Applicant testified in his own
behalf, and submitted Exhibits (AE A-N), without objection. I left the record open until
May 27, 2008 for Applicant to submit additional documentation. He did not submit any
2
documents. The record closed on May 21, 2008. DOHA received the transcript on May
16, 2008. Based upon a review of the record, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated March 19, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d of the SOR. He also admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 2.c-2.h of the SOR but denied the other allegations (2.a and 2.b)
because the debts were paid or he had no knowledge of them. He provided additional
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He received his
GED in 1974. In 1978, he attended a community college. He has worked for his current
employer since May 2004 (GE 1). Applicant served in the national guard in 1979 to
1980. 
When Applicant was a young man, he had several arrests. In February 1968, he
was arrested and charged with statutory rape (GE 4). He was dating a girl who was 13
years old. He was 17 years old. Her parents pressed charges against Applicant (Tr. 46).
Applicant believes they appeared in court and were then sent home. He does not recall.
He did not learn that the charge was for statutory rape until 2005.
In May 1968, Applicant was arrested and charged with destroying property.
Applicant stated that he broke into a drink machine. He was jailed for 90 days. In August
1968, Applicant robbed a man. He had a gun (.22 calbier revolver) at the time. Applicant
claims that the gun did not work (Tr. 49). He was found guilty and sentenced to five
years and actually imprisoned for 30 months (GE 4).
Applicant married in 1972 and divorced his first wife in 1985. He had three
children from his first marriage (Tr. 39). Applicant remarried in 1988. He and his second
wife have five children. He paid child support for his three children after the divorce. (Tr
55). He fell behind in his payments of $125 a week. The current balance is $3000 as of
March 2008. The deduction of $57.50 is made from his weekly paycheck (Tr 74). 
After Applicant left the national guard in 1980, he worked as an electrician. He
was steadily employed until 1994. In 1994, Applicant had neck surgery and was
unemployed for almost one year. In 1995, Applicant had a stroke. He remained in
intensive care for a period of time.  After about five months, he returned to his job (Tr.
42). Despite the fact that he had health insurance, Applicant began to experience
financial difficulties. He received worker’s compensation but the income was not
sufficient to pay his child support obligation of $125 a week and pay for his living
expenses. Thus, he fell behind in the child support obligations (GE 6).
In March 2005, Applicant and his sons were hunting. Applicant uses a bow and
arrow. His friends use shotguns. He had their guns in his truck. The game warden
3
advised Applicant that he could not have the guns in his possession because he was a
convicted felon. Applicant turned himself in for the firearm charge and he was released
on bond after going to court. The charge was dismissed. (GE4; Tr. 51).
Applicant was diagnosed with cancer in 2005. He had surgery and was treated
for at least a five-month period. He could not work during the treatment (Tr. 56). In
March 2005, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy (GE 4). On June 24, 2005, the
bankruptcy was discharged. He had approximately $51,000 in liabilities. 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts, including one child support obligation,
a bankruptcy, a charged off account and approximately four unpaid medical debts. The
total amount of the unpaid medical bills is approximately $600 (GE 7).
SOR allegation 2.a is for a charged off account in the amount of $11,584. This
account opened in 1999 appears to be the same account that was discharged in the
bankruptcy petition under another account name (GE 2). Applicant was adamant that
his attorney advised him that all his delinquent accounts, except child support, were
included in his March 2005 bankruptcy.
SOR 2.b is a telephone bill for $97 that Applicant has paid. He did not have
documentation at the hearing. He initially disputed the bill because the phone service
was not adequate and he cancelled the plan. He sent them a check recently (Tr. 65).
SOR 2.c-2.f are unpaid medical bills from late 2006. They total approximately
$600. Applicant has paid many medical bills. He is not certain if his insurance paid some
of the bills. He pays what he can when he receives a bill (Tr. 66).
SOR allegation 2.g is for past due child support (interest only). Applicant has
been paying and the amount has been reduced from $5,109 to $3,121.79. The amount
of approximately $58 is taken directly from his weekly pay check (AE N). The children
are emancipated at this point in time.
SOR allegation 2.h is for the bankruptcy that Applicant filed in 2005. This chapter
seven bankruptcy was discharged in June 2005 (GE 2). The liabilities resulted from
Applicant’s divorce, illnesses and unemployment.
 .
Applicant’s current monthly net income is $4,000. His wife also works. After
monthly expenses and child support and current debt payments, he has a net remainder
of $600. Applicant’s truck loan and credit card debt are current. He received financial
counseling in 2005 when he filed for bankruptcy. He has an established budget now (Tr.
79). 
Applicant’s current employer recommends Applicant for a security clearance. He
reports Applicant plays a vital role in the timely quality and construction of the most
advanced combatants in the world (AE G). He has served his department with integrity
and possesses excellent mechanic skills. He has provided dedicated supervisory
4
responsibilities and displayed outstanding supervisory skills and dedication. He tackles
every assignment with a “can do” attitude (AE H). Applicant is well respected by his co-
workers (AE I). He is a hard worker and is knowledgeable of submarine work. He has
acted in the capacity of a make-up foreman on several occasions and has performed
well (AE K). He works in a focused, timely, and concise manner. He works any shift or
assignment that he is given without hesitation (AE A). He is receptive to management
style and is quick to learn new systems. He is an extremely valuable and dedicated
employee (AE B, C and D). During his current employment, Applicant has completed
many courses and attained proficiency in different operational areas (AE M).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
5
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on numerous accounts and
could not meet his financial obligations from the late 1990's. He filed for bankruptcy in
2005. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions,
requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying
conditions may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@
Applicant=s financial worries arose in 1995. He accumulated some delinquent debt due
to his medical conditions and unemployment. He also fell behind in his child support
obligations. While those circumstances may have precipitated the debt, the inquiry does
not end at that point. He did pay the medical bills that he could and had been paying his
child support. Because of his dedicated recent efforts to establish financial
responsibility, it is unlikely that the financial difficulties will recur or that there is any
doubt about his current reliability or good judgment. This potentially mitigating condition
applies. 
6
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, his
financial problems initially arose from his illness, divorce, and a period of
unemployment. Although, he received worker’s compensation benefits, those benefits
were not adequate for him to maintain payments on his debts. After he became re-
employed, he acted responsibly in identifying and resolving these debts. I find this
potentially mitigating condition fully applies.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). This fully applies. Similarly, AG & 20(d)
applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant received counseling when he
filed for bankruptcy in March 2005. This is a legitimate means to resolve financial
difficulties. In this case many of the financial problems were caused by his various
illnesses and not frivolous spending. I conclude this potentially mitigating condition
partially applies to SOR 2.d.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant stated that the alleged
debt in allegation 2.a for $11,000 was included in the bankruptcy petition. The date in
the SOR for this debt predates the 2005 bankruptcy discharge. He disputed the account
and although he did not have separate documentation, the account appears to be the
same one as listed in a schedule of the petition. I conclude this potentially mitigating
condition partially applies.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 30:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 31(a), an “single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” may be potentially
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG 31(c) an allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted” may raise security concerns. Applicant has two convictions from the 1960's.
The 2005 charge was dismissed. This is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying
conditions.
7
AG ¶ 32(a) “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment” is a possible
mitigating condition.
Applicant’s two convictions occurred about 40 years ago. His recent (2005)
incident involved the physical possession of firearms in his truck during a hunting trip.
The guns did not belong to him, but he was in actual possession of them in his truck.
This mitigating condition applies because of the unusual circumstances of the offenses
in the 1960's, and he will not permit firearms in his truck in the future.
Similarly, AG ¶ 32(c) “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement” is a possible mitigating condition.
Applicant has not been involved in a serious crime in 40 years. However, the
2005 incident shows poor judgment. The charge was dismissed in court. Applicant was
credible in that he did not understand that he could be in possession of the guns
because they did not belong to him. He has worked steadily for the past 40 years
except for a period of recuperation from surgery or illness. He raised his family and until
1995 was current on his child support. He has highly favorable recommendations from
his employer. He has taken many courses to improve his work skills. He regrets his
behavior when he was a very young man. This mitigating condition partially applies.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are sufficient to
overcome the government’s case. Applicant was 17 years old when he had trouble with
the law. He served his sentence and has not been convicted of any crime in the past 40
years.
8
Due to illness and unemployment, Applicant had financial difficulties. He fell
behind in his child support but is now steadily paying the amount. He has $57.50
deducted from his weekly pay check. His children are now grown. Applicant filed for
Chapter 7 Bankruptcy in March 2005 and his debts were discharged the same year.
This is a legal means of resolving debt.
Applicant has taken his work seriously. He has completed many courses during
his employment so that he may better perform his job functions. He has worked hard to
support his family and children. His employers have recommended him highly. He has
had no documented problems with any of his employers. His current employer praises
his hard work and professionalism. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations and criminal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.h: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
