 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-03313 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kathleen E. Voelker, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the alcohol consumption security concerns raised by his 
alcohol related incidents. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on May 3, 2006. On November 7, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s 
security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline J (Criminal 
Conduct).1  
 
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 19, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2008. 
The Notice of Hearing was issued on January 23, 2008, convening a hearing on 
February 26, 2008. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government 
presented eight exhibits, marked GE 1-8, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant presented two witnesses, testified on his own behalf, and presented 23 
exhibits, marked AE 1-23, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on March 5, 2008. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
The Government moved to amend the first sentence of SOR ¶ 1.b, by deleting 
the date “August 5, 2006,” and substituting the date “April 30, 2005.” Applicant did not 
object. I granted the motion (Tr. 10).  
 
The Government elected not to pursue the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a, conceding 
that under Applicant’s state law, driving under the influence is considered a civil 
infraction and not a criminal offense (Tr. 11-12). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.c, and 1.d. He denied, however, the validity of the allegations reflected in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.e, and 2.a, and provided explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, including his 
demeanor, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
  
  Applicant is a 40-year-old senior electrical engineer. From 1986 to 1990, he 
served in the U.S. Army on active duty. His service was characterized as honorable. 
After his discharge he served in his state National Guard for four years (Tr. 102, 138). 
He received a Bachelor of Science degree in physics, and then completed a Master in 
Science and Technology Management in 2006 (Tr. 103).  
 
Applicant has been working for a defense contractor for approximately 10 years 
during which he has had access to classified information at the secret level (Tr. 103, GE 
1). There is no evidence to suggest, and the Government does not allege, that Applicant 
has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. Nor does 
the record evidence show that Applicant has ever failed to follow the rules and 
regulations required to protect classified information.  
 
Applicant has a reputation as a gifted engineer who is extremely dedicated and 
resourceful. Numerous certificates of appreciation/achievement, monetary awards, and 
outstanding performance appraisals attest to his excellent work history, character and 
professionalism (AE 4-21).  
Applicant and his wife have known each other for approximately 10 years, and 
married in June 2004. They have an 18-month-old daughter, and his wife was 
 
3 
 
 
scheduled to deliver a boy in April 2008 (Tr. 59). He also has a 15-year-old daughter 
from a prior relationship. 
 
Applicant has a history of episodic alcohol abuse, marked by his involvement in 
five alcohol related incidents. In June 1987, Applicant was arrested and found guilty of 
driving while intoxicated (DWI). He received probation before judgment. While serving in 
the Army, Applicant consumed alcohol frequently and was counseled informally by his 
supervisors for what he called his “after working hour’s problem” (Tr. 140). Applicant 
received non-judicial punishment because he was late to work as a result of being hung 
over from drinking the night before (Tr. 139). He remembers blacking out one time 
during his period in the Army. 
 
Applicant continued drinking alcohol while in college. He remembered having one 
or two blackouts/passing out as a result of his alcohol consumption. In January 1996, 
Applicant was involved in a one car accident. He was driving to the dorm through ice 
and snow at around 10:00 P.M. His car slid on the ice and hit a sign post, losing his 
car’s tag. After inspecting the car, Applicant continued on his way home where college 
friends awaited him. He claimed he had not consumed any alcoholic beverages before 
the accident. Applicant and his friends partied and consumed alcoholic beverages all 
night long that night. The next morning, police officers investigating the accident noticed 
Applicant’s smell of alcohol and he was arrested and charged with driving while 
intoxicated (DWI). The charges were dismissed in court (Tr. 163). 
 
 In July 1996, Applicant had two or three alcoholic drinks with dinner and drove 
his car home. He failed to obey an intersection stop sign and was arrested and charged 
with driving under the influence (DUI) and failure to obey the stop sign (Tr. 110). In 
November 1997, he was found not guilty of the DUI, but guilty of failing to obey the stop 
sign. He was given probation before judgment (Tr. 112, 166). 
 
 Applicant worked intermittently at a bar as a security person (bouncer) and bar 
backup (stocking and cleaning) from 1995 to 2007 (Tr. 104, 141). In April 2005, after 
working at the bar, Applicant consumed alcoholic beverages with his bar co-workers to 
the point of intoxication. He then drove his car home, lost control of the car and hit a 
bridge and a truck. He was charged with DWI, found guilty, and given one-year 
probation before judgment (Tr. 118, 168). As a condition of his probation, Applicant was 
required to report to his probation officer, and to abstain from drinking alcohol (Tr. 168-
169). Applicant stopped drinking for almost one-year; however, he started consuming 
alcohol before his probation term was over (Tr. 190). 
 
Applicant attempted to control his alcohol consumption by practicing controlled 
drinking. He did not attend alcohol counseling/therapy, Alcoholic Anonymous (AA), nor 
did he change his lifestyle. His controlled drinking did not work. Between April 2005 and 
August 2006, Applicant consumed alcohol approximately 10 times, four of which he 
consumed alcohol to excess (Tr. 119).  
 
 
4 
 
 
On a Friday in August 2006, Applicant was playing music at a bar and drinking. 
He drank alcoholic beverages while consuming cold medication. He then drove home, 
lost control of his car and rear ended another vehicle. He was arrested, charged with, 
and convicted of DWI. He was sentenced to 60 days jail (suspended), to pay a fine, and 
placed on probation. He was also required to attend victim impact group meetings, AA 
counseling, and to abstain from alcohol. In March 2008, he successfully complied with 
the conditions of his probation (except for payment of $192) (GE 23 at 4). 
 
The next working day after his DWI arrest, Applicant notified his employer of his 
DWI arrest and alcohol problem. He was enrolled in the company’s “Employee Family 
Assistance Program” (Tr. 121), and referred to formal therapy/counseling. He also was 
assigned a company manager (a recovering alcoholic) as a mentor to assist him as an 
informal AA coordinator (Tr. 123, 150). He met with the company mentor for 
approximately six months after his 2006 DWI (AE 22). 
 
After his August 2006 DWI arrest, Applicant realized he had an alcohol problem 
and that he needed help. He immediately began attending AA meetings, and attended 
90 AA meetings in 90 days (Tr. 124). He has continued to attend AA meetings, at least 
four times a week, to the day of the hearing. He finds the meetings helpful and promised 
to continue attending AA meetings.  
 
From August 2006 to September 2007, Applicant participated in an Intensive 
Outpatient Counseling Program. He was evaluated and received counseling from a 
state certified chemical dependence counselor who is also a licensed clinical alcohol 
and drug counselor. Applicant was diagnosed as being alcohol dependent; however, his 
prognosis is very favorable (AE 1). The counselor noted that Applicant has gained good 
insight into his addiction and his need to be in recovery . . . he sees the problems his 
behavior has created for him and others . . . and understands the potential 
consequences if the situation is not rectified (AE 1).  
 
In the counselor’s opinion, Applicant has been willing to do whatever necessary 
to maintain his sobriety. This is evidenced by Applicant maintaining contact with the 
counselor on a regular basis even after the conclusion of the formal treatment, regular 
attendance at several meetings of AA a week, strong sponsor contact, great family 
support, stable employment and strong work ethic, participation in the employer’s 
assistance program, and Applicant’s attitude (AE 1). Applicant’s AA sponsor has known 
him for approximately one-year as they attend the same AA meetings. Applicant 
changed AA sponsors about five weeks prior to the hearing because the prior sponsor 
was unavailable due to his travel schedule. Applicant’s current sponsor believes 
Applicant is doing all he can to maintain sobriety. Applicant has a great attitude; he is 
committed and dedicated to being sober (Tr. 45-53). 
 
Applicant testified the last time he consumed alcoholic beverages was in August 
2006. He credibly testified he has been sober since (Tr. 133). Applicant’s testimony is 
corroborated by his wife’s testimony, as well as the testimony of his AA sponsor, and 
the statement provided by his company’s mentor (AE 22). He further testified his 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
therapy taught him to change his lifestyle to be able to stop drinking (Tr. 134). In April 
2007, he stopped working at the bar to stop being around people consuming alcohol.  
 
After his August 2006 arrest, Applicant realized he had a drinking problem and 
sought help for the first time. His arrest was very close to his daughter’s birth and he 
realized he was at the brink of losing his family (Tr. 64). His wife confirmed Applicant 
has changed his lifestyle. His behavior is now family oriented, assisting with the care of 
his daughter, attending church meetings, working on remodeling his rental property, and 
avoiding friends who may be a bad influence (Tr. 134-135).  
 
Applicant continues to play music with his band, sometimes playing at bars 
where alcohol is being served. During 2007, he played music in bars six times (Tr. 158-
159). His last performance at a bar was in January 2008. Applicant claimed the entire 
band members know about his alcohol problem and protect him from drinking alcoholic 
beverages (Tr. 186). 
 
Applicant testified he understands the seriousness of his past behavior and takes 
full responsibility for his actions. He has made a conscious decision to be sober 
because of his concern to keep his marriage, his job, and to take care of his family. His 
past drinking behavior was a contributing factor to the ending of a prior relationship with 
the mother of his 15 year-old daughter (Tr. 160). 
 
Having observed closely Applicant’s demeanor, I find his testimony credible. At 
his hearing, Applicant promptly answered all the questions asked. He was frank, candid, 
and forthcoming in his answers and explained his answers without hesitation. He readily 
admitted his bad behavior and apologized numerous times for his questionable 
behavior. Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his actions.  
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.2 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). The 
adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, 
which are to be considered in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”3 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
  Under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), the government’s concern is that 
excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 21. 
 
3  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
7 
 
 
The government established its case under Guideline G by showing that in June 
1987, while serving in the Army, in July 1996, in April 2005, and in August 2006 
Applicant was involved in questionable behavior related to his alcohol consumption. 
Applicant drove while under the influence of alcohol in 1987, 1996, 2005, and 2006. He 
was convicted of DWI in 1987 and 2006. He received probation before judgment in 
2005.  
 
Applicant’s excessive alcohol consumption resulted in his exercising 
questionable judgment. Additionally, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent in 2006. 
Guideline G disqualifying condition AG ¶ 22(a): “alcohol-related incidents away from 
work, such as driving while under the influence,” AG ¶ 22(c): “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment,” and AG ¶ 22(e): “evaluation 
of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a license clinical social worker who is staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program,” apply.  
 
  There are four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 
potentially applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
 (a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
 (c): the individual is a current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and 
relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find Guideline G 
mitigating conditions AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. Applicant’s most recent DUI is recent. 
AG ¶ 23(b) applies. Applicant has acknowledged his alcohol dependence, presented 
credible evidence of actions taken to overcome his problem, and established he has 
been abstinent for 18 months. He is remorseful for his behavior and has initiated 
 
8 
 
 
changes in his lifestyle. His performance appraisals, certificates of achievement, 
monetary awards, and the statements from his company’s Employee and Family 
Assistance Program coordinator show Applicant’s work behavior has not been indicative 
of his having an alcohol problem. He is considered a valuable employee, who is reliable, 
dependable, and professional. Overall, he has made satisfactory progress in his 
counseling and treatment program. AG ¶ 23(c) applies. His wife, counselor, and AA 
sponsor corroborated he has abstained from alcohol since October 2006. Furthermore, 
Applicant received a favorable prognosis after he completed his intensive outpatient 
alcohol counseling, and continues his frequent participation in AA. At his hearing, 
Applicant acknowledged his issues of alcohol abuse, demonstrated remorse, and 
promised to continue his lifestyle changes and to remain abstinent. AG ¶ 23(d) applies. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the security concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 The Government conceded Applicant’s behavior did not involve criminal conduct 
under state law, and did not pursue the allegation in SOR ¶ 2. I find this allegation for 
Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I have carefully weighed all evidence, and I applied the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as listed under the applicable adjudicative guidelines in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and educated 
 
9 
 
 
man. He served honorably in the Army for approximately four years. He has worked for 
the same defense contractor and has had access to classified information at the secret 
level for approximately 10 years. Except for the pending allegations, there is no 
evidence of Applicant’s questionable behavior or, more importantly that he has ever 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information.  
 
Applicant has been willing to do whatever necessary to maintain his sobriety, 
including maintaining contact with his counselor on a regular basis even after the 
conclusion of the formal treatment and attending several AA meetings a week. He has 
great family support, stable employment and a strong work ethic. His participation in the 
employer’s assistance program, and his company support should ensure his successful 
rehabilitation. Applicant demonstrated the correct attitude and commitment to being 
sober. Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe Applicant has learned from 
his mistakes, and his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. In sum, I find Applicant 
has presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence convinces me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
