                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-04242
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
    
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: James N. Apostle, Esq.
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On December 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 25, 2008, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on February 14, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on
April 9, 2008.  A hearing was held on April 9, 2008, for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, deny,
or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted
of two exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and three exhibits.  The
2
transcript (R.T.) was received on April 17, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility to access classified information is denied.
Besides its two exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of 10
documents:  Background Note: Sudan, U.S. Department of State (January 2008);
Country Specific Information, U.S. Department of State (August 2007) U.S. Department
of State (August 2007); Travel Warning, Sudan, U.S. Department of State (September
2007); The U.S. Response to the Darfur Crisis, U.S. Department of State (October
2007);  Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006, Sudan (March 2007); State
Sponsors of Terrorism, U.S. Department of State (November 2007); Country Reports on
terrorism, Chapter 3 - State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, U.S. Department of State
(April 2007); Overview of Treasury and Commerce Regulations Affecting U.S. Exports to
Sudan, U.S. Department of State (March 2007); Blocking Sudanese Government
Property and Prohibiting Transactions with Sudan, Executive Order 13067), 62 Federal
Register 59989-59990 (November 2007); Blocking Property of and Prohibiting
Transactions with the Government of Sudan, Executive Order 13412, 71 Federal
Register 61369-61371 (October 2006).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 2007); ISCR
Case No. 02-24875 (App. Bd. October 2006).  Administrative notice is appropriate for
noticing facts or government reports that are well known.   See Stein, Administrative
Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause shown, administrative notice was
granted with respect to the above-named background reports addressing the geopolitical
situation in Sudan.  Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves,
consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evi.  This notice did  not foreclose
Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the
reports addressing Sudan’s current state.  
SUMMARY OF PLEADINGS
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged to (a) have a brother and three sisters
who are citizens and residents of Sudan; (b) send $500.00 a month to his siblings in
Sudan to assist them; (c) have a father-in-law and mother-in-law who are citizens and
residents of Sudan, (d) have a brother who is a citizen of Sudan and resides in the
United Arab Emirates; and (e) have returned to Sudan in 1996 to marry his spouse.  For
his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR without any
explanations. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 52-year-old linguist for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted
as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
3
Applicant’s background
Applicant was born and raised in Sudan and attended high school there.  Between
1973 and 1980, he was a professional soccer player; albeit, he never played for Sudan’s
national soccer team (R.T., at 29).  For about 10 years (between 1976 and 1986), he
worked for a civilian aviation company in Sudan (R.T., at 29, 87).  In 1986, he
immigrated to the U.S., and has had no further contact with his former Sudan employer.
Soon after his arrival in the U.S., he began working part time jobs, and applied for U.S.
citizenship.  Applicant was sworn in as a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1990 (R.T., at 30).
He retains his dual citizenship with Sudan (see ex. 1).  Applicant has several years of
college credits, but no degrees to date (R.T., at 28).  He expressed interest in returning
to college at some time, but to date he has not done so.
Applicant’s parents are deceased (R.T., at 28-29).  He has three brothers and two
sisters who are citizens of Sudan.  One brother owns a private business and resides in
Sudan (see ex. 2; R.T., at 36).  Another works for a private company, resides in the
United Kingdom, and recently became a British citizen (R.T. at 35-38); and a third works
for a government sponsored agency in the United Arab Emirates (R.T., at 31).  Applicant
maintains weekly to monthly contact with his brothers and sisters (see ex. 2).  None of
his siblings have ever worked for the Sudan government or have any interests in politics
(ex. 2).  And  no government or military officials have ever tried to exert any pressure or
influence over his family and work (R.T., at 40-41).   Both of Applicant’s two sisters
reside in Sudan.  One is a kindergarten teacher who is married (R.T., at 32-33).  The
other is a homemaker who is divorced (R.T., at 32).
Applicant last traveled to Sudan in May1996 to apply for his spouse (W) to
immigrate to the U.S (see ex.2).  W was born and raised in Sudan but moved to Saudi
Arabia with her parents when she was 11 (R.T., at 64).  W attended Saudi schools
through high school.  She earned an accounting degree from an Egyptian college.  After
earning her degree, she returned to Saudi Arabia to work (R.T., at 65-67).  Applicant met
W while he was working in Saudi Arabia and married her there in early 1996 (see ex. 1;
R.T., at 67). 
After his marriage, applicant briefly returned to the U.S.  Applicant returned to
Saudi Arabia in 1996 to file his application papers to bring her to the U.S.   The U.S.
Embassy refused to accept his marriage certificate and advised him that he needed to
obtain a certified marriage certificate from a Saudi court.   Because he could not
establish residency in Saudi Arabia, the Saudi court would not certify his marriage
certificate either (R.T., at 41-42).  His only open choice at this time was to travel with his
wife (who had a Sudanese passport) to Sudan to obtain a certified marriage certificate
that would enable him to bring her to the U.S.  Applicant obtained the certificate and
returned to the U.S. with W.  He has not been back to Sudan since his 1996 trip (R.T., at
42).   Once W immigrated to the U.S., she applied for U.S. citizenship.  She became a
naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2002 (ex. 1).
4
Applicant sends $500.00 a month to his siblings in Sudan for their necessities
(see ex. 2; R.T. at 42-43).  He owns no real estate in Sudan and has no business
interests in the country (R.T., at 43).  He has three daughters from his marriage to W (all
born in the U.S.).  They attended public schools for several years, but currently attend
private schools (R.T., at 46).  
Once qualified as a linguist for the Army, Applicant located to Iraq to work (in
November 2005).  He worked in Iraq for a little over two years, translating Arabic
documents to English, and English to Arabic (R.T., at 61-62).  He has never been
contacted by Sudan officials about taking adverse positions against the U.S. (R.T., at
48).  He returned to the U.S. in August 2007 after his interim clearance was revoked.  He
claims no conflicting loyalties to Sudan, however, and would like to return to Iraq to
further his linguist work.
W’s parents are Sudanese citizens by birth who currently reside in Egypt.  Her
father, once a communications engineer in Sudan, moved to Saudi Arabia in 1984 and
went to work for the Saudi military (R.T., at 71-72).  He retired in 2000 and to Sudan for a
brief period before moving to Egypt with Applicant’s mother (a homemaker) about 10
months ago (R.T., at 74).  He received a lump sum pension from his Saudi military
employer and receives no other pensions to Applicant’s knowledge (R.T., at 75). W
sends her parents $200.00 a month for necessities.  She maintains regular contact with
them (generally around twice a month).  Applicant talks to her parents occasionally when
he is at home (R.T., at 75-76).
W last visited her parents in August 2007 (following their move to Egypt).  She
visited her parents in the Sudan only once since she immigrated to the U.S. (in 2001)
(R.T.., at 77).  W has three brothers and three sisters, all of whom reside in Sudan.  The
oldest brother drives a bus for a private company (R.T., at 78-79).  Another brother is a
banker who has resided in Sudan since he moved there from Saudi Arabia in 2000 (R.T.,
at 79).  A third brother recently graduated from high school in Sudan and is trying to
open his own insurance company (R.T., at 79).  W’s remaining two brothers reside with
her parents in Egypt.  Of W’s three sisters, the oldest lives and works in Saudi Arabia.
Her other sisters are homemakers who have resided in the U.S. since 2000 and 2002,
respectively (R.T., at 81-82).  W maintains monthly contact with her brothers in Sudan
and Egypt, as well as her sister residing in Saudi Arabia (R.T.,at 83-84)  None of
Applicant’s brothers ever served in the Sudan military or government (R.T., at 86).  
Besides his siblings, Applicant has a cousin, two aunts, and an uncle who reside
in Sudan.  None work for the Sudan government.  He occasionally talks to these
relatives (who reside with his brother) when he speaks to his brother (R.T., at 94).
Applicant has had no involvement in the civil strife that has consumed Sudan ethnic
groups for years (R.T., at 95-96).  He described most of the strife as confined to the
southeast sector of the country (the Darfur region).  
Applicant has no reason to believe any of his siblings and other family members
residing in Sudan are at any risk to influence or pressure from the Sudanese military and
5
government officials (R.T., at 102).  He has not been to Sudan in many years and knows
nothing about Sudan’s intelligence service (R.T., at 103).  He has had no feedback from
other linguists in his organization about Sudanese intelligence gathering.
Applicant is highly regarded by his neighbors and coworkers who have worked
with him in Iraq (see exs. A through C).  All of his references express confidence in his
reliability and trustworthiness.  
Sudan’s country status
With one of the most diverse populations in all of Africa, Sudan is comprised of
two major cultures-Arab and Black Africa-with hundreds of ethnic and tribal subdivisions
and language groups.  This diverse population mix presents major challenges to
collaborative efforts.  See Background Note: Sudan, U.S. Department of State, at 2
(January 2008).
Historically, Sudan was once a collection of small independent kingdoms and
principalities, dating to the Christian era and ending with Egypt’s vanquishing and
unifying the northern sectors of the region in the 1820s (see id.).  Egypt never did
establish any effective control over the southern regions, which remained an area of
disparate tribes subject to frequent attacks by slave traders (see id.).
For a brief period in the early 1880s, Sudan was ruled by a religious leader who
proclaimed himself the Mahdi.  The Mahdi had led a nationalist revolt against he
Ottoman-Egyptian government that culminated in the fall of Khartoum in 1885.  Despite
his death shortly thereafter, the Mahdi’s state survived several more years before
succumbing to an invading Anglo-Egyptian force under Lord Kitchener in 1898 (see id., 
at 3).   Following their successful invasion, Egypt and Britain administered Sudan jointly
for a number of years, with Britain assuming management control and policy formulation
of Sudan (see id.).  
In February 1953, Britain and Egypt concluded an agreement that assured self-
government and self determination for Sudan (see Background Note: Sudan, U.S.
Department of State, supra, at 3).  Since gaining its independence, Sudan has endured
continuous wars within its borders.  Most of its civil strife is rooted in deep cultural and
religious differences that have stunted the economic and political development of its non-
Muslim peoples to the South and West.  Northerners who have controlled the country
since independence have pursued uniting policies based on Arabism and Islam over the
opposition of southerners and marginalized peoples to the South, East and West (see
id., at 3-4).
Following a brief return to civilian government after the overthrow of the
repressive Nimeiri regime, General al-Bashir and his Islam army faction mounted a
military coup and installed the National Islamic Front (see id., 4).  General al-Bashir’s
government committed to Islamism, which only served to intensify the north-south
conflict.  
6
Under General al-Bashir’s regime, Sudan became less and less responsive to the
grievances of Muslim and non-Muslim populations outside his northern political base.
The al-Bashir government continued its internal political repression against non-Muslim
groups and added its support to Islamist groups in Algeria, and to Iraq’s invasion of
Kuwait (id., at 5).
Regional efforts to broker a cessation of the Sudanese civil war between the north
and south/west provinces of the country were numerous throughout the 1990s (see id.).
Despite these brokered efforts, peace prospects in Sudan remained fairly remote by
2001.  Peace prospects initiated in 2002, however, produced an executed declaration
between the Sudan government and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army
(SPLM/A) that committed the government and the rebel group to a final comprehensive
peace agreement in December 2004 (see id.).
In January 2005, the al-Bashir government and the SPLM/A completed a
comprehensive peace agreement (CPA), establishing a new government of national
unity and the interim government of Southern Sudan.  Implementation of key provisions
by the peace agreement failed to materialize.  With the collapse of the peace agreement,
rebellion in Darfur ensued.  This resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of Darfur
inhabitants and mass internal displacement of two million persons in the Sudan, and
234,000 refugees in neighboring Chad (see id, at 6-8).  Without question, the Sudanese
government is complicit in the bombing, murder and rape of innocent civilians (which
include women and children living in aid camps) in Darfur, and bears principal
responsibility.  See The U.S. Response to the Darfur Crisis, U.S. Department of State
(October 2007).  The State Department charged President al-Bashir with demonstrating
“a continued refusal to honor his commitments to end the violence in Darfur (see id.).  
Sudan was designated a state sponsor of terrorism by the U.S. State Department
in August 1983, and remains on the State Department’s list of State sponsors of
terrorism (see id., at 9).  Sudan is under a broad U.S. embargo, and is subject to the
Treasury Department’s extensive trade restrictions on exports and re-exports to this
country.  See Overview of Treasury and Commerce Regulations Affecting U.S. Exports
to Sudan, U.S. Department of State, at 1  (March 2007).   These restrictions were eased,
but not removed under the recently concluded Darfur Peace and Accountability Act (id.).
Executive orders issued by both President Clinton (E.O. 13067) and President Bush
(E.O. 134120) cite Sudan’s human rights abuses as proof of the country’s posing an
unusual continuation of a threat to the national security and foreign policy of the U.S.
Compare E.O. 130687 (Blocking Sudanese Government Property and Prohibiting
Transactions with Sudan, Executive Order 13067), 62 Federal Register 59989-59990
(November 2007) with E.O. 13412 (Blocking Property of and Prohibiting Transactions
with the Government of Sudan, Executive Order 13412, 71 Federal Register 61369-
61371 (October 2006).
Sudan today is governed according to a power sharing arrangement established
by the January 2005 CPA, which was supposed to end the 22-year old civil war between
the north and the south.  See Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006,
7
Sudan (March 2007).  The CPA established an interim government of national unity,
which is composed of the National Congress Party (NCP), and is dominated by Islamists
from the north, and is ruled by an authoritarian president (Omar al-Bashir).  
Human rights continues to be a serious problem in Sudan. The State
Department’s report on human rights in the Sudan paints a grim picture. Despite the
signing of the CPA in 2005, sporadic violence continued to occur in the south (see
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006, Sudan, supra).  Militias aligned with
the SAF and the SPLM/A, as well as the increasing non-aligned militias, continued to
wage violent attacks on each other’s ranks in the Darfur region (see id.).  The al-Bashir
government bears ultimate responsibility for extraordinary human rights abuses that
have exploded on all fronts: rape, violence, hunger, displacement and looting.  Human
rights abuses include harsh prison conditions, arbitrary arrest and detention, including
incommunicado detention of suspected government opponents and prolonged pre-trial
detention, executive interference with the judiciary, denial of due process, widespread
prostitution, trafficking in persons, and harassment of journalists and religious groups
(id., at 8-12).
Recent UN peacekeeping reports cite evidence of systematic rape of women and
children in Darfur as particularly troubling.  The region today has rapidly turned into a
virtual free-for-all that has placed in jeopardy basic UN relief missions (see Country
Reports on Human Rights Practices - 2006, Sudan, supra, at 8-11).  While the al-Bashir
government and its loosely aligned militias have continued their attacks on local villages
in the regions, Darfur has become a center of organized crime and warlordism that
embraces marijuana-smoking rebels, disaffected government militias, and rogue bandits
brandishing AK-47 weapons.  All of these symptoms reveal how fragmented the fighting
has become in Darfur.  Where there were once two principal rebel groups (SPLM/A and
Justice and Equality Movement (JEM)) in Darfur (id., at 1), there are now dozens, some
which include Arab militiamen that once sided with the al-Bashir government.  
Along with rape and pillaging of women and children, the proliferation of banditry
has come to pose a major threat to UN-African Union humanitarian groups operating in
the region.  Carjackings, once rare, are now commonplace and victimize not only local
populations, but  major relief donors operating food distribution programs in Darfur.
Conditions today in Darfur indeed reflect a marked change from the beginning of the
conflict in 2003, when the al-Bashir government unleashed its aggression to crush the
rebels operating in the south and west of the country under the banner of ending
decades of discrimination by a government of Arab elites.  Though Arab and African
ethnicities are very intertwined in Sudan, the al-Bashir government fanned Arab
nationalism and money as a way to rally the landless, Arab nomadic militias against their
farmer neighbors who identified themselves more as African.  U.S. efforts in pressing for
strong UN-African Union action have been largely frustrated by events and conditions
that have witnessed disillusioned janjaweed militia, abandoned by the government,
actively joining forces with rebels and government soldiers in the expanding business of
looting, carjacking, and petty shakedowns (see Background Note: Sudan, U.S.
Department of State, supra, at 7). 
8
U.S. citizens are continually cautioned by the State Department to avoid travel to
Sudan.  See Travel Warning, Sudan, U.S. Department of State (September 2007).
Considered especially dangerous to U.S. citizens is the Darfur area (see id.).  Americans
and other westerners have been targets of carjackings and armed robberies while
traveling in Sudan.  Terrorist actions may include suicide operations, bombings, or
kidnappings (id.).  Travelers are reminded of reports of terrorist threats directed at
Americans and western interests in Sudan, and to avoid travel outside of the capital city
of Khartoum and the adjacent town of Obdurman (see Country Specific Information, U.S.
Department of State (August 2007).  Travel outside of these major cities remains
hazardous (see id., at 2).  
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
administrative judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These
Guidelines require the administrative judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and
all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the
administrative judge to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In
addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, administrative judges must take into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in
E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are intended to
assist the administrative judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism” (see Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6).
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that
to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires
9
administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in
the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance
depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all
adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security
clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
ANALYSIS
Born and raised in Sudan, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1990.
He married his wife in 1996 and brought her to the U.S. the same year.  She applied for
U.S. citizenship shortly after her arrival in the U.S., and became a naturalized U.S. citizen
in 2002.  Security concerns focus on Applicant’s siblings who currently reside in Sudan
and Saudi Arabia, respectively, and his wife and family members who have Sudan
citizenship and residency in Sudan and Egypt, respectively.  Applicant and his wife and
family have deep roots in Sudan, a country historically known to practice terrorism and
genocide, and to exercise ruthless repression and human rights abuses against its own
citizens.
The Government urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s siblings and
family members, as well as his wife and her family members residing in Sudan and Egypt,
might be subject to undue foreign influence by Sudan government authorities to access
classified information in Applicant’s possession or control.  Because Applicant and his
wife have family members who have Sudan citizenship by birth and reside currently in
either Sudan, or Egypt or Saudi Arabia, they present potential heightened security risks
covered by disqualifying condition  (DC) 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the Adjudication Guidelines for
foreign influence. The citizenship/residence status of these family members in Sudan and
neighboring countries pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of
10
undue foreign influence that could compromise sensitive or classified information under
Applicant's possession and/or control. 
Because none of Applicant’s family or W’s family have any identified prior military
or government service, no consideration of DC 7(b), “connection to a foreign person,
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information,” is
warranted.  To be sure, from what is known from the presented evidence, none of W’s
immediate family residing in Sudan have any political affiliations with the Sudan
government or military, have any history to date of being subjected to any coercion or
influence, or appear to be vulnerable to the same. 
Still, upon fully considering Applicant’s explanations about his siblings and family
members residing in Sudan, and his wife’s dual Sudan citizenship and deep family roots
in Sudan (which include all of her siblings who still reside there), risks of undue foreign
influence on Applicant, his own siblings, his wife and her family members residing in
Sudan and Egypt, respectively, Applicant/W’s contacts with their family members  appear
to be substantial and ongoing, and clearly of the magnitude that could make them subject
to a heightened security risk of pressure or compromise under Guideline B.
Sudan, a country reported to be a continuous state of civil war with its ethnic
populations of Darfur, continues to be a very repressive state that is historically burdened
with a poor human rights record and respect for the rule of law.  Not only is Sudan a
reported repressive state who has targeted ethnic people to the South for various human
rights abuses, but it is known to be very dangerous to Americans and westerners
traveling outside the main cities of the country.
The Adjudicative Guidelines governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se
results or mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are
citizens/residents of foreign countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable
risk in one foreign country may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by
practical necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for
referencing in the supplied materials and country information about Sudan. 
Unlike the old Adjudicative Guidelines, the new ones do take into account the
country’s demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important consideration in gauging
whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a
heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign
regime involved do matter.  As demonstrated, Sudan has long been known to be a
repressive country, who for decades has been involved in a ruthless civil war with the
south/west.  Sudan remains a country on the State Department ‘s state terrorist list, and
one with a known history of hostage taking and human rights abuses of wide magnitude
and scope. 
11
As for security concerns associated with the presence of Applicant's extended
family members in Sudan, the potential heightened risk of a hostage situation or undue
foreign influence brought in the hopes of eliciting either classified information or economic
or proprietary data out of Applicant through both his own family members and his wife’s
wife’s siblings still residing in Sudan is considerable, Applicant’s disclaimers
notwithstanding.  Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.”  is not available to Applicant.  Neither Applicant nor his wife and their respective
family members residing in Sudan can be characterized as sufficiently insulated from
potential pressures and influence from Sudan government and military officials to warrant
application of this mitigating condition.
Of some benefit to Applicant is MC 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group,
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant’s demonstrated loyalty,
patriotism, and professional commitments to the U.S., while considerable, are not enough
to neutralize all potential conflicts that are implicit in his relationships with his spouse, his
siblings, and his wife’s family membersr.  MC 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create risk for
foreign influence or exploitation,” has some applicability, too, based on Applicant own
infrequent contacts with his wife’s family members residing in Sudan.  Application of MC
8(c) is necessarily limited, though, because of the frequent exchanges applicant and W
maintain with their family members residing in Sudan.
Two other mitigating conditions have mixed application to Applicant’s situation.
MC 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, groups, or
organizations from a foreign country,” has some prospective value based on Applicant’s
assurances of reporting his travel plans to Sudan, and his long absence from the country
(no visits since 1996).  But there is really no documented record of Applicant’s prior
reporting of his contacts with members of his family and his wife’s family, respectively, to
warrant any more than minimal consideration at this time.  The same holds true with
respect to MC 8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.”  The extent of
Applicant’s and W’s financial interests and expectancies (e.g., inheritance) in Sudan is for
the most part still unknown.  
Whole person assessment is not available either to minimize Applicant’s exposure
to conflict of interests with his Sudan family members.  While Applicant is not aware of
12
any risks of coercion, pressure, or influence that any of his, or his wife’s, family members
might be exposed to, he acknowledged little information about them, their backgrounds
and relationships with former associates.  So, in Applicant’s case, the potential risk of
coercion, pressure, or influence being brought to bear on him, his wife, or any of their
respective family members remains uncertain, and therefore potentially considerable. 
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's relations with his
wife and their respective family members residing in Sudan, are insufficiently mitigated to
permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand risks of undue
influence attributable to his familial relationships in the Sudan.  Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline B.
In reaching my recommended decision, I have considered the evidence as a
whole, including each of the factors and conditions enumerated in E2.2.2 of the
Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
FORMAL FINDINGS
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B: (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a : AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.e: AGAINST APPLICANT
 CONCLUSIONS
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
13
