 
 
                                      
 
 
1
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 07-05858 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 6, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), also known as Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On October 22, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised. The SOR alleges security concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
 
 The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
 
 
                                      
 
 
2
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations in a sworn statement signed on 
November 26, 2007, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu 
of a hearing. One document was attached to the answer.  
 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 4, 2008, 
was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He provided some additional 
information which was received by DOHA on April 15, 2008, and admitted without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on May 9, 2008. Additional information was 
submitted on June 11 and 19, 2008, and they were admitted without objection. Two 
documents were credit reports that were already in the record (Exhs. 6 and 8). Two 
others were receipts for payments made on two debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and d.). The final 
document concerned payment of $226 on an account not alleged in the SOR.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR seven of the eight allegations in the 
SOR of financial considerations relating to delinquent debts. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked 
there since February 2005 as a security officer. He had a motorcycle accident in April 
2003 and sustained injuries resulting in medical expenses and a one-third reduction in 
salary for the following year before he moved to his present location. Over several years 
in his former employment and a one-year period of unemployment before obtaining his 
present job, he incurred debts of approximately $20,000 and they have become 
delinquent. He moved from the west coast where he was employed because of the high 
cost of living and drug crimes near his residence. However, he had difficulty obtaining 
employment and the expenses they incurred were for moving costs, utilities, a 
computer, vehicle repossession, rent, and other living expenses.  
 
 Applicant is married with one child. Their daughter has a learning disability and 
requires full attention so his wife does not now work except as a school aide working 
with their daughter. They are now able to keep up with present financial obligations but 
not able to resolve the delinquent debts at issue. They do not have a credit card or an 
automobile. He commutes to work on a borrowed motorcycle. He has a net income of 
$2,000 per month and, after expenses, has $93 remaining (Exh. 5). He was in the Army 
for approximately six months in 2001.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                      
 
 
3
Financial Considerations 
 
  Applicant admits to over $18,000 of the $20,000 debts alleged in the SOR. He 
denies one debt of approximately $1,200 (SOR 1.f.). He is investigating the status of the 
debt but did not supply any additional information in the response to the FORM. Two of 
the remaining delinquent debts have been resolved or is being resolved. The smallest is 
a utility bill for $54 which has been paid (Exh. B). He has paid $100 (Exh. C) on a $226 
garbage bill (SOR ¶ 1. d.) and is making payments.  He avers that several other debts 
have been charged off but does not deny that he owes them. The largest single debt is 
approximately $14,000 (SOR ¶ 1.g.) for an automobile repossession that has not been 
paid.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,” 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
                                      
 
 
4
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
 Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that Guideline F provides the standard for resolution of the allegations 
set forth in the SOR. It states: 
 
Guideline F Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit report (Exh. 6). 
At least seven of the debts remain unresolved. Only the one for $226 has been proven 
to be partially paid in the amount of $100. The government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19 (c).  
 
 Five Mitigating Conditions (MC) are provided under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) in the 
Guideline and have been considered:  
 
 
 
                                      
 
 
5
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant provided documentation in his answer and his response to the FORM to 
establish mitigation for two of the debts. However, his statements concerning his intent to 
make  payments to creditors are insufficient because he did not provide any proof that 
such was being done or his financial ability to do so. While his income appears insufficient 
to materially resolve the debts, he has not act responsibly under the circumstances since 
he has only resolved two of the smallest debts and admits that he has insufficient 
resources to resolve the others.  Thus, AG ¶¶20 (a) and (b) do not apply. 
  
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply because there are no clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control, and he did not establish that he acted in 
good faith to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable to his one disputed debt 
because he did not provide “documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
                                      
 
 
6
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions previously discussed through application of the whole person concept. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to financial considerations. He has made some progress in 
resolving the smallest debts but currently has substantial unresolved, delinquent debt. 
While he admittedly does not have sufficient income in his present circumstances to 
make much progress resolving the delinquent debt, he has not entered debt counseling 
or taken other steps that would justify applying mitigating conditions.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), a careful consideration of the whole person factors and supporting 
evidence, application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative Process, and 
interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has not mitigated or 
overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                      
 
 
7
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
    ___________________ 
Charles D. Ablard 
Administrative Judge 
