                                                              
 
1 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
--------------------   )  
SSN: ------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-14414 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se                 
         
                               
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Clearance is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on January 9, 
2006. On February 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines 
H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), for Applicant. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 22, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on March 17, 2008. I received the case assignment on March 20, 2008. DOHA issued a 
 
2 
                                      
Notice of Hearing on April 22, 2008, for a hearing on May 30, 2008, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, the government offered two exhibits (Exh.) which were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant submitted four exhibits which were admitted without 
objection. He testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on June 11, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
Amendment to SOR 
The government moved to amend the SOR in accordance with evidence submitted 
by Applicant in the following ways: 
SOR ¶ 1.d. was amended to delete “without a prescription” and substitute “in a 
manner inconsistent with approved medical direction.” 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and f. were amended to substitute the date February 2007 for 
December 2006 in both sections.  
Applicant had no objection to the amendments (Tr. 9). 
Findings of Fact 
Applicant is a twenty seven-year-old employee of a government contractor. He has 
worked since August 2004 in information systems, specializing in networking.  
The allegations in the SOR under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) relate to 
Applicant’s use of illegal drugs and use of prescription drugs in a manner inconsistent 
with approved medical direction between 2000 and 2007. The illegal drugs were 
marijuana and cocaine, which he used while in college. He used the drugs as frequently 
as two to three times a week (SOR ¶¶ 1. a. and b.). During his college years, a friend 
died of a drug overdose and, while this had an effect on him, he continued to use drugs 
but less often than before the death of his friend.  He graduated from college in 2003 and 
has not used those drugs since then.  He no longer sees any of his college friends with 
whom he used drugs.  
Applicant is alleged to have used at various occasions, both legally and illegally, 
the prescription drug oxycodone under the names Tramadol and Percocet (SOR ¶¶ 1. c. 
d. and e.). While he had a prescription for Tramadol, he used it in a manner inconsistent 
with approved medical direction. The prescription was as a result of pain arising from an 
auto accident in 2002 (Tr. 46). However, he continued to use it past the time he needed it 
for pain between 2003 and 2006 and discovered he could not cease using it (Tr. 45). He 
obtained it on several occasions from internet orders.  
 
3 
                                      
Applicant also obtained Percocet from his grandmother who was using it for 
rheumatoid arthritis (Tr. 59). It is a stronger drug than Tramadol and not available over 
the internet. He did not have a prescription for Percocet.  
Applicant tested positive for oxycodone in February 2007, the most recent 
evidence of drug use in the allegations (SOR ¶ 1. e.).  He received medical treatment at 
that time because he overdosed on one of the drugs causing seizures. He had planned 
on applying for Officer’s Candidate School but the seizures made him ineligible for the 
program. As a result of the drug treatment he received, he was prescribed methadone by 
the doctor. He used it for two weeks until he had no withdrawal symptoms.  
 Allegations in the SOR relating to Guideline E (Personal Conduct) also alleged 
that Applicant was charged with setting off a fire alarm in a dormitory while in college in 
2003 and fined $550 (Tr. 34). He turned himself in to the police the following day after the 
incident. He was also charged with underage drinking in 2001 and his driver’s license 
was suspended for 90 days. The incident did not occur while driving (Tr. 33). He admitted 
both allegations.  
 Also alleged under Guideline E are the first five allegations regarding illegal drug 
use and illegal use of a prescription drug.  
Applicant does not now and has never held a security clearance. He seeks one 
because the other members of the staff with whom he interrelates have clearances or 
have applied for them and having one would be helpful in his work.  However, his  work is 
management, so he does not interface with classified information (Tr. 26).  
Applicant has a bachelor’s degree in business administration and computer 
information systems. He is married with a two-year-old daughter. His wife’s parents own 
and operate the company for which he works. He is active in his church with the youth 
group where he serves as a minister. Letters from his minister and two others indicate 
that he is held in high regard by them (Exh. A – C). 
Policies 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                             
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by department counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis 
Guideline H Drug Involvement 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶  24:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 (1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
 
  (2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                             
 (b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
Three drug involvement disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse”, “testing positive for illegal drug 
use”, and “illegal drug possession, including . . .  purchase, sale or distribution . . . .” AG 
¶¶ 25 (a), (b), and (c). The other five disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 are not 
applicable. These three disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant used drugs, 
tested positive for a drug he illegally obtained and used, and possessed drugs.  
AG ¶ 26 provides several conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
  
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
  
 (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Drug involvement with illegal drugs is mitigated by the passage of a period of five 
years, since his most recent use of illegal drugs was in 2003. He has removed himself 
from contact with drug users.  However, the misuse of prescription drugs last occurred 
only a little over one year ago. While he initially used the drug because of pain, there is 
no evidence that it grew from a severe or prolonged illness. His treatment from a 
medical professional grew out of seizures as a result of overdose on the prescription 
drug.  Thus, I conclude that he has not mitigated the allegations relating to the misuse 
of prescription drugs.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                             
Guideline E Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Since the first allegation under this guideline (SOR ¶ 2.a.) relates to the first five 
allegations under Guideline H, and raises the same issues of trustworthiness to hold a 
security clearance, there is no need to discuss it further under Guideline E.  
 
The other two allegations (SOR ¶¶ 2.b. and 2.c.) relate to the two criminal 
offenses that occurred in 2001 and 2003 while Applicant was in college.   
  
 AG ¶ 17 provides one condition that could mitigate security concerns for those 
allegations: 
 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
  The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 17 (c) is applicable to those two allegations.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2 (a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                             
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 While Applicant has shown evidence of rehabilitation by changes in his life style, 
and actions to remove himself from contact with drugs and users of drugs, the period of 
time elapsed since his last wrongful and illegal use of prescription drugs has not been 
sufficient to warrant a whole person finding in his favor. He failed to take advantage of 
the lessons he should have learned at the time of the death of his friend in college. He 
also should have known from his past experience with drug use that becoming 
dependent on a prescription drug might lead to the type of problems he encountered.  
 
 After considering all the evidence in its totality, I conclude that Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use. While he is a young man who 
likely has learned from his past conduct, it is premature to grant him a security 
clearance at this time.  
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraph 1.a.:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 1.b.:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
    Subparagraph 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
    Subparagraph 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
    Subparagraph 1.f.:   Against Applicant 
    Subparagraph 1.g.:  Against Applicant  
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.b.:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.c.:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                             
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance at this time. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge 
 
