1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11070
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On February 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its denial of Applicant’s
request for a security clearance. Specifically, it alleged facts which raise concerns under
Guidelines H, Drug Involvement, J, Criminal Conduct, and E, Personal Conduct. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 20, 2008, and requested a hearing. I was
assigned the case on April 10, 2008. On April 17, 2008, the hearing was scheduled for
May 16, 2008. During the hearing, I received five government exhibits, 23 Applicant
exhibits, and the testimony of six Applicant witnesses. I received the transcript on May
2
27, 2008. After reviewing the record evidence, I conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 30-year-old married man with three children. The two oldest are 13
years old and 22 months old, respectively. The third is an infant that he and his wife
adopted from a developing country in September 2007 (Tr. 187). Applicant has taken
some college courses.
From 1996 to 2003, Applicant served in the U.S. Army. He was an industrious
soldier with an aptitude for satellite communications technology. He received multiple
awards including Company Soldier of the Year, and Regional Soldier of the Year in
1999 (Exhibits H and I, Tr. 194). He frequently worked overtime on projects (Exhibit S at
1).
In May 2000, Applicant was promoted to a non-commissioned officer (NCO)
position after completing a non-commissioned officer’s course with honors (Exhibit O).
Younger soldiers respected him, considering him one of the “company father figures”
(Tr. 56). He was 24-years-old at the time. By approximately 2002, Applicant had a top
secret clearance with access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) (Exhibit 1
at 14, Tr. 240).
From 1997 to 2003, Applicant smoked marijuana approximately 15 to 20 times
with fellow soldiers in two duty locations. In one of the duty locations, he also smoked it
with a family member who had been living in his home (Tr. 172). Fearing adverse job
consequences, he did not disclose it on a security clearance application completed in
1999 (Tr. 245). One evening in March 2003 while at a party at a local college, Applicant
shared two cigarettes laced with cocaine (Tr. 212 - 213). The next day, he was ordered
to take a random drug test. Over the next two weeks, while the drug test was pending,
he used marijuana once more (Tr. 239).
Applicant tested positive for cocaine (Tr. 214). Subsequently, he was the subject
of Non-Judicial Punishment/Article 15 proceedings. He was reduced one paygrade,
ordered to forfeit half of his pay for two months, and served 45 days restriction. Also, his
security clearance was suspended.
Applicant’s command gave him the option of transferring to another position or
leaving the military (Tr. 218). He chose the latter option, and was honorably discharged
in April 2003 (Exhibit A). 
In November 2003, Applicant began working as a communications engineer for a
defense contractor. He worked there for approximately three years. He spent all but two
weeks of the first two years of his stint with this employer in either Iraq or Afghanistan
installing and maintaining satellite communications systems, and securing radio
frequencies (Tr. 116, 121, 222). 
3
The work was dangerous. Applicant lived outside of the Green Zone in Iraq. He
wore body armor and carried a weapon (Tr. 224). Once, he and some coworkers had to
shoot suppression fire at a hostile crowd that was converging on the hotel where they
were residing (Tr. 225). On another occasion, part of a convoy that was transporting
Applicant was destroyed by a roadside bomb (Tr. 136). While in Afghanistan, Applicant
provided onsite communications support to teams of Afghani workers, civilian police,
and U.S. military tasked with poppy eradication (Tr. 138). Much of the area the teams
covered was rural, desolate and littered with unexploded ordnance. On one occasion, a
team member’s hand was blown off by a land mine (Tr. 139). 
In September 2005, after returning to the U.S., Applicant accompanied his then-
supervisor to the U.S. Gulf Coast after Hurricane Katrina to help a local police
department rebuild its communications infrastructure (Tr. 127). The job took
approximately a month to complete. When he arrived, the municipality was under
martial law (Tr. 198). The police department deputized Applicant during this period
(Exhibit V). The department sheriff is “eternally grateful” for the assistance Applicant
provided (Exhibit W).
Applicant was laid off in August 2006 for reasons unrelated to performance
(Exhibit 1 at 13). His supervisor characterized him as dependable, hardworking, and
dedicated (Tr. 121).
Since October 2006, Applicant has worked for his current employer as a radio
frequency engineer. His duties include designing, maintaining, and securing satellite
networks (Tr. 50, 84). He is “well respected by his colleagues and supervisors and
relied upon as an esteemed member of [his] department” (Exhibit U). His current
supervisor describes him as “second to none” (Tr. 98). Also, he is dedicated to his
profession, continually researching new software updates and maintenance procedures
(Tr. 62 - Testimony of Co-Worker).
Applicant has not used illegal drugs since July 2003 (Exhibit 3 at 2). Since then,
he has attended pastoral counseling when not working out of town. He disclosed his
drug use history to the state social service agency that facilitated the adoption of his
youngest child. Before finalizing the adoption, the agency conducted a home study, and
required him to undergo two months of random drug testing, which he passed (Tr. 177-
179).
In December 2006, Applicant completed another security clearance application.
In an effort “to leave no stone unturned” (Tr. 231), he was fully forthcoming about his
drug use history.
Applicant is active in his church. He helps manage the church’s nursery class (Tr.
170).
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The government reposes a high degree of
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information.
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “use of an illegal drug . . . can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
5
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 24). Here, Applicant’s drug use while possessing a
security clearance, and the subsequent failed drug test, triggers the application of AG
¶¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” 25(b), “testing positive for illegal drug use,” and 25(g), “any
illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.”
During a six-year-period, Applicant used marijuana approximately three times per
year, and used cocaine once. He did not use drugs before then, and he has not used in
the five years since then. I conclude his use was not frequent. Its infrequency is
outweighed, however, by the negative inferences generated by his decision to use
drugs while in the Army, entrusted with a top secret clearance and SCI access, and his
intentional failure to disclose it on a 1999 security clearance application.
Nevertheless, the amount of time that has elapsed since the last use outweighs
the negative inferences generated by the nature and surrounding circumstances of his
use. There is no bright line definition of what constitutes recent conduct. Instead, it
depends on the totality of the record evidence (ISCR Case No. 03-02374). Applicant’s
drug abuse occurred between ages 19 and 25. Since then, his employers have
repeatedly entrusted him with high-pressure tasks under unusual and/or dangerous
circumstances. He has performed admirably. 
Applicant’s personal life has been equally distinguished. He adopted a child from
a developing country, and is actively involved in a local church, attending pastoral
counseling, and assisting with the church nursery school. The adoption is particularly
significant because he had to participate in home study that included two months of
random drug testing before it was finalized.
Applicant has been fully forthcoming about his past drug use during the current
security clearance investigative process. His testimony reflected a recognition of the
gravity of his past transgressions. He has always been a talented individual. During his
years in the military, however, he lacked the equally important characteristics of maturity
and good judgement. Throughout the past five years, he has developed these
corresponding attributes. Upon considering these facts, in addition to Applicant’s
credible, introspective testimony, I conclude that the significant rehabilitation that has
occurred since he last used drugs mitigates the possibility of recurrence. AG ¶ 24(a),
“the behavior happened so long ago . . . that it is unlikely to recur . . “, and AG
¶24(b)(3),”a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as an
appropriate period of abstinence” apply.
Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement Security concern.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under Article 112(a) of the Uniform Code of Military Justice, wrongful use of
illegal substances such as marijuana and cocaine is a crime. Consequently, Applicant’s
repeated marijuana use and one-time cocaine use while in the military generates a
6
security concern under AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,”
and AG ¶31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
For the reasons set forth in the Drug Involvement section, above, I conclude AG
¶¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened . . . that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment,” and 32(d), “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including
but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement,” apply. Applicant has mitigated the Criminal Conduct security
concern.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information,” (AG ¶15). Here, Applicant’s drug use while in the military led to the
suspension of his security clearance in addition to Article 15 proceedings. Ultimately, it
hastened his departure from the military. AG ¶ 16(e), “personal conduct, or concealment
of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress, such as . . .engaging in activities which, if known, may affect
the person’s personal professional, or community standing,” applies. 
For the reasons set forth in the Drug Involvement Section, above, AG ¶ 17(c), “. .
. so much time has passed . .  that [the conduct] is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” applies.
Applicant has mitigated the Personal Conduct security concern.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
7
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
By using illegal drugs and lying about it on a 1999 security clearance, Applicant
committed a serious dereliction of his responsibilities as a soldier, and betrayed the trust
bestowed upon him by his family. He has been drug-free for five years. In that time, he
has lived an exemplary life, earning the trust, respect, and admiration of his professional
colleagues, and has restored the trust of his family. I conclude the rehabilitation, and the
time that has elapsed since the last drug use outweighs the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct. Clearance is granted.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
