1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-11828
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On December 10, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 30, 2008, and requested an
administrative determination. He then filed a Supplemental Answer on February 29,
2008. On March 24, 2008, the government prepared a File of Relevant Materials
(FORM). Applicant received it on March 27, 2008, did not reply, and the case was
assigned to me on May 27, 2008. Based upon a review of the FORM, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
2
Preliminary Rulings
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR subparagraph 1.c to read as follows:
You are indebted for a judgement entered against you on or about July
2006, in the approximate amount of $367. As of November 28, 2007, this
debt has not been paid.
Applicant did not file an objection, therefore, I granted the motion. The allegation, as
amended, however, is vague. Although SOR allegations need not be drafted as
precisely as criminal pleadings, they must, at minimum, be drafted with enough
specificity for the applicant to prepare a response. SOR subparagraph 1.c does not
meet this threshold, therefore, I have resolved it in Applicant’s favor, and will not
address it further in the Decision.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 35-year-old man with three children. One is age 17, and the age of
the other two is not listed in the record. He recently divorced his wife to whom he had
been married for approximately ten years. Applicant served in the U.S. Marines from
1998 through 2002. He was honorably discharged. Since 2005, he has worked as a
security guard. He has a high school education.
In October 1996, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The SOR alleges that
“the bankruptcy was discharged” in approximately January 1997 (subparagraph 1.a).
Although Applicant admits to this allegation, it is unclear from the record whether
Applicant’s unsecured debt was discharged or whether the court dismissed the
bankruptcy petition before granting a discharge.
Currently, Applicant has approximately $16,000 of delinquent debt. SOR
subparagraph1.b is a judgment against him for delinquent payments on a trailer home.
Applicant’s ex-wife is paying this debt as part of their separation agreement (Answer at
3 through 9).
SOR subparagraphs 1.d through 1.l are medical expenses incurred in 2005 when
Applicant’s son injured himself playing high school football (Answer at 13). Applicant
contends the school should pay them (Answer at 4). He provided no evidence that he
has officially disputed these bills.
SOR subparagraphs 1.m and 1.n are student loans. Applicant has been paying
these through a federal income tax garnishment (Answer at 17-18). As of January 30,
2008, he owes $5,576 (Answer at 15).
SOR subparagraphs 1.o and 1.p are duplicate bills representing the deficiency
remaining from a 2001 automobile repossession. Applicant fell behind on the car note
when his then-wife was hospitalized and unable to work. It remains outstanding.
3
SOR subparagraph 1.q is a delinquent electric bill. Applicant alleges he paid it in
July 2007 (Answer at 5). He provided no supporting evidence.
Applicant had another vehicle repossessed in November 2006 (Answer to SOR
subparagraph 1.r). It is unknown from the record whether he owes any deficiency.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole
person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Applicant successfully demonstrated that SOR subparagraph 1.b is no longer his
responsibility. I resolve it in his favor. 
The remaining delinquencies raise security concerns under Guideline F, financial
considerations, because “failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
4
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Moreover, “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds” (Id.). 
Applicant’s history of delinquencies spans 12 years and includes two automobile
repossessions that occurred after a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing. AG & 19(a), “an inability
or unwillingness to satisfy debts,@ AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial
obligations,” and AG ¶ 19(e), “consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis,” apply.
I have considered the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. Applicant
provided scant evidence that his delinquencies are being resolved or are under control.
Also, he provided no documented proof to substantiate the basis of the disputed
delinquencies, and the record does not indicate he has undergone financial counseling.
I conclude the negative security inferences generated by the repetitive and ongoing
nature of his financial delinquencies outweigh any positive inference generated by the
fact that some of the delinquencies may have been caused by circumstances beyond
his control. Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
Evaluating this case using the whole person factors, particularly, the seriousness
of the problem, and its recurrent nature, I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. Clearance is
denied.
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d -1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.q - 1.r: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
