   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
  )  
 ------------------------  )  
 SSN: ---------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-10712 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
        For Applicant: Pro se               
         
                               
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). Security concerns regarding Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) were mitigated.  Clearance is 
denied.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on January 16, 
2006. On January 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines B, C, E 
and J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 28, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on February 2, 2008, and I received the case assignment on February 25, 2008. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on February 27, 2008, for a hearing on March 14, 2008, and I 
convened the hearing as scheduled.  
At the hearing, the government offered three exhibits (Exh.) which were admitted 
in evidence without objection. The government offered eleven official government 
documents for administrative notice and they were admitted without objection. Applicant 
offered no exhibits but he testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on March 24, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
Notice 
The hearing notice was dated 15 days before the hearing date. I advised 
Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before the 
hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to the 15 days notice and indicated he 
was ready to proceed (Tr. 7).  
Pleading 
 The government conceded that the allegations under Guidelines E and J were 
not proven and moved to withdraw them from consideration (Tr. 65). I approved the 
motion to withdraw those allegations from consideration.  
Findings of Fact 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor who was born in 
Iran, traveled to England in 1975 at age 19 to study and live with a brother.  He earned 
three university degrees in England including a Ph.D in computer imagery. He became 
a British citizen in 1984 and worked for a British defense contractor. He came to the 
U.S. and became a U.S. citizen in 1993. He operated his own consulting company for a 
period of time. He was employed by a U.S. defense contractor in 2000 and still works 
for a successor company. His work involves developing software systems for baggage 
scanning in airports. He has not held a security clearance but needs one to advance in 
his professional career with the company.  
  In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that his mother, two brothers, two 
sisters, and his mother-in-law are citizens of and resident in Iran. His two brothers in 
Iran are in the business of exporting fruit. A third brother lives in the U.K. and has a 
small business. He admitted traveling to Iran in 2000, 2005, 2006, and 2007, and 
holding an Iranian passport which he has held for many years (Tr. 25). It was set to 
expire in 2003 and he applied for a new one which does not expire until 2008.  He 
 3
prefers to travel with the Iranian passport to Iran as use of a U.S. passport with his 
background raises problems for him with immigration authorities in Iran (Tr. 31). He has 
offered to place his Iranian passport in the custody of his security office to be used only 
on travels to Iran but does not want to give it up or destroy it (Tr. 12).  He needs to 
travel there every year primarily to visit his mother but he also sees his siblings while he 
is there (Tr. 40-45).  In past years his family was able to visit him in England and the 
U.S. and did so, but that is not feasible now so he must visit them in Iran if he is to see 
them. Even though he does not hold a security clearance, he has advised cognizant 
authorities in his company of his past travels to Iran (Tr. 30). 
 Applicant’s wife was born in Iran, has a college degree, and works as a 
pharmacist in the U.S. They have two children ages 17 and 9 who were born in the U.S.  
They have investments and assets in the U.S. and none in Iran. 
 The documents submitted for administrative notice by the government consisted 
of U.S. government reports establishing some of the following adjudicative facts.  Iran is 
a theocratic Islamic republic dominated by Shia Muslim clergy. The government is 
hostile to the U.S. and has provided training, funding, and weapons to Shia political and 
militant groups in Iraq. The U.S. has designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism. 
The U.S. and international organizations are concerned about Iranian efforts to acquire 
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. Iran regards Iranian-born 
naturalized U.S. citizens as solely Iranian citizens and expects them to enter and exit 
Iran on an Iranian passport.  
       Policies 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 4
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors and conditions above, I conclude the following with 
respect to all allegations set forth in the SOR:  
 
 Conditions under Guideline B that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include contact with a foreign family member who is a citizen of, or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion (AG ¶ 7a). Based on the evidence of 
record, including Applicant’s acknowledgment of family members living abroad, the 
Government established a basis for concern over foreign influence. The Applicant had 
the burden to establish security suitability through evidence which refutes, mitigates, or 
extenuates the disqualification and demonstrates that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance. ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 
8, 2001). 
 
 By virtue of his relationships to the foreign family members, Applicant’s contacts 
cannot be deemed casual. Mitigating conditions (MC) that might be applicable are a 
 5
determination that the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which the persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual group or government and the 
interests of the U.S. (AG ¶ 8a). The other relevant MC is that the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. that he can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. (AG ¶ 8b). Applicant’s relatives live in 
a country whose government is hostile to the U.S. Terrorist organizations are located in 
the country and pose a threat in the area of the world with which the U.S. has security 
interests. Applicant has traveled there frequently and intends to continue to do so 
imposing a very heavy burden on him to mitigate this allegation as has been repeatedly 
held by the Appeal Board. I conclude that he has not done so. Neither mitigating 
condition applies.  
 
 
Guideline C: (Foreign Preference)  
 
 The applicable guidelines for Foreign Preference Guideline C provide that an 
individual who acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are 
harmful to the interests of the United States (AG ¶ 9). Conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying include the possession of a current foreign 
passport (AG ¶ 10 (a) 1).  
 
 Security concerns may be mitigated by providing evidence that the passport has 
been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise 
invalidated. (AG ¶ 11e) Applicant prefers to keep his Iranian passport and believes it 
provides more security to him when he travels to Iran. He has traveled there almost 
annually since 2000. He intends to continue to do so in view of his family loyalties to his 
mother and siblings in Iran. His proposal to give custody of the passport to his company 
is insufficient to mitigate since he has not and does not intend to completely surrender 
the passport to a security official. Thus, the mitigating condition is not applicable.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 6
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 Applicant is a person of substance who is well educated and ambitious. He has a 
responsible position of trust. He provided sincere and credible testimony as to his 
relationship with his family, his motivations, and his loyalty to the U.S. He has 
established a successful life here building financial ties to the U.S. He has a strong 
financial stake in the U.S. He has no deference to or loyalty to Iran.  However, the 
multitude of family connections and uncertainties in a tumultuous part of the world 
where possibilities exist to bring pressure on Applicant leads me to conclude that it is 
premature at this time to grant a clearance to him because of the potential for pressure 
or coercion. 
  
 After considering all the evidence in its totality and as an integrated whole to 
focus on the whole person of Applicant, I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant clearance to Applicant. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions as well as the 
above nine factors in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
While there is no evidence that Applicant is anything other than a loyal U.S. citizen, he  
has close relatives living in a country whose government has expressed hostility to the 
U.S. and seeks to harm other countries allied to the U.S. While Applicant left Iran before 
the revolution in 1979 that brought that government to power, he, through no fault of his 
own, still has relatives living there who could be pressured into attempting to cause him 
to take action contrary to the best security interests of the U.S. He continues to hold a 
passport of Iran which is still valid. Guidelines B and C are not mitigated. Thus, he is not 
eligible for a security clearance and must be denied.   
     Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant  
                                  
 
7 
                                      
 
                                   Paragraph 2, Guideline C:AGAINSTAPPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d.: Against Applicant  
      Conclusion 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
___________________ 
CHARLES D. ABLARD 
Administrative Judge 
 
