 
1 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-12922 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:                  , Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign family members. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
On January 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 5, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on April 8, 2008. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 18, 2008, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on May 29, 2008. The record closed on June 13, 2008. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 11, 2008.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to India. Applicant did not object and the request was approved. 
The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record as HE I through XIV. The facts administratively noticed are set 
out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called one witness, and submitted 
Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were received without objection. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until June 13, 2008, to submit additional matters. 
Applicant submitted 41 pages of documents marked as AE C through J. AE C, and E 
through J were admitted without objection. Department Counsel objected to AE D, a 
letter by Applicant dated June 12, 2008, on the basis that the letter contained additional 
information that was testimonial in nature. The objection to AE D is overruled and it is 
admitted. Department Counsel’s memo is HE XV.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He was born in the 
United States. He is a college graduate from an Indian university. He is single with no 
children.1 
 
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His maternal grandfather 
immigrated to the United States and became a U.S. citizen. His parents were visiting his 
grandfather in the U.S. when Applicant was born prematurely. They returned with him to 
India when he was very young. He attended school in India. It was his intent from an 
early age to eventually return to America to live. He returned to the United States in July 
2005, after he graduated from college.2 
 
 Applicant’s mother does not work outside the home. He contacts his mother by e-
mail about once a week. He also speaks with her periodically on the telephone. 
Applicant has not returned to India since he left in 2005. He saw his mother in 2006, 
when she came to the United States for a family member’s wedding. His father works 
for an Indian government agency. He is the head of a department. Applicant is not 
totally certain what his father does, but he believes it has to do with checking machinery 
and equipment. He believes his father has about 12 people working under him. His 
father served many years in the Indian military and retired as a senior officer. He 
receives a government pension based upon his military service. He is in his late 50s 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 34-35, 52; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 35-39, 42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 
and will retire when he turns 60. Applicant had limited contact with his father while he 
was growing up because his father was stationed in an area that was distant from 
where Applicant and the rest of the family lived. He is much closer to his mother than 
his father. His father has never visited him in the United States. His contact with his 
father is mostly limited to when Applicant is contacting his mother.3 
 
 Applicant’s younger brother is also a citizen and resident of India. He is in college 
pursuing a master’s degree. Applicant has very limited contact with his brother. He has 
not seen his brother since he left India in 2005. The last time he spoke to him was about 
six months ago, to wish him a happy birthday. Applicant would eventually like to 
sponsor his parents and brother to immigrate to the U.S. He does not provide any 
financial support to his family in India.4  
 
 Applicant lived with his grandfather when he came to the U.S. He currently rents 
an apartment as his grandfather has a full house. He plans on moving back in his 
grandfather’s house next year after another family member moves out. He is involved in 
his community. He is a volunteer Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) for his local fire 
and rescue department. He has volunteered 350 hours in the last seven months. He 
has no foreign assets. He is saving for the future and to be financially capable of 
sponsoring his family. He has assets of about $65,000 to $70,000 in the United States.5 
 
 Almost all of Applicant’s family on his mother’s side are in the U.S. His maternal 
grandparents, two uncles, and an aunt are all U.S. citizens and residents. He also has 
numerous cousins that are U.S. citizens. They all live in the same geographic location 
as Applicant, except for one cousin who lives in another state. His grandfather was born 
in India. He started working for the U.S. Government as a young man. He spent more 
than 40 years working for the U.S. Government, in India, in the United States, and in 
other foreign countries. His son, Applicant’s uncle, has worked for the U.S. Government 
for more than 20 years.6 
 
 Two of Applicant’s supervisors wrote character letters on his behalf. Both 
individuals have decades of experience in the military, as defense contractors, and hold 
clearances. Applicant is described as “a proud, patriotic citizen who is unequivocal in his 
support of our nation.” He has displayed integrity and is trustworthy, dedicated, and 
conscientious. They recommend him for a security clearance. His grandfather testified 
that Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen, who is stable and truthful, and would “not lie under 
any circumstances.”7 
                                                          
 
3 Tr. at 53-70; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 70-76, 86-87; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 43-44, 82-85, 96. 
 
6 Tr. at 87-89; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. at 99-100; AE A, B. 
 
 
4 
 
India 
 
 According to its constitution, India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic 
republic. It is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament 
and a population of approximately 1.1 billion.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but numerous 
serious problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial 
killings of persons in custody, disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack of 
accountability permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere 
in which human rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks have 
been committed in recent years by separatist and terrorist groups. 
 
The U.S. recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought to 
strengthen its relationship with India. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting 
terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s 
nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist. There are also concerns 
about India’s relations with Iran, including their increasing cooperation with the Iranian 
military. 
 
There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India, including technology and equipment which 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign 
government entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology, and acquisition of sensitive 
U.S. technology by foreign private entities does not slow its flow to foreign governments 
or its use in military applications. 
 
The U.S. views India as a growing world power with which it shares common 
strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries and they are 
expected to continue to address differences and shape a dynamic and collaborative 
future. The U.S. and India are seeking to elevate the strategic partnership further to 
include cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense cooperation, education, and joint 
democracy promotion. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
 
6 
 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s parents and brother are citizens and residents of India. His father 
works for an Indian government agency. India is the world’s largest democracy, works 
closely with the U.S. on many matters, shares common strategic interests, and 
generally respects the rights of its citizens. But it also continues to have some human 
rights issues, has been victimized by terrorist attacks, and restricted, dual use 
technology has been illegally exported to India. This creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential 
conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant was born in the United States, but was raised in India. He came to the 
U.S. in 2005, after he graduated from college. He obtained a good job, where he is 
respected and highly regarded. He lived with his grandfather, who is a U.S. citizen and 
has worked for the U.S. Government for decades. He is obviously very close to his 
grandfather and greatly admires him. Virtually all of his mother’s side of the family are 
U.S. citizens and residents. His parents and brother are still in India and his father 
works for the Indian government. India is a democracy and strategic partner of the 
United States. Technology has been illegally exported to India, but the Hearing Exhibits 
provided by Counsel do not show that coercion was utilized. I find that it is not likely 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the 
Indian government or his family members in India and the interests of the United States. 
I further find there is minimal conflict of interest, because Applicant can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) are 
partially applicable. No other mitigating condition is applicable. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
8 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an American citizen by 
birth. While he was raised in India, it is clear that the United States was always where 
he wanted to be. He returned to the U.S. in 2005, after he graduated from college. He is 
very highly regarded at work. He is committed to his community, volunteering many 
hours as an EMT. He diligently saved to be financially secure and to be able to sponsor 
his parents and brother to immigrate to the United States. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India. There is a strong 
partnership between the U.S. and India and they share common strategic interests. 
However, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”8 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly 
governments must be made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, 
sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to 
their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged 
in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with 
the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. Also very 
important is whether the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
  
 India is a democracy that generally respects the rights of its citizens, but 
numerous serious problems remain. Like almost every country, including the United 
States, it has been victimized by terrorist acts. Restricted, dual use technology has been 
illegally exported to India, but there is no indication that India utilizes coercion against its 
citizens for espionage purposes. Many of our allies conduct intelligence gathering 
against the U.S. India would be jeopardizing its relationship with the U.S. by raising the 
stakes, and attempting to use duress against one of its citizens in an attempt to coerce 
a U.S. citizen to commit espionage. Applicant’s position, assets, and ties in the U.S. 
make economic coercion through his parents and brother extremely unlikely to happen. 
In the very unlikely event that a conflict arose, I am convinced that because of 
Applicant’s strong ties to the United States, that he would resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the U.S. 
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
9 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
