                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-14191
SSN: --------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
June 20, 2008 
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(eQip), on November 9, 2006.  On February 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guidelines B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on February 27, 2008, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on March 26, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on April 4, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for April 24, 2008.  At the hearing the Government presented
two  exhibits.  The Applicant presented four exhibits and testified on his own behalf.
The official transcript (Tr.) was received on May 8, 2008.  Based upon a review of the
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
2
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political conditions in the People’s Republic of
China (PRC), the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (Hong Kong) and the
Macau Special Administrative Region (Macau).  Applicant had no objection.  (Tr. p. 23).
The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were
included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of
Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 38 years of age and has a Bachelors
Degree in Mechanical Engineering.  He is employed as a Mechanical Engineer for a
defense contractor.  He seeks a security clearance in connection with his employment
in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Hong Kong, China in 1969.  He was adopted by his
uncle and moved to the United States when he was ten years old.  (Tr. p. 32).  Since
then, he has lived in the United States, attended American schools, and fully
assimilated into the American culture.  In fact, he has never considered himself to be a
part of the Chinese culture.   (Tr. p. 33).  He married an American woman of Italian
descent and they have two children who were born in the United States.  His children
have never been to China, they do not speak Chinese, and the Applicant has no intent
of ever taking them to China, as their permanent home is the United States.  The
Applicant stated, “There is no reason for me to help China in anything in any way”.  (Tr.
p. 34).
The Applicant explained that although his biological father is a citizen and
resident of Hong Kong, China, the Applicant did not grow up with him.  The Applicant
and his biological father are not close, they have no parental bond, and no relationship
of that sort.  As a matter of respect, the Applicant has minimal contact with his biological
father, maybe once a year or so, or on holidays, and only because of the Applicant’s
respect for his Christian upbringing, which says that he should “honor his father and
mother”.  (Tr. p. 35).  Copies of the Applicant’s telephone bills for 2006 and 2007 verify
this.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D).  
In responding to interrogatories concerning this investigation, the Applicant
indicated that his biological father was self-employed, manufactured L.C.D. screens
from home, and is attempting to find investors for his business.  (Government Exhibit 2).
The Applicant was unsure about his responses and asked his mother to help him to
provide information about his biological father for the Department of Defense.  (Tr. p.
3
36).  The Applicant admits that he was mistaken about the information he provided the
DoD concerning his biological father.  The Applicant stated that the reason his biological
father went to Hong Kong  instead of to China is because the family hated Communism
so much and wanted to get away from it.  (Tr. p. 38).  A copy of the Applicant’s
biological father’s resume indicates that he was educated at MIT in the field of
Mechanical Engineering and then returned to Hong Kong.  Over the years he has been
involved in various business ventures in Hong Kong and/or has done consulting work in
the clothing and garment industry, the automobile industry, the computer industry, the
real estate industry, and power plants and the manufacture of wind turbines.
(Applicant’s Exhibit C).  He is not a member, nor has he ever been a member, of the
Communist party or any other political or government agency and has no ties to such.
He is a devout Christian and has been involved with the church on a volunteer basis for
many years in various capacities.  With the exception of still being Chairman of the
China Bible Seminary, he has retired from all of his other jobs and is no longer
employed.  The Applicant’s biological father has decided to permanently move to the
United States to live with the Applicant’s biological mother.  He has recently applied for
citizenship in the United States and is awaiting his application processing.  (Tr. pp. 37-
38).
The Applicant contacted his biological father for the limited purpose of alerting
him to the fact that the Department of Defense may contact him and question him
concerning the Applicant, as the Applicant is applying for a security clearance.  The
Applicant’s father is not aware of any other details concerning the Applicant.  For the
most part, the Applicant’s biological father has never shown interest concerning the
Applicant, his wife or his family in the United States.  
Although the Applicant’s biological father has a background in Mechanical
Engineering, just as the Applicant does, the Applicant has never and will not ever
discuss any work issues with him.  The Applicant does not talk to his father about his
work as he takes his responsibilities very seriously. On those rare occasions where the
Applicant may have the opportunity to talk with his biological father, they talk about the
Applicant’s son and his health problems.         
The Applicant’s uncle, who adopted the Applicant at the age of ten, is the
Applicant’s father for all intends and purposes.  The Applicant considers him to be his
father.  He is a citizen and resident of the United States and has raised the Applicant as
his own son.  
The Applicant’s biological mother, immigrated to the United States in the 80's, is
a citizen and resident of the United States and is teaching Chinese Bible Church.  The
Applicant lived with her for a short time when he came to the United States but now only
visits her on holidays.           
A letter of compelling need from the Applicant’s employer dated April 17, 2008,
indicates that the Applicant, with over ten years of experience in the field, provides key
skills necessary for solid Engineering support.  He is a dedicated employee and can be
trusted to perform his task with the highest quality and integrity and is strongly
recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A). 
4
In winter 1994, the Applicant was awarded for his academic achievement and
was on the Dean’s Honor List at the College of Engineering he was attending. 
(Applicant’s Exhibit B).  The Applicant received a certificate from the American Society
of Mechanical Engineers for a design entry in the National Student Design Competition
held at a University in March 1995.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B). 
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning the Peoples Republic
of China (PRC), the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (Hong Kong), and the
Macau Special Administrative Region (Macau).  While the Hong Kong government
generally respects the human rights of its citizens, under PRC nationality law, persons
who are of Chinese descent and who were born in the mainland China or Hong Kong
are PRC citizens. The People's Republic of China is a Communist country that its
politics, society and human rights records remain inconsistent with United States
system of democracy and freedom.  It is the most populous country in the world, is
economically powerful, and is an important trading partner of the United States.  It has
strong military forces, and has its own foreign-policy.  The United States is a primary
intelligence target of China because its role as a global superpower; its substantial
military, political, and economic presence in the Pacific Rim and Asia; its role as a
developer of advanced technology that China requires for economic growth and the
large number of Americans of Chinese ancestry, who are considered prime intelligence
targets by the PRC.  The PRC engages in espionage against the United States through
an extensive network of businesses, personnel, and specific programs designed to
acquire advanced U.S. military technology.  One approach is to covertly conduct
espionage by personnel from government ministries, commissions, institutes, and
military industries, independently of the PRC intelligence services.  This is believed to
be the major method of PRC intelligence activity in the United States.  It also tries to
identify ethnic Chinese in the United States who have access to sensitive information,
and sometimes is able to enlist their cooperation in illegal technology information
transfers.
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
5
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
8.  (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign person, the country in which
these person are located, or the positions or activities of those person in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.;
8.  (c) Contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
6
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign influence ad has foreign connections
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the United States.  The mere possession of a foreign passport raises legitimate
questions as to whether the Applicant can be counted upon to place the interests of the
United States paramount to that of another nation. The Government must be able to
place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security
rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
7
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  However,
Mitigating Conditions 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign person, the
country in which these person are located, or the positions or activities of those person
in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of
having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or
government and the interests of the U.S, and 8(c) Contact or communication with
foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation also apply.
Although the Applicant’s biological father is a citizen and resident of Hong Kong,
China, the Applicant is not close to him and rarely contacts him.  There is no evidence
of a close bond or strong evidence of affection.  In fact, to the contrary, the Applicant’s
biological father was never there for the Applicant growing up and the Applicant’s only
respect for him at all is because of the Applicant’s Christian convictions.  All of the
Applicant’s close family members are citizens and residents of the United States.  The
Applicant’s adopted father, his biological mother, his wife and their two children are all
residents and citizens of the United States.  The Applicant does not consider himself to
ever have been a part of the Chinese culture and essentially cut all ties from China
when he moved to the United States as a youngster.  
It is noted that the current political situation in Hong Kong, China elevates the
cause for concern in this case.  However, the evidence shows that the Applicant has no
bond and affection with his biological father or to any foreign individual or to  Hong Kong
or China in any way that could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Therefore there
is no possibility of foreign influence that exists that could create the potential for conduct
resulting in the compromise of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is not
vulnerable to foreign influence.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline B
(Foreign Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has met the mitigating conditions of
Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.  
8
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subparas. 1.a.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.b.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.c.: For the Applicant
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
