  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-13940
SSN: --------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on January 28, 2008. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The SOR
alleges security concerns under Guideline C for foreign preference. For the reasons
discussed below, this case is decided against Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
 The government’s brief includes several attachments referred to as items. They are referred to as exhibits3
herein. 
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20. 4
2
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date. 
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR was signed by him on February 5, 2008, and he
indicated he did not wish to have a hearing. His reply or answer consisted of his
handwritten responses on the SOR. Accordingly, the case will be decided based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. 
On March 25, 2008, the government submitted its written case consisting of all
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing. This so-called file
of relevant material (FORM)  was mailed to Applicant on March 31  and it was received3 st
by him on April 8 . He did not reply to the FORM within the allowed 30-day period. Theth
case was assigned to me on May 27, 2008.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
First, in its FORM, the government moved to amend SOR as follows: (1) to add ¶
2 setting forth a security concern under Guideline B for foreign influence; (2) to add ¶ 3
setting forth a security concern under Guideline E for personal conduct; (3) to delete ¶
1.c and replace it as ¶ 2.a under Guideline B; and (4) to delete ¶ 1.b and replace it as ¶
3.a under Guideline E. The motion appears to be in order because it conforms to the
evidence and for other good cause (to allege two additional security guidelines). As
Applicant did not reply to the FORM, he likewise did not reply to the motion.
Accordingly, the motion to amend is granted. For clarity, the factual allegations in SOR
¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, and 3.a will be described in the findings of fact.  
Second, the government included in its FORM as an item of documentary
evidence an account of an interview of Applicant (Exhibit 5). The interview was part of a
report of investigation (ROI) prepared by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management. The
ROI indicates that the Applicant’s interview was an unsworn declaration made in April
2007. 
The general rule is that a background ROI may not be received and considered
by an administrative judge.  The exception to the general rule is “[a]n ROI may be4
 Id. 5
 FORM at 5. 6
3
received with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the
Federal Rules of Evidence.”  5
In past cases, the government included an ROI in its FORM without an attempt to
authenticate it or offer some other method of getting the evidence to the trier of fact (for
example, stipulation). The ROI was excluded from consideration in those cases. Here,
the government authenticated the ROI through Applicant. In particular, in about
December 2007, it issued an interrogatory asking Applicant to review the ROI and state
if it accurately reflected the information he provided during the interview (Exhibit 5).
Applicant indicated it did, and he did not provide any additional information about the
interview. Accordingly, without objections, the ROI is admitted as a business record or a
public record or both and it will be considered.
Third, in its FORM, the government requested that official or administrative notice
be taken of information about Mexico and referred to two documents from the State
Department (Exhibit 6–background note and Exhibit 7–travel warning).  The request did6
not specify the particular facts to be noticed. Both documents are voluminous (12 and
13 pages) and address diverse and multiple subjects. It is not the role of an
administrative judge to review these documents and select the particular facts that are
relevant to the government’s case. Accordingly, the request to take official or
administrative notice is denied due to its lack of specificity.  
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee who is a native-born U.S. citizen. He has
worked for his current employer since April 2002. His current position or job title is tech
trainer. His employment history includes active duty military service as well as service in
a state national guard. 
Applicant completed a security-clearance application in January 2007 (Exhibit 4).
In it, he reported that he has lived in a border town in Mexico since about April 2003,
and that he lives there due to the low cost of living (Exhibit 4 at 2, 9). He crosses the
U.S.–Mexico border daily whenever he commutes to and from work. 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant has resided in Mexico since about April 2003
despite that he is a U.S. citizen employed in the U.S. Applicant admits this allegation in
his Answer. In addition, it is established by the information in his security-clearance
application noted above.
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a7
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).11
4
SOR ¶ 2.a alleges that Applicant currently resides with a girlfriend and her son,
both of whom are Mexican citizens, in Mexico. Applicant admits this allegation in his
Answer. In addition, it is established by the information in his security-clearance
application and the summary of his interview (Exhibit 5). He lives with his girlfriend, an
unemployed housewife, and her son. He has weekly contact with his girlfriend’s
immediate family, and Applicant has contact with the girlfriend’s ex-husband whenever
the ex-husband visits his son. 
SOR ¶ 3.a alleges that during the April 2007 interview with an authorized
investigator for the Defense Department, Applicant stated that he does not have
Mexican residency. The allegation does not assert that this statement is false or
misleading, but that is the implication based on reading the FORM in its entirety.
Applicant denies this allegation in his Answer. He explained that he made it clear to the
investigator that he lived in Mexico, but has a post office box in the U.S. According to
the summary of his interview, Applicant stated that he does not have Mexican
citizenship or residency (Exhibit 5 at 2).  As noted above, Applicant disclosed the fact
that he has lived in Mexico since 2003 in his security-clearance application. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.7
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an applicant8
to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret
information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any9
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about10
whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved
in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 15
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).16
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.17
 Revised Guidelines at 5–6 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating18
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 5. 19
5
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An12
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate13
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme14
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.15
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.16
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination17
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
The foreign influence and foreign preference guidelines will be addressed
together because they are factually related. Under Guideline B for foreign influence,  a18
security concern may arise due to foreign contacts and interests “if the individual has
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests,
or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”  And under Guideline19
 Revised Guidelines at 7–8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating20
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 7. 21
 Revised Guidelines at 5. 22
 Revised Guidelines at 6–8. 23
6
C for foreign preference,  a security concern may arise “[w]hen an individual acts in20
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then
he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the
interests of the United States.”21
For foreign influence, there are two disqualifying conditions  under Guideline B22
that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:
DC 1. [C]ontact with a foreign family member, business, or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
DC 4. [S]haring living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Both of these DC apply based on the following facts: (1) Applicant lives in Mexico; (2)
Applicant lives with a girlfriend who is a Mexican citizen and resident; and (3) Applicant
has contact with Mexican border officials whenever he crosses the border.
For foreign preference, none of the four specific DC under Guideline C apply to
the facts of this case. But the fact that Applicant has chosen to live in Mexico with a
Mexican girlfriend falls within the concern expressed under Guideline C because these
actions indicate a preference for Mexico over the United States. Whatever Applicant’s
motivation for living in Mexico may be, his actions nonetheless raise a security concern.
Both guidelines contain conditions that may mitigate the security concerns.  I23
reviewed the MC under each guideline and conclude none apply in Applicant’s favor.
His ties and connections to Mexico are substantial and ongoing, and there is no
indication things will change in the future. The evidence shows this is a case of divided
interests because Applicant has, both literally and figuratively, one foot in Mexico and
one foot in the United States. This is not a case where an applicant is living in a foreign
country as a condition of his employment. Instead, Applicant has decided to live in
Mexico for his own reasons. Although his situation is not illegal or immoral, his ties and
connections to Mexico are not clearly consistent with the national interest of the U.S.
Accordingly, Guidelines B and C are decided against Applicant. 
 Revised Guidelines at 10–12 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and m itigating24
conditions).  
 Revised Guidelines at 10.25
7
Personal conduct under Guideline E  includes issues of false statements and24
credible adverse information that may not be enough to support action under any other
guideline. In particular, a security concern may arise due to:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  25
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
In dispute here is the truthfulness of Applicant’s statement about whether or not
he has residency in Mexico when he said he did not in his April 2007 interview. This
allegation is supported by the summary of his interview (Exhibit 5 at 2). But Applicant
denies this allegation and explained that he made his position clear to the investigator.
Resolving this dispute is hampered by the summarized nature of Applicant’s interview
(as compared with a verbatim sworn statement) and the lack of a hearing where this
matter could have explored in detail. In addition, the evidence is crystal clear that
Applicant disclosed that he has lived in Mexico since 2003 when he completed his
security-clearance application, which predates the interview. It is difficult to imagine how
the government could have been mislead or deceived in light of his disclosure. Based
on this skimpy record, the evidence is insufficient to establish that Applicant deliberately
made a false or misleading statement during the April 2007 interview. Accordingly,
Guideline E is decided for Applicant. 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden
of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the
whole-person concept (including Applicant’s military service) was given due
consideration and that analysis does not support a favorable decision. This case is
decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
8
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
