1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-13250
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November 17,
2005. On February 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
J and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 5, 2008. He answered the
SOR in writing and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on April 8, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 14, 2008,
and I convened the hearing on May 7, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1-2,
which were received without objection. Applicant testified in his own behalf and
presented two witnesses. He submitted Exhibits (AE) A-G, without objection. DOHA
The report was not in the record. Applicant was not given a copy at the time of the evaluation. Thus, there1
is no information on what testing was done nor the precise basis for the diagnosis. Applicant reported in his
SF 86 that he was seen by someone who possesses an MSW  (Master of Social W ork) for the evaluation in
early 2003 after his release. This credential (MSW ) is not the same as a licensed clinical psychologist. 
2
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on May 15, 2008. Based upon a review of the
case file, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated March 5, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b of the SOR. He also admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶
2.a-c of the SOR with explanation (denying its applicability under Guideline E) but
denied allegation ¶ 2.d of the SOR. Applicant provided additional information to support
his request for eligibility for a security clearance. 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
college with highest honors in December 2005 (AE B). His degree is in computer
science with a minor in mathematics. His grade point average was 4.0 in his major. He
is single. He has worked for his current employer since 2005 (GE 1).
Applicant attended a preparatory school before entering the U.S. Naval Academy
in 1989. Just prior to that time his mother died. He was 16 years old. His mother and
father had divorced when he was very young. Thus, he experienced some depression
(AE D). During his first year at the academy, at the age of 19, he was still grieving his
mother’s sudden death. He had a stressful first year and experienced pressures. He
had trouble with the intensity of the military training. He was not sleeping at night and he
felt that he wanted to leave the military setting. He voluntarily spoke to a psychologist on
the campus about his difficulties. The military psychologist recommended that Applicant
be discharged from the academy due to not being emotionally suited for military service
(Tr.85). The psychologist believed that Applicant should go home. Applicant agreed that
he was not happy in the academy setting. He decided he wanted to go to a regular
college. After Applicant left the academy, he attended a community college for a few
years and earned an Associate Degree. He worked while attending the community
college.
On May 13, 1992, Applicant shot a man who had raped his girlfriend. His
girlfriend told Applicant about the rape and Applicant got a gun and went to the person’s
house and shot him in the chest. He pled nolo contendre (no jury trial) and on
November 13, 1992, he was sentenced to 22 years in prison, probation and restitution
on the charge of Attempted First Degree Murder. He was 21 years old. This was his first
and only arrest. Applicant spent more than ten years in prison and was released in
December 2002 for good behavior. As part of a court requirement upon his release,
Applicant underwent a psychological evaluation in early February 2003. He was
diagnosed with a non-specific personality disorder with antisocial and narcissistic traits.
The diagnosing therapist determined that Applicant did not require any treatment.1
The certificate of achievement notes that these courses are an intensive and carefully structured series of2
learning experiences dealing with personal planning, goal setting, communications skills, social skills,
emotional development, attitude and outlook enhancement. Moreover, the courses involve critical self-
appraisal and evaluation which culminate in the development of a personal plan.
3
During his time in prison, Applicant took many courses (AE A). He received a
certificate in Vocational Masonry. He completed a series of self-help courses, including
Life Skills, Vital Issues Project, Family Empowerment Enrichment Program and a
Transition program.  He attended psychiatric counseling. He was a facilitator for a self-2
help group. He worked in the adult basic education classes to help other prisoners (Tr.
59). He spent 10 years, seven months and sixteen days incarcerated. During that time
he did not receive any disciplinary actions. 
In 2003, Applicant started his courses at university. He took computer science
courses. He was an outstanding student who was in regular contact with his academic
advisor. She found him to be an excellent student with good people skills. He was a
disciplined student who managed his time very well. He worked while attending college
to support himself. Applicant told his academic advisor that he was a convicted felon.
She was quite impressed with him and believes he has much to offer his employer and
the defense contract world. His academic advisor held a security clearance and
recommended him highly. She was adamant that there is no reason to deny a security
clearance at this point in time despite his crime. She remarked that Applicant’s
intelligence, dedication, hard work ethic and knowledge of technology would make him
an asset to the U.S. (Tr. 49). She also explained that Applicant is one of the only
students she taught to earn a 4.0 as a computer science major.
Applicant’s academic advisor specifically asked to testify at the hearing in
addition to providing a sworn statement. She recognizes the impact of obtaining a
security clearance. She noted in her letter of recommendation for Applicant that “nobody
with whom I worked who also had a secret clearance seemed more deserving of this
recognition than [Applicant] since I have known him” (AE G).
Applicant lived with his father, stepmother and grandmother while in college. He
took a part time job with a swimming pool company. He worked his way up to a
management position in the company. He saved money for his education expenses. He
also worked part time for the defense contractor that hired him permanently in 2005.
Applicant was hired as a systems analyst initially in 2005. He immediately told his
employer that he was a convicted felon. He works independently but is a valued
member of a small team. He is reliable. He is an excellent problem solver. He received
numerous compliments from clients. He works very hard (Tr. 35-38). During his three
years with the company Applicant has received promotions. He has done an excellent
job and his evaluations are very good (Tr. 41).
Applicant’s manager for operations research hired Applicant three years ago. He
has worked closely with him on several projects (Tr. 35). He emphasized that Applicant
4
works well independently but does not hesitate to ask for assistance when needed.
Applicant has assisted the manager in presentations of professional materials. Applicant
already has access to some sensitive information such as proprietary data and trade
secrets (Tr. 40). His final comment was that Applicant was exceptionally reliable (Tr 41).
Applicant tutors students in college level math, science and computer courses.
He does this as a volunteer. He views this as a way to give something back to society.
Applicant acknowledges that he very much regrets what he did in 1992 - almost 16
years ago. He hurt someone and destroyed many lives. He threw his whole life off track
and hurt the people who cared for him. He does not excuse his behavior. He believed
he committed the crime in response to the trauma of his girlfriend’s rape. He has
learned from this grave mistake (Tr. 57-58). 
Applicant pays restitution to his victim and his family as part of his probation. He
was ordered to pay restitution to the hospital in the amount of $41,517 and $11,855 to
the victim. Applicant has 13 more years of probation. However, his understanding is that
once he finishes his restitution payments he will not remain on probation. Currently, he
pays approximately $260 a month. (AE C) He has doubled the payments over the past
14 months. The balance is now $33,608. 
Applicant underwent psychological testing on April 18, 2008 by a licensed clinical
psychologist. He completed the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory - Second
Edition (MMPI-2). The MMPI-2 is an objective personality assessment designed to help
identify personal, social, and behavioral problems (AE D). The testing revealed that he
is extroverted, sociable, gregarious, and friendly. The profile was within normal limits.
He seems to maintain a healthy balance in his approach to life. His profile indicated that
he responded in a forthright manner and may therefore be viewed as a reliable and
accurate measurement of his current functioning. He describes himself as being happy,
healthy and contented. He does not report any type of emotional distress. He did not
clinically elevate scales associated with paranoia, undue suspicion, lack of empathy,
current disdain for authority, antisocial problems, depression, anxiety, mania or
aggression (AE D). Applicant will seek counseling with this therapist when the need
arises or he feels pressures (Tr. 94).
In October 2006, Applicant was interviewed as part of the security clearance
process. He explained to the interviewer that he writes to a 70-year-old man in prison
who was kind to him when he was in prison. He does not call him or visit him (Tr. 73). At
the hearing, he explained his reasons for the pen-pal relationship. It provides value for
both men. Applicant provided the name of this gentleman on his security clearance
application under Section 12. Since he spent a decade incarcerated, he decided to list
this fellow inmate. Applicant believed this would give the investigators an opportunity to
speak with him regarding Applicant. At the hearing, Applicant noted that if necessary, he
would discontinue his written exchanges with this inmate. However, his friend is in poor
health and Applicant enjoys sending him letters to share his progress. He believes his
letters give the inmate hope.
5
On cross examination, Applicant related that he at first thought of suicide when
his girl friend was raped. He tried to explain his feelings at the time of the crime. He did
not want the man who raped his friend to be free and walking around (Tr. 75). He also
explained that he cannot justify what he did. He knows this was irrational behavior (AE
E). His girl friend did not report the rape to the police and he related that he just
exploded. He also explained that the judge sentenced him to the maximum time in
prison. 
Applicant’s probation officer now requires him to phone in several times a month.
The senior probation officer does not require Applicant to physically present himself to
the office anymore. This reduction in level of supervision is due to Applicant’s continued
compliance and no violation of rules in his probation (Tr. 100). His probation officer
noted that even with the relaxed terms of supervision, Applicant has continued to
maintain compliance (AE F).
Applicant presented many letters of recommendation frm professors, colleagues,
friends, family and a senior associate from his current employment. The senior
associate commended Applicant on his dedication during his past three years of
employment. Applicant works nights and weekends to complete a project. He is a
talented and respected computer professional (AE G). Each letter attests to Applicant’s
candor, honesty, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
6
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in
AG & 30, “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 31(a), an Asingle serious crime or multiple lesser offenses@ may be potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 31(d), A an individual who is currently on parole or
probation@ may raise security concerns. As noted above, Applicant admits he committed
a felony crime in May 1992. He was sentenced to prison (22 years) for the charge of
Attempted First Degree Murder. He served almost 11 years in prison. He is on probation
and he is still paying his court-ordered restitution. These facts are sufficient to raise
these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Aso much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment.@ Applicant=s criminal conduct occurred almost 16 years ago when he was 21
7
years old. He said he reacted to the rape of his girlfriend. He was released from prison
almost six years ago (for good behavior) and is on supervised probation. This potentially
mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case. 
Under AG & 30(d), it may be mitigating where A there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including, but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement.” As noted above, Applicant
was released from prison for good behavior after serving more than ten years of his
sentence. He has completed his college education. He has a very good position with his
company. His supervisor highly recommends him. He volunteers in the community. He
has undergone psychological testing. He is making restitution for his crime to his victim
and the hospital. He deeply regrets his irrational reaction to the rape of his girlfriend. He
acknowledges that he harmed many lives. I find this potentially mitigating condition
applies in this case. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 16(c):
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.
Applicant was administratively discharged from the U.S. Naval Academy in 1989.
He was a midshipman fourth class. He volunteered to see a psychologist because he
felt depressed, was grieving his mother’s death and could not handle the strain of the
military setting. He did not display unbecoming conduct. He agreed with the
psychologist that he was not emotionally suited to the military setting at that time. I do
not find that this raises a disqualifying condition under this section.
8
Similarly, under AG ¶ 16(d):
credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to
consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior....
Applicant shot a man with a gun for which he spent time in prison. Thus, AG ¶
16(d) applies because this shows unreliability and poor judgment.  After his crime and
his time in prison, Applicant was court-ordered to receive a psychological evaluation
upon his immediate release. Applicant did not see a copy of the report of that
evaluation. The alleged diagnosis is somewhat diminished because the basis for the
diagnosis and testing is no known nor is it in the record evidence. Applicant met with the
psychologist several times and discussed his past along with the prison experience and
his transition to society. Applicant was not determined to need treatment after his
release in December 2002. It is now almost six years later and his licensed clinical
psychologist finds his profile, based on the MMPI-2, within normal limits. He did not
clinically elevate scales associated with antisocial problems or aggression. 
Applicant writes to an inmate in the prison where he spent more than ten years of
his life.  He does not visit him nor call him. He believes that his letters encourage the
man and give him hope. The man is 70 years old and in poor health.
AG ¶ 16(e) “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s
conduct that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress, such as (1)
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or
community standing.” This disqualifying condition is not a factor for consideration
because Applicant has told his employer and others about the crime and his time in
prison. He has taken the positive steps of disclosure, eliminating his vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation or duress. I do not believe he would compromise national
security to avoid public disclosure of his crime or conduct.
Paragraph 17 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Specifically,
AG ¶ 17(c) “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not case doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgement” is a factor for consideration in this case. Moreover, AG ¶17(d) “the individual
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is
9
unlikely to recur” does apply. Applicant’s emotional status in 1989 and his evaluation in
2003 do not reflect inappropriate behavior or poor judgment. Applicant has rehabilitated
himself and has acknowledged his crime and is paying restitution to the victim. His
recent psychological evaluation underscores the positive steps he has taken to ensure
that criminal conduct does not occur again. Moreover, since the 2002 release from
prison Applicant has not had any behavioral problems. He has been gainfully employed
and has a better perception of how to avoid future problematic situations. Thus, AG
17(e) “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress” is a factor for consideration.  He has mitigated any
personal conduct concerns through his recent actions and behavior. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant committed a grave crime
in 1992 when he was 21 years old. He intentionally got a gun and shot the man who he
says raped his girlfriend. He was convicted of Attempted First Degree Murder. He
served more than ten years of his 22 year sentence. Applicant does not excuse his
crime. He was diagnosed in early 2003 (just after his release in December 2002) with a
non-specific personality disorder with antisocial and narcissistic traits. 
However, Applicant received counseling during his years in prison. He also
availed himself of many self help programs. He tutored other inmates. He facilitated
groups. He did not receive any disciplinary infractions while in prison. He was released
on probation in 2002 for good behavior. 
Applicant returned to college after his early release for good behavior. He
received the highest honors upon graduation in 2005. He completed his computer
science major and earned a 4.0 grade average. He worked to pay for his education. He
was hired in 2005 by a defense contractor. He has received promotions and earned the
respect of his supervisors and colleagues as well. Applicant tutors other students. 
See Attorney Sheldon I. Cohen’s 2008 article on the repeal of the Smith Amendment at3
www.sheldoncohen.com/publications. 
10
Applicant is paying restitution to the victim and is paying the hospital bills. He has
doubled his payment during the past 14 months. He reports to his probation officer by
phone. He has not violated any conditions of his probation during the past five years.
Applicant was recently evaluated by a clinical psychologist. He presented in a healthy
manner and did not show signs of paranoia, disdain for authority, antisocial problems or
aggression. He has met his burden of proof in this case to overcome the government’s
case.
Applicant’s parents divorced when he was young. His mother died when he was
sixteen. Applicant’s depression and difficulties during his time at the Naval Academy are
related to her death. He was not emotionally suited to the military setting in 1989 when
he was a young man. He has received psychological counseling and evaluations as
required. His most recent psychological evaluation confirms that he is now coping with
stress and is living a healthy life. 
In addition, Applicant began his education by attending a navy preparatory
school and followed that by enlisting in the Navy. He earned admission to the U.S.
Naval Academy. He wanted to serve his country. 
On January 28, 2008, the President signed into law Public Law 110-181, the
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008, Section 1072 which repealed
10 U.S.C. Section 986, formerly known as the Smith Amendment. In doing so,
Congress lifted the automatic ban to those who had been convicted of a crime and
served more than one year of incarceration. Originally, 10 U.S.C. Section 986 barred
anyone from holding a security clearance if convicted of an offense and sentenced to at
least a year regardless of whether they were allowed to serve community service and
never spent a day in jail. The effect was to cause numerous long-standing excellent
employees to lose their clearances, and thus their jobs, even if convicted of an offense
many years before.3
Congress has grappled with this weighty issue over the years. Recognizing the
injustice of this law, it has been changed. The intent is to decide on a case by case
analysis if an Applicant has overcome the past criminal record and is rehabilitated.
Having considered the “whole person” concept in evaluating Applicant’s risk vulnerability
in protecting our national interest, I find Applicant has made sufficient progress to
mitigate the criminal and personal conduct security concerns.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal
conduct and criminal conduct. 
11
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a-d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
