                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-10873 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) January 23, 2007.  On December 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations and personal conduct under Guidelines F and E for Applicant. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 11, 2008. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing in an undated response received at 
DOHA on January 30, 3008.  She admitted ten and denied five of the allegations under 
Guideline F and denied the allegation under Guideline E.  She provided an explanation 
for her admissions and denials.  She requested a hearing before an administrative 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
judge.  Department counsel was prepared to proceed on February 11, 2008, and the 
case was assigned to me on February 13, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
March 19, 2008, for a hearing on May 1, 2008.  I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
The government offered six exhibits, marked government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 
6, which were received without objection.  Applicant submitted eleven documents, 
marked Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A-K, which were received without objection.  
Applicant testified on her own behalf.  The record was left open for Applicant to submit 
additional documents.  Applicant timely submitted three documents, marked App. Ex. L-
N.  The documents were admitted into the record without objection from Department 
Counsel (Gov. Ex 7).  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 9, 2008.  
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 42 years old and has worked for almost three years as a senior 
management analyst for a defense contractor.  Prior to working for her present 
employer, she was employed by other defense contractors for seven years.  After 
graduating from high school, Applicant enlisted in the Army.  She served almost 19 
months on active duty before being discharged because she was pregnant.  She later 
had a second child by the same father, who was also on active duty in the Army.  The 
couple never married.  For the next eight years, Applicant raised her two children as a 
single parent, received her associate’s degree, and remained in the Army Reserves.  
Applicant then married another Army member who left active duty shortly after the 
marriage.  He was employed in a civilian position before being laid-off.  When he was 
laid off, he entered the Navy and Applicant moved with her children to his first duty 
station.  Applicant had four more children, but unfortunately one died at two months of 
age.  Applicant has five living children.  Applicant missed work for periods of time 
because she was hospitalized for various serious illnesses.  Applicant and her husband 
separated in July 2007, and the divorce will be final in July 2008 (Tr. 51-97, 117-123; 
Gov. Ex. 1, Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing, dated January 23, 
2007).  
 
Applicant’s monthly income is $2,430, and she receives $1,752 monthly in child 
support from her husband, and $400 per month from the father of her two oldest 
children, for a combined monthly income of $4,587.  Applicant’s five children range in 
age from 20-year-old to 20 months old.  All live at home, including the oldest who is a 
student.  Applicant’s combined monthly expenses are approximately $3,307, which 
includes payments for payment plans on her delinquent debts.  She has a discretionary 
remainder each month of only $280 (Tr. 80-99; See, Gov. Ex. 4, Interrogatories, dated 
October 23, 2007, at 4, Personal Financial Statement; App. Ex. J, support order, dated 
July 2007).  Applicant’s mortgage payments are current (Tr. 46; App. Ex. I, credit report, 
dated March 2008). 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Credit reports and the SOR show fifteen delinquent debts for Applicant: a 
judgment for $2,568 (SOR 1.a); a delinquent bill for $539 (SOR 1.b); a collection 
account for $1,348 (SOR 1.c); collection accounts on a returned check for $591, $30, 
and $25 (SOR 1.d, 1.e, 1.f); a charged off automobile account for $4,997 (SOR 1.g); a 
collection account for $11,834 (SOR 1.h); a collection account for $232 (SOR 1.i); a 
collection account for $622 (SOR 1.j); a past due auto loan account for $483 (SOR 1.k); 
a delinquent student loan account for $239 (SOR 1.l); a collection account for $457 
(SOR 1.m); and a collection account for a cell phone debt of $273 (SOR 1.n) (Gov. Ex. 
2, credit report, dated February 9, 2007; Gov. Ex. 3, credit report, dated August 31, 
2007; Gov. Ex. 4, Interrogatory, dated October 23, 2007; Gov. Ex. 5, Judgment, dated 
June 23, 2004; Gov. Ex. 6, credit report, dated April 23, 2008). 
 
Applicant signed for her mother’s hospital bill and is responsible for the $2,568 
debt (SOR 1.a).  Applicant pays at least $113 on this debt every other week.  When she 
can, she makes additional payments.  She has a payment plan and has reduced the 
balance to about $1,139.  She also has a plan to pay the debt early if funds that are 
anticipated become available for payment (Tr. 20-23, 99-100; App. Ex. A, payment 
receipt, dated April 29, 2008).  
 
The judgment listed in SOR allegation 1.b is for dental work for her children.  
Applicant continues to go to the same dentist and is paying on her account.  The 
balance is now $450 (Tr. 20-23; 100; App. Ex. B, Account information, dated, March 4, 
2008). 
 
The collection account listed in SOR allegation 1.c is for $1,348 for the funeral 
expenses of her minor child that died.  The debt was paid in full by the family and the 
insurance company (Tr. 25-26, 100; App. Ex. C (Status letter, settled in full, dated, 
March 17, 2008). 
 
SOR allegations 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f are for dishonored checks written on Applicant’s 
account by her oldest son without her knowledge or permission for $591, $30, and $25.  
The $591 check was paid off in two installments of $303.21 (Tr. 25-26, 100-102; App. 
Ex. D Bank account statement, dated April 3, 2008).  The $30 and $25 checks have 
been redeemed and paid (Tr. 29-32, 103-104; App. Ex M Bank account statement, 
dated May 2, 2008). 
 
The automobile loan for $4,997 listed in SOR allegation 1.g is for the balance on 
a car destroyed in a hurricane.  Applicant and her husband settled this account for 
$3,300 and it paid in full (Tr. 32-35; App. Ex. E, Letter, dated March 18, 2008).   
 
SOR allegation 1.h is the debt on a time share property previously owned by 
Applicant and her husband.  The property was sold and the debt cleared.  It was 
removed from Applicant’s husband credit report and is being removed from her credit 
report (Tr. 32-36, 105-111; App. Ex F, credit report, dated March 6, 2008). 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR allegation 1.i and 1.n are collection accounts of $232, and $273 for the 
same cell phone debt.  Applicant moved from one cell phone plan to another within the 
same company, and the new plan absorbed the amount due on the old plan.  Her cell 
phone account is current.   The debts are not listed on the latest credit reports (Tr. 37; 
Gov. Ex. 6, credit report, dated April 23, 2008; App. Ex. K, credit report, dated April 29, 
2008). 
 
SOR allegation 1.j is a collection account for $622 on a past due student loan.  
The debt has been paid in full (Tr. 37-39, 114-115; App. Ex G, proposed settlement 
letter, dated April 24, 2008; App. Ex. L, bank statement for paid settlement, dated May 
19, 2008; App. Ex. N, credit report, dated May 19, 2008).  
 
SOR allegation 1.k is an automobile loan payment past due for $483.  Applicant 
was late on one of her automobile payments because she was hospitalized.  She made 
up the payment and the latest credit reports show the debt is current (Tr. 39-41; Gov. 
Ex. 6, credit report, dated April 23, 2008; App. Ex. K, credit report, dated April 29, 2008). 
 
SOR allegation 1.l is a student loan past due for $239.  The loan has been 
deferred and Applicant has requested an extension of the deferment (Tr. 45-46; App. 
Ex. H, Deferment request, dated April 29, 2008). 
 
SOR allegation 1.m is a collection account for $457.  This account has been paid 
in full (Tr. 43-45; App. Ex. D, bank statement, dated April 3, 2008). 
 
In response to questions on her security clearance application concerning her 
finances, Applicant listed one debt as currently more than 90 days past due but listed no 
debts in the last seven years that were more than 180 days past due.  Six debts were 
more than 180 days past due.  Applicant informed a security manager of the one debt 
listed, and she was advised to note the debt on the form.  She was paying on some of 
the older debts.  She was informed that the debts she was paying did not have to be 
listed.  She did not have knowledge of other debts caused by her son writing bad 
checks (Tr. 123-127). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
5 
 
 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Consideration: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18)  Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an Applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
 
6 
 
 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance.  An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  Applicant’s delinquent debts admitted by Applicant and listed in credit 
reports are a security concern raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying Conditions 
(FC DC) ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC ¶ 19(c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations),  Since two of the debts are listed twice, the 
established SOR allegations are for 13 delinquent debts. 
 
 Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment) does have some application.  The debts happened 
years ago and some were paid in the past, two are still being paid, and some were just 
cleared recently.  The behavior causing the debt did not happen long ago.  There were 
a variety of debts from car loans, to dental and medical debts, to student loans, to time 
share loans.  The accumulation of debt was not infrequent.  Some of the debts were 
accumulated under unusual circumstances.  Applicant had medical problems and one of 
her young children died.  Her son wrote dishonored checks on her account without her 
knowledge.  She and her husband are separated and are in the process of divorcing.  I 
gave consideration to these unusual circumstances leading to some of the delinquent 
debts.  Since the debts have either been paid or are being paid, they do not cast doubt 
on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) has some application to Applicant’s 
financial issues.  As noted, some of the debt arose because of her son writing 
dishonored checks on her account.  She was sick and hospitalized for a period of time 
losing time at work and salary.  One of her young children passed away requiring 
funeral expenses.  Applicant either paid or is paying her debts.  She acted reasonably 
under the circumstances.  
 
FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies.  For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay.  A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed.  
Applicant has the ability to pay the debts, has shown a strong desire to pay them, and 
has shown a good effort to pay them.  Applicant paid ten of the 13 delinquent accounts.  
She has payment plans on two accounts and is current with her payments.  She has a 
student loan that is under deferment and no payment is required.  Her present credit 
report and other documents show her accounts are paid or being paid.  Applicant acted 
responsibly towards her debts and they are under control.  Applicant established her 
good-faith efforts to resolve her debts, and mitigated security concerns related to her 
financial situation. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.  The security 
clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information.  
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  Applicant’s incomplete answer to a 
question on her security clearance application concerning her past due debts raises a 
security concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a) 
(the deliberate omission concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, to determine security eligibility or trustworthiness). 
 
 Appellant denied intentional falsification.  Applicant credibly testified that when 
she completed her security clearance application, she listed the debt she knew that was 
past due more than 90 days.  She thought other debts past due more than 180 days 
either were being paid and not past due, or had been paid.  She discussed her debts 
with a security official, who informed her that any debts she was paying on or had paid 
did not have to be listed on the form.  In addition, she was not aware of some debts that 
were caused by her son’s bad check misconduct.  While there is a security concern for 
an omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or 
oral statement submitted to the government when applying for a security clearance, 
every omission, concealment, or inaccurate statement is not a falsification.  A 
falsification must be deliberate and material.  It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and 
willfully.  Since Applicant listed the one debt she was aware of, and she did not 
reasonably know she had other delinquent debts, the available information shows her 
failure to list delinquent debts was not knowing and willful.  Applicant established she 
did not deliberately provide false information on the security clearance application with 
intent to deceive.  I find for Appellant as to Personal Conduct.   
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
 
8 
 
 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the 
ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall 
common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potential disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered Applicant’s honorable 
service in the Army and Army Reserve. I considered that she is raising five children as a 
single mother, and has had medical problems causing periods of unemployment.  I 
considered she took responsibility for the debts and either paid them or is paying them 
as agreed.  I considered that Applicant’s financial obligations not listed as security 
concerns are paid as agreed.  Her finances do not create a security concern.  She did 
not provide incomplete information on her security clearance application with the intent 
to deceive.  Overall, on balance the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
