1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-13209
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
June 25, 2008 
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(eQip), on August 16, 2006.  On February 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guideline B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on March 6, 2008,and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on March 28, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on April 4, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for April 24, 2008.  At the hearing the Government presented
three exhibits.  The Applicant called one witness, presented four exhibits and testified
on his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on May 8, 2008.  Based
2
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political condition in Iran.  Applicant had no
objection.  (Tr. p. 23).  The request and the attached documents were not admitted into
evidence but were included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out
in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 49 years of age and has a Masters Degree
in Engineering.  He is employed as a Mechanical Engineering Design Manager for a
defense contractor.  He seeks a security clearance in connection with his employment
in the defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Iran in 1958.  He immigrated to the United States in
1976, before the Revolution, to obtain an advanced education.  He obtained both his
Bachelors and Masters degrees and started working in the defense industry.  He
married an American woman in 1984, and they had two children, who are native born
American citizens.  In 1987, he received his United States citizenship.  The Applicant
received a security clearance in 1990, and has committed no security violations.  In
2002, he and his first wife divorced.  
In 2003, the Applicant married an Iranian woman that he met through a friend in
Iran.  It took a year and a half before the Applicant was able to bring her to the United
States.  After going through the process of applying for her green card, in 2005, the
Applicant’s Iranian wife was permitted to come to the United States.  She is now a legal
permanent resident.  She had a son from a previous marriage.  The Applicant
sponsored her, her son, and her parents in Iran to come to the United States.  Their
marriage experienced problems, the Applicant filed for divorce in October 2007, and it is
pending.  The Applicant’s wife, and his step-child are citizens of Iran.  His mother-in-law,
father-in-law, and brother-in-law are also residents and citizens of Iran.
The Applicant’s father, and a brother are residents and citizens of Iran.  Another
brother of the Applicant’s is a citizen of Iran, and resides in Sweden, and a sister is a
3
citizen of Iran, and resides in the United Arab Emirates.  The Applicant has another
brother who resides in and is a citizen of the United States.     
Applicant’s mother is a United States citizen who received her citizenship in
2002.  She travels between the United States and Iran.  When she comes to the United
States, she lives with the Applicant.  When she travels to Iran she lives with the
Applicant’s brother.  She is presently in Iran taking care of the Applicant’s ailing father.
The Applicant maintains contact by telephone or e-mail with his mother, father, and
brother in Iran about once a month or so.  They also send him pictures of their children.
The Applicant has on occasion sent birthday and wedding gifts to his relatives in Iran. In
2002, the Applicant’s mother applied to bring the Applicant’s two brothers and his sister
to the United States.  They have applied for permanent residency and have INS file
numbers.
The Applicant has traveled to Iran on five separate occasions: 1978, for a
summer vacation; April 1996, when his father was sick; July 2000, for his brother’s
wedding; August 2007; December 2003 through January 2004 to visit his wife; and
again from December 2004 through January 2005, to bring his wife to the United States.
On each occasion, he traveled to Iran using his Iranian passport.  He has now
surrendered this Iranian passport to his company security office.  
When asked what his intent is as far as traveling to Iran?  The Applicant stated,
“If it jeopardizes my life here, it won’t happen.  If there is some emergency happen - -
like I say my father is 77 years old and he is very sick - - if something happens, then I
have to do something.  Otherwise, I have no intention to go back there.”  (Tr. p. 52).
Other than the two year mandatory military service required by the Iranian
Government, the Applicant has no relatives in Iran who are associated with, or
employed by the Iranian Government.   The Applicant indicates although he stands to
inherit something from his father when he passes away, the Iranian Government goes
through the assets first and will probably audit it and take it.
The Applicant further stated:
One other thing I just thought, everybody, including the President of
the United States is talking about the family values and what I do, the
contact I have with my family, that are in Iran or other countries, is
basically because of the family value that I have.  And I am not going to
lose that.  That is not going to affect my job and the job - - the kind of job I
do here - - either.  But I guess I have been brought up, you know, that
family is important and, you know, you have to respect that.  But it should
not - - you should not affect what you do and how you do it.  (Tr. pp. 64 -
65).       
The Vice President of Engineering and Program Management, who has been the
Applicant’s direct supervisor for about three years, testified that the Applicant’s work
4
product is highly rated.  His special capabilities involve his mechanical background that
provides a special skill for the company that is not easy to obtain.  The company is
currently training others to replace him but it takes a long time to establish his level of
expertise.  (Tr. pp. 67-68). 
A letter of recommendation from another Vice President of Engineering, who was
at one time the Applicant’s direct supervisor, indicates that the Applicant is a very
capable, knowledgeable mechanical engineer and manager.  He has always delivered
safe and reliable products to the customer and his abilities, integrity and loyalties are of
the highest standard.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B). 
A letter of recommendation from a Senior Mechanical Engineer who worked with
the Applicant for ten years, between 1990-2000, indicates that the Applicant is honest
and forthright, careful, respectful of the rules regarding the handling of classified
materials.  He is proud to be a citizen of the United States and has consistently strived
to meet its highest ideals.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C). 
A letter from the Facility Security Officer indicates that he is in possession of the
Applicant’s Iranian passport and that the company will notify DOHA in the event the
Iranian passport is returned to the Applicant for any reason.  (Government Exhibit 3).
Performance evaluations of the Applicant for 2005 and 2006 reflect that his work
performance always “meets standards”.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D).   
I have taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in Iran.  The
fact that Iran has no diplomatic relations with the United States, Iran’s efforts to acquire
nuclear weapons and other weapon of mass destruction, its support for and involvement
in international terrorism, it’s support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace
process, and it’s dismal human rights records.  I have considered the fact that Iranian
Government officials at all levels commit serious abuses of their power and authority.
It’s Totalitarian Government and the fact that Iran supports terrorists activities, and is
rampant with crime and instability.  The overall deteriorating security situation in Iran,
the human rights abuses, and the government corruption elevates the cause for
concern in the case.  The United States may face no greater challenge from a single
country than from Iran.    
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
5
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
6
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign connections may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
The mere possession of a foreign passport raises legitimate questions as to whether the
Applicant can be counted upon to place the interests of the United States paramount to
that of another nation. The Government must be able to place a high degree of
confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations,
at all times and in all places.
7
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
The Applicant is a dual citizen of Iran and the United States.  He has significant
family ties in Iran and there is strong evidence of a close bond and affection with his
family in Iran.  His mother, father, brother, sister, wife, step-son, father-in-law, mother-
in-law and brother-in-law are all citizens of Iran.  His mother, father, brother and in-laws
all reside in Iran.  He maintains close and continuing contact with them, as he contacts
them at least once a month.  Although he is going through a divorce with his wife, and
his contact with her, his step-son and his in-laws is much less than it has been in the
past, he still has some contact with them.  Furthermore, after becoming a United States
citizen, he traveled to Iran using his Iranian passport on at least five occasions for family
matters.  It does not go unrecognized that for over twenty five years he has worked hard
to establish himself as a responsible, educated, American citizen.  However, he has not
cut all ties from Iran.    
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  None of
the mitigation conditions apply. 
It is noted that the current political situation in Iran elevates the cause for concern
in this case.  Although there is no direct evidence that his family members in Iran are
associated in any way with the Iranian government, there is evidence of a close bond
and strong evidence of affection with his family in Iran.  This bond and affection with his
family could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Therefore, the possibility of foreign
influence exists that could create the potential for conduct resulting in the compromise
of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is vulnerable to foreign influence.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not met the mitigating conditions
of Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
8
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subparas. 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparas. 1.b.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.c.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.d.: Against the Applicant
Subparas. 1.e.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.f.:  Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.h.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.i.:  Against the Applicant
 
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
