 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-12280 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application on August 21, 2006. On 
February 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 13, 2008; answered it 
on March 3, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on March 6, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on April 7, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on the same day. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on April 17, 2008, scheduling the hearing for May 21, 2008. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 10 were 
 
2 
 
 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through DD, which were admitted without 
objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until June 6, 2008, to 
enable her to submit additional evidence.  Applicant timely submitted AX EE through II, 
and they were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s response to AX EE 
through II is attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on June 5, 2008. The record closed on June 6, 2008. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, 
except SOR ¶ 1.f, which she denied. Her admissions in her answer to the SOR and at 
the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old senior software engineer for a federal contractor. She 
has worked for her current employer since June 2006. She began working for federal 
contractors in 1978, worked her way through school, and became a software engineer 
in 1999 (Tr. 51). She has worked for several federal contractors and held a clearance 
from March 1992 until about three years ago, when it was administratively terminated 
because she moved to a job that did not require a clearance (Tr. 9). 
 
 Applicant is highly regarded by her friends, co-workers, and supervisors. Her 
friends describe her as reliable, honest, dedicated, capable, hard-working, and 
dependable (AX X, Z, AA, and DD). Co-workers similarly describe her as having a zest 
for learning. She is considered affable, reliable, honest, conscientious, and dependable 
(AX Y and BB). Former supervisors evaluated her as trustworthy, hardworking, 
conscientious, and dependable (AX W, BB and CC).  
 
 Applicant was married in June 1971 and divorced in July 1975. She remarried in 
December 1975 and was divorced in February 1983, remarried in November 1990 and 
divorced in November 1991. She married her fourth husband in September 1998, and 
they divorced in May 1999. She married her fourth husband again in September 2000, 
and they divorced in June 2005. After her divorce in June 2005, she assumed most of 
the marital debts from her most recent marriage (Tr. 27).  
 
 When Applicant was divorced in June 2005, her ex-husband agreed to assume 
the credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and his agreement was spelled out in the 
divorce decree (Enclosure to Answer to SOR). The debt has been resolved (AX E, F, 
and FF).  
 
 Applicant entered into a debt settlement program in November 2005 to resolve 
her debts after her last divorce. The total unsecured debt was about $28,210, and her 
plan provided for eliminating the debt in 36 months (GX 1 at 39). She made monthly 
payments of $210 beginning in November 2005. The three large debts alleged in SOR 
 
3 
 
 
¶¶ 1.b, 1.c and 1.d were not included in her debt settlement program, but she 
negotiated separate payment agreements with those creditors. 
 
 Applicant purchased a manufactured home in August 1997 and lived there with 
her spouse until October 1999 when her office relocated in another state (Tr. 52). 
Renters occupied the home until October 2000, when Applicant accepted a job in her 
home state and resumed living in the manufactured home. She and her spouse incurred 
about $6,000 in credit card debt to repair the renters’ damage (GX 6 at 1). 
 
Applicant and her spouse purchased another house in January 2001, but were 
unable to sell the manufactured home. In July 2002, Applicant left her job because the 
company started laying off employees and she believed she would be laid off soon. She 
incurred the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b when she left her job after less than one year 
and was required to reimburse her employer for training (Tr. 54-55). She learned about 
the debt a couple of years ago when a collection agency contacted her (Tr. 55-56). She 
recently negotiated a payment plan and has made payments of $100 per month 
beginning in April 2008 (Tr. 56; AX R, S, T, and U). 
 
Applicant found a job in another state, and she purchased a house at her new job 
location, hoping to sell the other two properties. In mid-2002, Applicant and her spouse 
were unable to make all their loan payments. Renters had again damaged the 
manufactured home, and they decided to allow the loan company to repossess it. This 
debt is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant negotiated a payment plan, paid a lump sum of 
$4,000, and has been paying $400 per month since January 2008 (Answer to SOR; AX 
J through Q). 
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is a credit card account. It is the same debt as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f (AX G). While Applicant worked in another state, she and her 
spouse maintained two households and used credit cards for airline tickets to visit each 
other and to repair damage to their rental property. All the loans and credit cards were 
in Applicant’s name because her spouse had bad credit. (Tr. 61-62; GX 6 at 1). 
Applicant negotiated a payment plan and has made seven $500 payments on this debt 
(Tr. 62; Answer to SOR; AX H, I, and II)  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e was for a line of credit with a credit union. 
Applicant stopped making payments in December 2005 when she entered the debt 
settlement program (Tr. 67). In April 2008, she used her income tax refund to pay off 
this debt as well as the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h. (Tr. 69; AX B, C, and D). The credit card debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g was paid in full in 2007 (Answer to SOR; Tr. 69-70; AX A). 
 
 Applicant sold one of her two remaining homes in the summer of 2004. She 
became the sole owner of the one remaining home, which is currently occupied by 
renters while she works in another location (GX 6 at 2). 
 
 Applicant’s net monthly income in June 2007 was about $4,620, her household 
expenses were $2,423, and her debt payments were $2,177 (GX 6). She submitted an 
 
4 
 
 
updated financial statement after the hearing, reflecting net monthly income of 
$6,121.94, expenses of $2,982, debt payments of $3,042, and a net remainder of 
$117.94 (AX GG). At the time of the hearing, she was preparing to move to a smaller, 
less expensive apartment at the end of her lease (Tr. 29). After the hearing, she 
submitted a financial statement reflecting that her monthly rent and utilities in the new 
apartment would be about reduced by about $600 (AX HH). 
 
 The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized in the 
table below. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status at Hearing Evidence 
1.a Credit card $5,504 Settled Apr. 2008 Answer to SOR; AX E, F, FF 
1.b Training 
program 
$7,048 Pays $100 monthly 
since Apr. 2008 
AX R through U 
1.c Repossession $36,615 Pays $400 monthly 
since Jan. 2008 
Answer to SOR; AX J-Q 
1.d Credit card $35,262 Pays $500 monthly 
since Oct. 2007 
Answer to SOR; AX H, I, II 
1.e Line of credit $2,686 Paid Apr. 2008 AX B, C 
1.f Credit card $24,860 Same debt as 1.d AX G 
1.g Credit card $2,017 Paid 2007 Answer to SOR; Tr. 69-70; AX 
A 
1.h Collection $408 Paid Apr. 2008 AX D 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
5 
 
 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
 
6 
 
 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@ 
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e). AG ¶ 19(b) is not raised 
because there is no evidence of “frivolous or irresponsible spending.” 
 
Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (b), (c) and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong.  It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@  If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
The first two prongs (“so long ago” and “so infrequent”) are not established 
because Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts, three of them were resolved 
only recently, and the recently negotiated payment plans for the three debts are not yet 
completed. The third prong (“under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur”) is 
established. Applicant’s delinquent debts were caused by unwise purchases of multiple 
homes and the expense of maintaining two households while working at a location 
distant from where her spouse resided. Applicant is resolving the debt incurred when 
her manufactured home was repossessed. She is divorced, now owns only one home 
that is generating rental income, and earns a substantial income that is more than 
adequate to satisfy her financial obligations.  
 
The fourth prong (“does not cast doubt”) also is established. Applicant held a 
security clearance for many years, apparently without incident. She is well respected by 
her friends, co-workers, and supervisors. She had no financial problems until about 
2002. She responded to the debts alleged in the SOR decisively and responsibly. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is established. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e. conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s first job 
relocation in October 1999 was a circumstance beyond her control, but her second job 
relocation to avoid a layoff was voluntary, albeit prudent. The damage to her 
manufactured home by renters was beyond her control. Her divorce was a circumstance 
beyond her control, but the debts had already occurred by this time, and she had 
voluntarily put all debts in her name because of her spouse’s bad credit record. Her 
decision to purchase two additional homes was voluntary. Since 2002, she has acted 
responsibly in resolving her financial problems. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) applies only to 
her involuntary move in October 1999. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition also has two prongs that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive. If 
the person has received counseling, it must also be shown that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or under control. However, if the person has 
not received counseling, this mitigating condition may still apply if there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or under control. 
 
Applicant sought financial counseling in November 2005. She negotiated 
separate payment plans for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d, because they 
were not included in her debt settlement plan. She has sufficient income to make the 
payments on her debts and has done so. I conclude AG ¶ 20(c) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant began working on her financial situation in November 2005, long before 
the SOR was issued. She paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g in 2007. She negotiated a 
payment plan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d in October 2007. She negotiated a 
payment plan for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c in January 2008. In April 2008, she used 
her income tax refund to pay the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h., and she 
negotiated payment plans for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is 
established. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f and provided documentary evidence that it was a 
duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is established with 
respect to SOR ¶ 1.f. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has spent virtually all of her career as a 
government contractor. She and her former spouse made some unwise financial 
decisions while they were living separately because of her job. She had no financial 
problems before 2002. After her divorce in June 2005, she addressed her financial 
situation aggressively, and her financial situation is under control. She lives frugally and 
has a good income. She was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
