 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-15110 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Chief Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement and 
criminal conduct considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 9, 2007, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an e-
QIP version of a Security Clearance Application (hereinafter SF 86). On February 25, 
2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; and 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive). 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines E (Personal Conduct), H (Drug 
Involvement), and J (Criminal Conduct), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
It should be noted that on December 29, 2005, the President promulgated 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified 
Information, and on August 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) 
published a memorandum directing implementation of those revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (hereinafter AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended and modified (Regulation), in which the 
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  The AG are applicable to Applicant’s 
case because his SOR was issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 3, 2008. In a sworn, 
written statement, notarized March 14, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on April 8, 2008, and the 
case was assigned to me on April 11, 2008. A Notice of Hearing was issued that same 
date, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on May 8, 2008. During the hearing, 
three Government exhibits and nine Applicant exhibits were received without objection, 
and Applicant testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on May 16, 
2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.c., 2.a. and 2.b., and 3.a. of the SOR. 
 
Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor, serving as a 
software engineer 2,1 and he is seeking to obtain a security clearance. He commenced 
working for his employer in January 2007. He received a Bachelors Degree in Computer 
Science in December 2005.  He never served in the military and never married.  
 
During the period May 2002-September 2007, Applicant was a poly-substance 
abuser whose choice of substances was rather broad, and included narcotics, 
stimulants, hallucinogens, and cannabis.2 He attributed his substance abuse to curiosity 
and, despite learning as a child that drug use could be detrimental to one’s life, he was 
drawn to “experiment” with such substances.3 At one point, he intentionally became 
“addicted” to cigarettes for 18 months to experience overcoming an addiction while so 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP)/Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86), dated Apr. 9, 2007), at 15; Applicant Exhibit D (Employee Performance 
Development Process, dated Jan. 7, 2008. 
  
2 Answer to SOR, dated Mar. 14, 2008, at 1. 
 
3 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories, dated Oct. 31, 2007), at 6 is the source for 
the facts in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
many individuals were unable to do so.  He noted that there was only one occasion that 
he ever “abused any drug, whether legal or not, to fill a void in [his] life.” He stressed 
that “while all other substances were kept easily under control and used only for a short 
time period, . . . marijuana may have gotten away from [him].” 
 
Applicant is not ashamed of his drug use. He believes “it played a non-trivial role 
in [his] development as a person.” He does, however, regret not more seriously 
considering his future before satisfying his curiosity, and not being able to leave 
marijuana alone when he graduated from college. 
 
On April 9, 2007, Applicant completed his SF 86, and in response to an inquiry 
pertaining to his use of illegal drugs and drug activity “since the age of 16 or in the last 7 
years, whichever is shorter,”4 Applicant responded, in part, that he had used marijuana 
socially during college (estimated commencement date May 2002 until estimated end 
date July 2006) on dozens of occasions, usually while attending parties or other social 
gatherings.5 During an interview with a Government investigator in May 2007, Applicant 
stated he had stopped using illegal drugs in July 2006, and said he had no intention to 
use any illegal drugs again.6 Nevertheless, despite being aware of the illegal or 
controlled status of the substances and the Government’s interest in his substance 
abuse in April 2007, he actually continued to use marijuana on an estimated three 
occasions since graduating from college, including one time during the last week of 
September 2007.7  Applicant contended he did not lie to the investigator because at the 
time he made the statement, that was his intention.8 
 
On October 31, 2007, Applicant stated that graduating from college in December 
2005 was his personal signal to cease his substance abuse.  Nevertheless, as noted 
above, he continued using marijuana several more times after graduation. He stated:  “I 
feel guilty about it.  It is no longer fun, it keeps me from ‘being all that I can be.’  And 
more importantly it is illegal & could cost me my job.”9 He also contended he decided to 
stop using marijuana because he was “growing up” and recognized “nothing positive 
comes from it. . . .”10 He stated he has no intention to use any of the substances 
again.11 
4 Question 24. 
 
5 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 31. 
 
6 Tr. at 32-34.  This appears to be a misstatement by Applicant for he actually graduated in Dec. 2005, not 
Jul. 2006.  See Applicant Exhibit G (University Degree, dated Dec. 12, 2005). 
 
7 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 3, at 3, 6. 
 
8 Tr. at 33-34. 
 
9 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 3, at 3. 
 
10 Id. at 1. 
 
11 Applicant Exhibit C (Statement of Intent, dated May 8, 2008). 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
 
 
In addition to the marijuana, Applicant also used a number of other substances 
which are categorized as illegal or controlled substances, or misused prescription drugs, 
during the period July 2003-October 2005.  The following substances were alleged in 
the SOR and their respective use was admitted by Applicant:12 
 
SOR ¶ SUBSTANCE13 OCCASIONS PERIOD OF USE 
1.a.(1) marijuana 50 times May 2002 – Sep. 2007 
1.a.(2) cocaine 5 times Aug. 2003 – Oct. 2005 
1.a.(3) mushrooms14 3 times Aug. 2003 – Nov. 2003 
1.a.(4) Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) 1 time Mar. 2004 
1.a.(5) MDMA (Ecstasy) 3 times Nov. 2003 – Jan. 2004 
1.a.(6) opium 1 time Aug. 2003 – Dec. 2003 
1.a.(7) Dextromethorphan (DXM) 2 times Jul. 2003 – Aug. 2003 
1.a.(8) Alpha-methyltryptamine (AMT) 1 time Jul. 2003 
1.a.(9) Percocet 1 time Jul. 2003 
1.a.(10) Morphine 1 time Jul. 2003 
 
During the period of his substance abuse, from May 2002 until September 2007, 
Applicant also engaged in the purchase of several of the illegal substances. The 
following substance purchases were alleged in the SOR and their respective purchases 
were admitted by Applicant:15 
 
SOR ¶ SUBSTANCE OCCASIONS 
1.b.(1) marijuana at least12 times 
1.b.(2) mushrooms at least 1 time 
1.b.(3) Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) at least 1 time 
1.b.(4) MDMA (Ecstasy) at least 1 time 
 
During the hearing, Applicant modified some of his earlier admissions regarding 
his purchases of illegal substances.  He acknowledged purchasing marijuana on maybe 
two dozen occasions.16 He also purchased powder cocaine on one occasion between 
                                                          
12 Answer to SOR, supra note 2, at 1. 
 
13 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. 
§812(c).  Marijuana (cannabis) and Ecstasy (MDMA) are Schedule I controlled substances.  See Sch. I (c)(9) and 
1(c)(10), respectively.  See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on 
Schedule I).  Ecstasy or 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine is a Schedule I Controlled Substance.  See United 
States v. Crawford, 449 F.3d 860, 861 (8th Cir. 2006).  Cocaine is a Schedule II Controlled Substance; Psilocybin, 
AMT, and  LSD are Schedule I Controlled Substances; Opium is a Schedule II, III, and V Controlled Substance; 
Morphine is a Schedule II and III Controlled Substance; and DXM is on the watch list. 
 
14 Applicant admitted the mushrooms he ate were Psilocybin or hallucinogenic mushrooms. Tr. at 43-44. 
 
15 Answer to SOR, supra note 2, at 1. 
 
16 Tr. at 42. 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
August and December 2003.17 While he did not purchase the prescription drug 
Percocet, he did not have a valid prescription for it and received it for free from his drug 
supplier, another college student.18 
 
On one occasion, when he had more marijuana than he needed or wanted, he 
sold a portion of the marijuana to friends.19 
 
Applicant’s overall work performance rating, as of January 2008, was 
outstanding.20  He has been cited for his commitment to excellence, leadership, and 
dedicated efforts.21 Several of his colleagues, friends, and a supervisor, have 
characterized him as professional, knowledgeable, punctual, dependable, extremely 
trustworthy, well-mannered, very reliable, and as a person of integrity, and support his 
application for a security clearance.22 
 
On October 28, 2007, Applicant and his roommate-another illegal substance 
abuser-agreed to cease sharing an apartment.23 Nevertheless, two days later, in 
response to an inquiry as to whether or not he associates with substance abusers, 
Applicant acknowledged his old roommate and he will “sometimes buy cannabis maybe 
once or twice a year.  He usually will invite [Applicant] over to hang out [sic] and smoke 
if he has some.”24 
 
Applicant has never received any counseling from a recognized drug 
rehabilitation program nor has he ever attended any drug rehabilitation support group 
activity for his substance abuse.25 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
17 Id. at 42-43. 
 
18 Id. at 45-46. 
 
19 Tr. at 46. 
 
20 Applicant Exhibit D, supra note 1, at 4. 
 
21 Applicant Exhibit E (Certificates of Commendation, undated). 
 
22 Applicant Exhibit A (Character Reference Letters, various dates). 
 
23 Applicant Exhibit B (Move-Out Notice, dated Oct. 28, 2007). 
 
24 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 3, at 1. 
 
25 Id. at 2-3. 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
An Administrative Judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”26 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive. Once the Government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the Applicant has the heavy burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, 
explanation, extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the 
Government’s case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” Accordingly, nothing in this Decision should be construed to 
suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied 
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
 
26 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). 
 
7 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds 
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 25(a), “any drug abuse (see above definition),” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” may 
raise security concerns. During the period May 2002-September 2007, Applicant 
purchased, used, and sold a variety of illegal or controlled substances, or misused 
prescription drugs. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply.   
  AG & 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance” would 
apply if Applicant had already been granted a security clearance.  However, in this 
instance, Applicant was merely an applicant for a security and it had not been granted 
prior to his continued substance abuse.  Accordingly, the evidence fails to establish AG 
& 25(g). 
In addition, AG & 25(h), “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure 
to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use,” may raise security 
concerns.  While there is no expressed intent by Applicant to continue his illegal drug 
use, in May 2007, he stated to an investigator that he had stopped using illegal drugs in 
July 2006, and said he had no intention to use any illegal drugs again.  Nevertheless, he 
actually continued to use marijuana on an estimated three occasions since graduating 
from college, including one time during the last week of September 2007.  Thus, his lack 
 
8 
                                      
 
of candor, as recently as May 2007, has raised substantial question as to his 
commitment to discontinue drug use.  AG & 25(h) applies. 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  While the majority 
of Applicant’s illegal substance abuse occurred during the period May 2002 until 
January 2004, he continued his “experimentation” with cocaine until October 2005 and 
his extensive use of marijuana until September 2007. Taken individually, the 
“experimentation” of some of the substances might qualify as infrequent use that 
occurred “so long ago.” However, the entire course of conduct-the behavior-which, 
despite having been pronounced by Applicant as in the past, continued for nine months 
after he became an employee of the defense contractor and to within six months of the 
issuance of the SOR, casting doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  The evidence fails to establish AG & 26(a). 
 Under AG & 26(b), drug involvement concerns may also be mitigated where 
there is a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence 
As noted above, on October 28, 2007, Applicant and his roommate agreed to 
cease sharing an apartment. That action was the first formal disassociation from his 
drug-using associate. Also, his claims that his lifestyle and environment have changed, 
that he has graduated from college, has taken up physical fitness, and is now employed 
in a professional capacity, when viewed carefully, reveal some rehabilitative steps. 
Applicant graduated from college in December 2005, took up physical fitness, and 
entered the professional work place in November 2005 (with a non-defense contractor 
as a software engineer) and then in January 2007 with a defense contractor. 
Regardless of the changes in environment and lifestyle, Applicant continued his 
substance abuse. His purported abstinence, commencing in September 2007, after 
nearly five and one-half years of intensive substance abuse with a wide variety of 
substances, has, if he is to be believed, been in place less than nine months, hardly a 
sufficient period of abstinence, considering his history of substance abuse and the 
absence of any drug awareness or treatment programs. The evidence fails to fully 
establish AG ¶ 26(b).  
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 30:      
 
9 
                                      
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly, under AG & 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,” may raise security concerns. During the period May 2002-September 2007, 
Applicant purchased, possessed, and sold a variety of illegal or controlled substances, 
or unauthorized prescription drugs.  Those activities constitute criminal conduct 
because such conduct violates state and/or federal criminal laws. AG && 31(a) and 
31(c) apply.   
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” Also, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply where “there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  Applicant’s nearly five 
and one-half years of criminal conduct-intensive substance abuse with a wide variety of 
substances-continued until at least September 2007, or until about nine months ago. 
Those nine months of purported abstinence, as well as some expressed remorse, and a 
good employment record, constitute some evidence of rehabilitation. However, the 
length of the criminal conduct, the absence of being truly and sincerely remorseful-he 
said he was not ashamed-about his drug abuse, the fact that the criminal conduct 
continued after he became employed by a defense contractor, and it continued after he 
misrepresented facts to an investigator, all minimize the significance of the possible 
mitigating conditions and cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.  The evidence fails to establish AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d).   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
10 
                                      
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, and 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, under AG & 16(b), “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative,” may raise security concerns. 
In April 2007, Applicant completed his SF 86, and indicated he had used a 
variety of illegal or controlled substances, or misused prescription drugs usually while 
attending parties or other social gatherings. During an interview with a Government 
investigator in May 2007, Applicant stated he had stopped using illegal drugs in July 
2006, and said he had no intention to use any illegal drugs again. Nevertheless, despite 
being aware of the illegal or controlled status of the substances, he actually continued to 
use marijuana on an estimated three more occasions after graduating from college, 
including one time during the last week of September 2007.  Applicant contended he did 
not lie to the investigator because at the time he made the statement, his intention was 
not to use illegal substances in the future.  While there is evidence that substance 
abuse continued until September 2007, the record is bereft that the substance abuse 
continued between July 2006 and May 2007.  With Applicant’s denial, and the absence 
of Government evidence to the contrary, there is no evidence Applicant deliberately 
omitted, concealed, or falsified information in the SF 86 or during the interview.  The 
evidence fails to establish AG & 16(a) or AG & 16(b). 
In addition, AG & 16(c), “credible adverse information in several adjudicative 
issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information,” may raise security 
concerns.  In this instance, Applicant’s drug involvement and criminal conduct were 
 
11 
                                      
 
clearly sufficient for an adverse determination, and the two minor allegations under 
Guideline E offered no meaningful evidence not otherwise considered. Drug use while 
holding a security clearance is specifically dealt with under AG & 25(g), and drug use 
while a clearance is pending may be considered under the whole person concept. The 
evidence fails to establish AG & 16(c). 
In addition, AG ¶ 16(g), “association with persons involved in criminal activity,” 
may raise security concerns.  Applicant, his roommate, and his drug supplier, as well as 
the friends and associates at college who used illegal substances with him during social 
gatherings and thereafter, were all involved in criminal activity.  It appears Applicant’s 
relationships with everyone other than his roommate ceased upon graduation.  He and 
his roommate continued to reside together until October 2007. Because of that 
continuing relationship, AG & 16(g) applies.   
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. Under AG ¶ 17(e), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress,” and under AG ¶ 17(g), it may be 
mitigated when an “association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations.”  
Applicant terminated his relationship with his roommate in October 2007, and has taken 
positive steps to reduce vulnerability by becoming more forthright regarding his history 
of illegal substance abuse and criminal conduct.  AG ¶¶ 17(e) and 17(g) apply.   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When Applicant’s problems first 
 
12 
                                      
 
began, he was a university student.  Curiosity got the best of him and, knowing what he 
was about to do was illegal, he intentionally began to experiment with a number of 
illegal or controlled substances, or misused prescription drugs. (See AG & 2(a)(1), AG & 
2(a)(2), AG & 2(a)(4), AG & 2(a)(5), and AG & 2(a)(7).)  His drug abuse reached its 
highest level in 2003 when he abused nine different substances.  Thereafter, while it 
may have tapered off, he continued to abuse cocaine as recently as October 2005, and 
marijuana as recently as September 2007. (See AG & 2(a)(3).  He intended to abstain 
in July 2006, and intended to alter his lifestyle and environment, but, notwithstanding his 
graduation from college, his interest in physical fitness, and his employment by a 
defense contractor, his substance abuse continued.  After nearly five and one-half years 
of intensive substance abuse, followed by only nine months of abstinence, his 
behavioral changes and rehabilitation efforts are too recent to fully assess, and there is 
insufficient evidence of change to conclude there is no likelihood of recurrence.   (See 
AG & 2(a)(6) and AG & 2(a)(9).) 
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement and criminal conduct considerations.  His personal conduct concerns are 
better covered under the other two issue areas which specifically are directed towards 
his criminal conduct and drug involvement, and are considered redundant to them. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.(1):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.(2):   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a.(3):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.(4):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.(5):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.(6):   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a.(7):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.(8):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.(9):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a.(10):   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.(1):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.(2):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.(3):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.(4):   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Chief Administrative Judge 
