1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-13739
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
June 25, 2008 
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(eQip), on December 4, 2006.  On February 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guidelines B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on February 6, 2008, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on April 25, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on May 2, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for May 28, 2008.  At the hearing the Government presented
three exhibits.  The Applicant called one witness, presented three exhibits and testified
2
on his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on June 11, 2008.  Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts concerning the current political condition in Iran.  Applicant had no
objection.  (Tr. p. 10).  The request and the attached documents were not admitted into
evidence but were included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out
in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 51 years of age and has a Bachelor’s
Degree in Electrical Engineering.  He is employed as an Engineer for a defense
contractor.  He seeks a security clearance in connection with his employment in the
defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Iran in 1957.  He immigrated to the United States in
January 1979, and started attending college that same year.  In 1984/1985 he married
an Irish citizen who possesses an Irish passport.  She recently initiated her application
for United States citizenship.  They have two children who are native born American
citizens.  The Applicant became a United States citizen in June 1990.  He possesses an
Iranian passport that was issue to him in June 2001.  Although his Iranian passport
became invalid, he validated it each time he traveled to Iran.  In April 2001, he validated
his Iranian passport in order to travel to Iran to see his father who was ill.  In 2005, when
his mother passed away, he again traveled to Iran using his Iranian passport.  A copy of
this Iranian passport indicates that it is currently invalid.  (Government Exhibit 3). 
The Applicant’s father passed away two months before the hearing.  Prior to his
death, he was a retired government railroad worker, who received a government
pension.  With respect to whether he will travel to Iran again, the Applicant stated, “ No.
It is not obligatory.  I may just again to pay a visit to my father’s grave this time, but it is
not - - I don’t have a passport; so, I guess I can’t.”  (Tr. pp. 43).  When asked whether
he had any intentions of validating his Iranian passport, he stated, “Not at this time, no”.
(Tr. p. 44).    
3
The Applicant has a sister, nephew and uncle who reside in and are citizens of
Iran.  The Applicant and his sister grew up close, but he cannot say for sure how close
he is to her now.  He contacts his family in Iran about once a month to see how they
and are doing.  His sister is a homemaker who is supported by her husband, who is also
a government railroad worker.  They have one child, the Applicant’s nephew, who
recently moved back in with his mother.  His nephew is about 29/30 years old and is in
business for himself, but the Applicant is not sure what he does.  He recently purchased
a computer and is now corresponding with the Applicant by e-mail.  The Applicant is
considering sponsoring his nephew to come to the United States.  (Tr. p. 54).  The
Applicant’s uncle is a retired government civil engineer who traveled from Iran to the
United States for the Applicant’s wedding.  He and the Applicant are in contact with
each other about every two months or so.  Each of these family members know that the
Applicant is an Engineer but they do not know where he works or what he does.
 
Over the years, the Applicant has occasionally sent money to his family in Iran
for emergency purposes, such as to cover the expense of his parents’ funerals.  (Tr. p.
47).  He has also sent money when he feels his family in Iran is in need.  At times, he
has sent between $1,000.00 and $2,000.00 to his sister by way of a friend who may be
traveling to Iran who can get the money for her when they arrive in Iran and then the
Applicant reimburses them.  The purpose for this process is to avoid the problem of the
restriction on how much money can be brought into the country.  The Applicant believes
that since he has been living in the United States, he has sent no more than $10,000.00
to his family in Iran.  When his mother died, the Applicant gave all of his rights of
inheritance in Iran to his sister.  (Tr. p.  46).
Besides his children, the Applicant has no relatives in the United States.  (Tr. p.
56).  His net worth in the United States is approximately $700,00.00.  He is involved in
the community, and has volunteered as coach for his daughter’s club soccer team.
(Applicant’s Exhibit A).
With respect to his Irish family members, besides his spouse, he has a mother-
in-law, sister-in-law and brother-in-law who are Irish citizens.  His sister-in-law lives in
France, and his brother-in-law lives in England.  The Applicant’s wife has contact with
her mother in Ireland, and her sister in France about every other week.  She contacts
her brother in England about once a month.  The Applicant’s other sister-in-law resides
in the United States and was for several years, a private nurse for a United States
dignitary.  The Applicant’s father-in-law has passed away.
The Applicant’s supervisor, who has known the Applicant for thirteen years and
managed him for the last eight years, testified that the Applicant is a leading Engineer in
the field who has successfully held a security clearance for about ten years.  His
expertise is critical, and his skill is very hard to find in the industry.  He is reliable,
provides excellent analysis, and is willing to share his knowledge with other Engineers.
He has never committed a security violation.  Out of sixteen employees, he is ranked in
the top four.  (Tr. pp. 22-29)  
4
Performance evaluations of the Applicant for 2006, 2007, and 2008 reflect that
the Applicant’s overall rating always “exceeds expectations”.   (Applicant’s Exhibit B).
A letter from the Applicant’s neighbor for the past eleven years indicates that the
Applicant is trustworthy and responsible.  On a number of occasions the neighbor has
asked the Applicant to watch over their home while they are away.  (Applicant’s Exhibit
C).
I have taken administrative notice of the current political conditions in Iran.  The
fact that Iran has no diplomatic relations with the United States, Iran’s efforts to acquire
nuclear weapons and other weapon of mass destruction, its support for and involvement
in international terrorism, it’s support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace
process, and it’s dismal human rights records.  I have considered the fact that Iranian
Government officials at all levels commit serious abuses of their power and authority.
It’s Totalitarian Government, the fact that Iran supports terrorists activities, and is
rampant with crime and instability.  The overall deteriorating security situation in Iran,
the human rights abuses, and the government corruption elevates the cause for
concern in the case.  The United States may face no greater challenge from a single
country than from Iran.    
The Government presented no evidence on the current political conditions in
Ireland.  Accordingly, I find that the foreign contacts the Applicant has in Ireland do not
pose a security risk.  
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992  Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern; which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
5
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risks of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure,
or coercion. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
6
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicted upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination. 
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guideline B (foreign influence)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's adverse conduct
and his ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency
of proof of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the past
adverse conduct, is unlikely to be repeated, and that the Applicant presently qualifies for
a security clearance.
An individual who demonstrates a foreign connections may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
The mere possession of a foreign passport raises legitimate questions as to whether the
Applicant can be counted upon to place the interests of the United States paramount to
that of another nation. The Government must be able to place a high degree of
confidence in a security clearance holder to abide by all security rules and regulations,
at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSIONS
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
 
Under Foreign Influence, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a foreign
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a
citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risks of
7
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies in this
case.  None of the mitigation conditions are applicable. 
The Applicant is a dual citizen of Iran and the United States. His wife and her
family are citizens of Ireland.  Besides his two children who are United States citizens,
the Applicant has no family in the United States.  However, he has significant ties of
affection in Iran.  His sister, nephew and uncle are citizens and residents of Iran with
whom he maintains a close and continuing relationship. Although he does not want to
admit it, the Applicant is very close to his family in Iran.  The Applicant has deep and
abiding ties in Iran.  His only sister, with whom he grew up, is very special to him.  His
nephew is also special to him as he is considering sponsoring him to come to the United
States, which is not an easy task.  He is also very close to his uncle, his father’s brother.
He contacts his sister, nephew or uncle at least once a month or so by telephone and
most recently receives e-mail from his nephew.  He sends them money when they need
it.  There is strong evidence of a close bond and affection.  After becoming a United
States citizen, he traveled to Iran using his Iranian passport on two occasions for family
matters.  It does not go unrecognized that for the past thirty years he has worked hard
to establish himself as a responsible, educated, American citizen.  However, he has not
cut all ties from Iran.    
It is noted that the current political situation in Iran elevates the cause for concern
in this case.  Although there is no direct evidence that his family members in Iran are
associated in any way with the Iranian government, there is evidence of a close bond
and strong evidence of affection with his family in Iran.  This bond and affection with his
family could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  Therefore, the possibility of foreign
influence exists that could create the potential for conduct resulting in the compromise
of classified information.  I find that the Applicant is  vulnerable to foreign influence.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Considering all the evidence, the Applicant has not met the mitigating conditions
of Guideline B of the adjudicative guidelines set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive.
Accordingly, he has not met his ultimate burden of persuasion under Guideline B.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
8
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
Subparas. 1.a.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.b.: For the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.c.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.d.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.e.: Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.f.:  Against the Applicant
 Subparas. 1.g.: For the Applicant
Subparas. 1.h.: For the Applicant
 
 DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
