 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXX, XXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-11884 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’I, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-Qip), on December 5, 2006. On February 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 4, 2008, which was 
received at DOHA on March 21, 2008. He answered the SOR in writing on April 2, 
2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the 
response/request on April 4, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
 
2 
 
 
April 17, 2008, and I received the case assignment on April 23, 2008. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on May 2, 2008, scheduling the hearing for May 29, 2008.  The 
hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were 
received without objection. The government also submitted a Government’s Exhibit List, 
which was marked as Exhibit (Ex.) I. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through 
I, which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 5, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 64-year-old graphic designer, who has worked for his defense 
contractor employer since September 1989. He seeks to renew his security clearance, 
which he has held for “over 20 years.” AE G.  
 
Beyond high school, he estimates he has completed two years of college course 
work. Tr. 49-50. Applicant has been married to his first and only wife since August 1985. 
They have three children, ages 21, 16 and 14. GE 1, Tr. 25-26.  
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included among other things the review of his September 2007 credit bureau report,  
November 2007 Signed Response to Interrogatories and Attachments, and July 2002 
Defense Security Service (DSS) Sworn Statement. GE 5, GE2, GE 3. 
 
The background investigation revealed that Applicant had filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in January 1993, and was awarded a discharge in November 1993. (SOR ¶ 
1.a.) GE 6. In February 1999, he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was dismissed 
in April 2002. The Summary of Schedules for that bankruptcy listed total assets of 
$279,038, and total liabilities of $307,633. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) GE 7, GE 8.  
 
During his July 2002 DSS interview, and referring to his 1993 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, he stated his financial problems began because he was taking care of his 
mother, who was uninsured and on dialysis. He added that his wife was in between jobs 
and had given birth to their youngest child. He consulted a bankruptcy attorney who 
advised him to file for Chapter 7. GE 3. 
 
During the same July 2002 DSS interview, he stated he filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy because his wife “was let go from her job.” He stopped making payments to 
the Trustee in February 2002 because his bankruptcy attorney advised him that he 
“would never be caught up on [his] bills.” He added, “[m]y intentions are to clean up all 
my credit, even if I have to lose my house and rent a smaller home.” At that time, he 
 
3 
 
 
planned to meet with his attorney in August 2002 and re-file under Chapter 13 or 
Chapter 7, depending on what he could afford. GE 3. 
 
In November 2002, he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and was awarded a 
discharge in February 2003. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) GE 9. 
 
Since his February 2003 Chapter 7 discharge, he has accumulated six debts 
totaling approximately $27,337. These debts are identified in the SOR and 
substantiated by his September 2007 credit report and admissions to the SOR. (SOR ¶¶ 
1.d. – 1.i.) GE 5, Response to SOR. These debts include one medical bill, one utility bill, 
two credit cards debts, and two automobile loans in arrears.  
 
In his November 2007 Response to Interrogatories, he explained he was “in the 
process of making payments” to the medical bill, that the utility bill “will be paid off in two 
weeks,” that he “will set up a payment plan” for the two credit card debts, that he “[has] 
agreed [to] give back car” for one of the automobiles, and “will talk to dealer about 
giving back car” for the other automobile. He further explained “my credit is not good but 
I am trying to clear it up and bring my credit scores up. I am delinquent on some debts 
however financiall[y] we are getting better.” The Personal Financial Statement attached 
to the Response to Interrogatories showed a negative cash flow of over $1,000. (SOR ¶ 
1.j.) GE 2.  
 
At the time of his hearing, Applicant did not provide any evidence demonstrating 
that he had followed through on any of his stated intentions contained in his November 
2007 Response to Interrogatories. As of the hearing date, the government also 
submitted an April 2008 credit report reflecting that Applicant’s financial situation had 
not improved. GE 4. At his hearing, Applicant restated his previous intentions to pay off 
or pay down his bills. Tr. 22-29. None of the six debts that were incurred after 
Applicant’s Chapter 7 discharge in 2002 have been resolved. Tr. 29-33. 
 
Applicant explained: 
 
[T]he first bankruptcy was a matter of bad judgment. . . . The second 
(bankruptcy) was when my second child was born, my wife stayed home 
with the child and I took over all the bills. She was out of work for about a 
year and a half. . . . Moving up to the present time, we worked together as 
a team. She runs a catering business. What she does is school lunches 
and I’m an illustrator at [defense contractor site]. She became sick 
approximately a year and a half ago. She came down with something 
called Crohn’s disease. She lost several of her contracts because she was 
incapacitated. We went to [hospital] and she was operated on and that 
operation saved her life. She’s still in a kind of a sensitive state, but she’s 
recovered to the fact that she’s back working. And in order for both of us 
to make it, she has to work, too. And now we are beginning to see some 
light. I understand that there is a lot of sacrifices that I have to make to 
bring myself back into a financial stability and there’s a couple of things I 
 
4 
 
 
plan to do to do that. . . . Well, first of all, with the owner of the house that I 
live in, we’re going to begin to downsize. We’re renting with the option of 
buying. I took out the option to buy. Our lease runs out in July. I decided 
not to redo the lease. We’re going to downsize to an apartment perhaps or 
something that’s within our price range. Tr. 14-15. 
 
Applicant also submitted a “Plan for [F]inancial [R]ecovery.” The plan included 
setting aside $400 from his tax return to pay down bills, downsizing their home, moving 
his family out of state for six months while Applicant’s lives locally with his brother, and 
enrolling in a debt recovery program That program includes a plan to meet with a 
financial counselor in June 2008 (month after hearing date). AE G - I. 
 
Applicant went through various degrees of financial counseling associated with 
his three bankruptcies. Tr. 52-55, 57-58. He also received financial counseling through 
his church (circa 2002 – 2004). Tr. 58-59, 60.  
 
Applicant submitted three reference letters that provided favorable comments 
about his character and supported his being granted a clearance. AE A through C. He 
also provided three certificates reflecting favorable work-related performance. AE D – F. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),1 the Government’s concern is that 
an Applicant’s “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
 Applicant has a history of failing to meet his financial obligations dating back to 
1993. He filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1993 and was awarded a discharge. He filed 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in 1999, which was dismissed in 2002. He 
converted that Chapter 13 bankruptcy to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2002, and was 
awarded a discharge in 2003. Since that discharge, he has accumulated at least six 
delinquent/charged off debts totaling approximately $27,337.  
 
In July 2002, Applicant was interviewed by DSS regarding his financial problems 
and stated his intentions to resolve his financial difficulties. In his November 2007 
Response to Interrogatories, he restated those same intentions, and again at his 
hearing. He presented no evidence to show he has taken any action to resolve his 
debts or show that he is on the road to financial recovery. His financial recovery plan is 
1  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
prospective in nature. His financial difficulties date back to at least 1993. As of the 
hearing date, he still had the same six outstanding and unmitigated delinquent/charged 
off debts identified in his November 2007 Response to Interrogatories and February 
2008 SOR. Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) ¶ 19(a): inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and FC DC ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations; apply in this case.  
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 I conclude that Applicant is able to 
receive partial credit under Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC ¶ 
20(b) discussed infra as a result of his wife’s illness in 2006 and subsequent loss of 
income. I also gave Applicant credit for receiving credit counseling under FC 20(c), 
discussed infra . However, whatever credit is received by those MCs is overcome by 
years of financial mismanagement going back to at least 1993. Applicant presented no 
evidence documenting efforts taken to contact or resolve debts with the six creditors 
identified in the SOR. Nor is there any evidence that his past participation in financial 
counseling, especially that associated with his two Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 
bankruptcies netted in any tangible results.  
 
I specifically considered FC MC ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and FC MC ¶ 20(c): the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
 
Applicant’s uncorroborated testimony fails to establish mitigating factors that may 
be considered as circumstances beyond his control contributing to his inability to pay his 
debts. When confronted with the government’s concerns that his financial past was a 
security concern, he failed to pursue any corrective action that would have included 
disputing or otherwise resolving past debts.   
 
He presented no evidence to show he has dealt responsibly with his financial 
obligations before, or especially after receipt of the SOR (i.e., paid debts, settlements, 
documented negotiations, credible payment plans). Applicant’s financial history and lack 
of favorable evidence preclude a finding that he has established a track record of 
financial responsibility, or that he has taken control of his financial situation. Based on 
his past performance, his prospective assurances ring hollow. His financial problems 
are likely to be a concern in the future. Moreover, his financial problems are recent, not 
isolated, and ongoing.  
 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did not meet his 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
2  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
7 
 
 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does not support a favorable decision. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.j.:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
