 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13735 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-
QIP) on April 4, 2007. On February 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On March 29, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested her case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on April 23, 2008. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on April 24, 2008.  
The record is not clear as to when Applicant received the FORM. She submitted a 
response to FORM on May 26, 2008. On May 29, 2008, Department Counsel did not 
object to Applicant’s response to the FORM. The FORM was assigned to me on June 9, 
 
2 
 
 
2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admits to the allegations in her Answer to the SOR. (Item 4.) 
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  She has been employed with the defense contractor 
since January 2005. She was widowed in 1999 and has two children and four 
stepchildren. They are all adults. (Item 5.)   
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed two delinquent accounts 
consisting of a $5,552 collection account placed for collection in May 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.a; 
Item 6 at 5-6; Item 7 at 2; Item 9 at 7); and a $8,859 automobile account placed for 
collection in October 2003. Applciant co-signed a car loan for her daughter. (SOR ¶ 1.b; 
Item 6 at 5, 7; Item 7 at 2; Item 8 at 2; Item 9 at 12; Response to FORM, dated May 26, 
2008.) 
 
In response to interrogatories, dated December 18, 2007, Applicant indicated 
that she attempted to make payment arrangements with the creditors of the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Neither creditor was willing to negotiate with her. She provided 
evidence that she resolved a delinquent $315 cell phone account. (Item 6 at 11-14.) 
She also showed that she is current on her electric bill which used to be delinquent. 
(Item 6 at 9-10.) Applicant submitted a personal financial statement which showed that 
her net monthly income is $1,962.64.  Her total monthly expenses are $2,094.59 which 
leaves a monthly balance of negative $131.95. (Item 6 at 4.)  
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant indicates that she is making payments 
towards the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a to the collection agency who is handling the 
account. She agreed to pay $50 a month plus give the company her income tax return 
until the debt is paid. She made a payment of $1,062 in February 2008 and a $50 
payment in April 2008 and May 2008. Her balance is now $4,452.93. She states that it 
might take a couple years to settle the account. Once this account is paid, she intends 
to start paying on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b (Item 4; Response to FORM, dated 
May 26, 2008.) Applicant was unemployed between August 2004 and September 2004. 
(Item 5 at 13.)        
 
Applicant states that she is an honest, hard working person. She does not try to 
“keep up with the Joneses.” She lives in a 1974 mobile home. She is trying to make 
ends meet by doing an honest days work. (Item 4.) She would never jeopardize her job. 
(Response to FORM, dated May 26,2008.)  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant had several delinquent debts 
that she has been unable to resolve based on her income. The largest debt is an 
automobile loan where she agreed to act as co-signer for her daughter who defaulted 
on the loan payments.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable 
because Applicant’s attempt to resolve her delinquent accounts is recent.    
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies. Applicant was widowed in 1999 
which more than likely created some financial hardship. In addition, she was 
unemployed for one month in August 2004. Applicant never fully explained how she 
encountered her financial problems. One can argue that her daughter’s failure to meet 
the terms of her automobile loan was not within Applicant’s control as well. Applicant 
does not appear to live beyond her means. She is paying what she can towards her 
delinquent accounts and has acted responsibly under the circumstances.    
 
     FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial 
counseling. She has taken steps to resolve her financial situation.  She satisfied two 
 
5 
 
 
debts that were not alleged in the SOR.  She is making payments towards the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.a.   
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a.  Applicant entered into a payment plan and has been making payments towards 
this debt. She agreed to sign over all of her tax returns and pay $50 per month until the 
debt is paid off. The balance has been reduced from $5,552 to $4452.93.  While one 
unresolved delinquent account remains, Applicant is not the primary debtor on the debt 
that remains unresolved. Her daughter has primary responsibility for this automobile 
loan.  While as co-signer, Applicant is legally responsible for this debt, she should not 
be penalized for her daughter’s financial irresponsibility. While Applicant’s financial 
situation is very tight, she does not appear to live beyond her means. She is making a 
good-faith effort to resolve her debts.      
  
Under the revised AG, the overall concern under financial considerations is not 
only whether a person who is financially over-extended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds, but also the failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  Although Applicant struggles financially, she has taken steps to meet her 
financial obligations. Her financial problems are controllable. Her financial situation does 
not raise a security concern. She has mitigated the security concerns raised under 
financial considerations.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant paid two delinquent debts 
prior to the SOR being issued. Only two delinquent accounts remain. She entered into a 
repayment agreement pertaining to one debt. She is meeting the terms of the 
 
6 
 
 
repayment agreement. The remaining debt is for an automobile which she acted as co-
signer. Applicant intends to resolve that debt when she completes the payment plan for 
the first debt. Based on her financial situation, this is a reasonable approach. Applicant 
has mitigated the security concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
