 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
 As authorized by Paragraph E3.1.7,  Additional Procedural Guidance, Enclosure 3 of the Directive.
2
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-13842
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern caused by his use of marijuana
while possessing a security clearance. 
On February 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR that was received by DOHA on April 1, 2008. Applicant
admitted all SOR allegations, except the allegation contained in subparagraph 1.e, and
requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel
requested a hearing by memorandum dated April 7, 2008, that was made part of the record
as Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex.) I.   2
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
The case was assigned to me on April 17, 2008. A notice of hearing was issued on
April 24, 2008, scheduling the hearing for May 19, 2008. The hearing was conducted as
scheduled. The government submitted four documentary exhibits that were marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-4, and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant
testified and submitted three documentary exhibits that were marked as Applicant Exhibits
(AE) 1-3, and admitted into the record without objection. The record was held open to
provide Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation in support of his case.
One additional document was timely received, marked as AE 4, and admitted into the
record without objection. The transcript was received on June 2, 2008.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 50-year-old single man who has been employed as an engineer by
a defense contractor since October 1990. From August 1985 until October 1990, he was
employed as an engineer by a different defense contractor. Applicant graduated from high
school in 1975. He thereafter attended college, graduate school, and ultimately was
awarded a PhD in engineering in June 1985. Applicant’s work performance appraisals and
letters of recommendation establish that he is a valued and trusted employee. He has
possessed a secret level security clearance since 1985 and no previous adverse action
has been taken to revoke or downgrade that clearance.
Applicant used and purchased marijuana while in high school. On one occasion he
purchased a quarter pound of marijuana, divided it into four smaller packages, and sold
them for profit. He denies using marijuana or associating with anyone who used marijuana
from his high school years until approximately 1999. He was questioned about his use of
marijuana when he first applied for a security clearance in 1985 and assured the
investigator who questioned him that he would never use marijuana in the future.
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions in May 2006 (GE 1) in
which he disclosed he had used marijuana between seven and fourteen times from
January 1999 to May 2006. He blamed his use of marijuana during this time period on
associating with one or more cousins who used marijuana and with whom he wanted to be
friendly. He last used marijuana on December 31, 2006, and asserts he will not use it again
in the future because he does not want to jeopardize his security clearance. (GE 4)
However, he told a DoD investigator on May 29, 2007, that he could not definitely rule out
future use if he visited with the cousin who he had been smoking marijuana with, and he
further qualified that assertion at the hearing as follows:
Now, how do I know what is going to happen in the future. I won’t do it. I tell
you if you are a good Hollywood screenwriter you could dream up some
station [sic], you know, where it winds up happening. (Tr. 48)
Applicant submitted a random urinalysis sample on May 21, 2008, that was negative for
the presence of any controlled substance, including marijuana. (AE 4)
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 Id at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
3
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline H (drug involvement),
with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the6
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to7
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
4
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations.
Applicant purchased and used marijuana while in high school. On one occasion
while in high school he purchased, divided and resold a quarter pound of marijuana. He
abstained from marijuana use for almost 25 years before starting to smoke it with a cousin
with whom he wanted to become more friendly. He used marijuana approximately seven
to fourteen times between January 1999 and December 31, 2006, including after he
submitted his security clearance application in 2006. He possessed a security clearance
at all times while using marijuana after 1999. 
While Applicant asserts he will not use marijuana in the future, he found it necessary
to qualify that assertion by pointing out that he could not definitely rule out future use if he
visited with his cousin and that it is always conceivable some unforeseen circumstance
could occur that would result in him using marijuana. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 25(a):
any drug abuse; 25(c): illegal drug possession, including . . . purchase, sale, or distribution;
25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and 25(h): . . . or failure
to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use all apply.
I have considered all mitigating conditions and conclude that none apply. While it
has been almost 18 months since Applicant last used marijuana, he went almost 25 years
between his high school use and when he resumed smoking marijuana in 1999. Further,
his explanation for resuming the use of marijuana and using it intermittently over the course
of almost eight years amounts to nothing more than his succumbing to mild peer pressure
and a desire to become more friendly with his cousin. He most recently saw that cousin
when he visited Applicant about six months ago. Add to these facts Applicant’s
equivocation in his assertion that he will not use marijuana in the future and there cannot
be a reliable prediction that he will not use marijuana in the future, including while
possessing a security clearance. Thus, Mitigating Conditions (MC) 26(a): the behavior
happened so long ago . . . or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment does; and 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such
as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding
the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;(4) a
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation do not
apply. The remaining mitigating conditions have no application to the facts of this case. 
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
5
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, to include Applicant’s educational background, the letters of
recommendation and work performance appraisals he submitted, his lengthy work history,
the number of years he has held a security clearance, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through
¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and the applicable disqualifying conditions, Applicant has failed to
mitigate the security concern caused by his drug involvement. He has failed to overcome
the case against him or satisfy his ultimate burden of persuasion. Guideline H is decided
against Applicant. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a
security clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-f: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
