DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 07-13497
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: 
Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Brent C. Harvey, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 29 January 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines C and E.  Applicant answered the SOR 20 March 2008, and requested a1
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 14 May 2008, and I convened a hearing 5
June 2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 16 June 2008.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. He is a 53-year-old accountant
employed by a defense contractor since October 1997. He seeks to retain the security
clearance he has held since about April 2006. Although he does not know what, if any,
clearance were granted, he has been the subject of U.S. government background
investigations in November 1998, April 2005, and April 2006 for his contract work with
other government agencies.
Applicant was born in Nigeria in August 1954. He was raised there and educated
there through high school. He became an accountant by on-the-job training. He
immigrated to the U.S. in August 1980 to go to college, having obtained an education
visa.  He eventually obtained both undergraduate and post-graduate degrees. Along the
way, he was able to covert his education visa into a work visa. He became a naturalized
U.S. citizen in February 1995. At that time, he surrendered the Nigerian passport that
U.S. immigration law required him to maintain. Later that year, he obtained his first U.S.
passport. He renewed his U.S. passport in September 2005.
In February 1990, Applicant married a Nigerian national he met in the U.S. She
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2000. Applicant and his wife have four
children, all native-born U.S. citizens.
Applicant and his wife traveled to Nigeria in 2001 with his children to show them
where he grew up. They traveled on their U.S. passports. In 2003, Applicant had
disciplinary problems with his teenage daughter and thought she might be less blase
about her privileged live in the U.S. if she experienced school in Nigeria. He enrolled her
in a private school and traveled to Nigeria for a week in 2003 to take her to school.
Again, he traveled on his U.S. passport. When—lesson learned—she implored him to
take her out of school, he returned to Nigeria on his U.S. passport in 2004.
The difficulty and expense of obtaining the necessary visa from the Nigerian
Embassy bothered Applicant on two counts. The difficulty made travel visas
inconvenient. The expense Applicant viewed as enriching a corrupt Nigerian
government. Applicant believed it would be both more convenient and less enriching to
the Nigerian government if he obtained a Nigerian passport, and—being unaware of any
reason not to—applied for one. He received his Nigerian passport in August 2004. He
used it to enter and exit Nigeria in December 2005 and December 2007, although he
used his U.S. passport to re-enter the U.S. He made these trips to visit his brothers.
Applicant fully disclosed his foreign connections on his August 2006 clearance
application (G.E. 1) and fully discussed them during a July 2007 subject interview (G.E.
2). During his interview, he stated his willingness to surrender his Nigerian passport and
renounce his Nigerian citizenship. When he became aware of the security concerns
raised by his possession and use of a Nigerian passport, he surrendered his passport
and stated his intent to renounce his Nigerian citizenship to the Nigerian Embassy on 7
3
March 2008 (Answer). He received confirmation of the surrender and renunciation from
the Nigerian Embassy in May 2008 (A.E. A).
Applicant’s two brothers are resident citizens of Nigeria. Neither is connected to
the Nigerian government. One brother is a farmer; the other is a town planner at a
governmental level equivalent to a state government in the U.S. He has frequent
enough contact with his brothers, mostly the town planner. The farmer doesn’t have a
telephone.
Aside from applying for and using a Nigerian passport, Applicant has not
exercised his dual citizenship with Nigeria since becoming a U.S. citizen. He has no
financial or other interests in Nigeria. He has no contacts with Nigeria other than his two
brothers. All his financial interests are in the U.S. He owns his own accounting firm. He
has voted in every election in the U.S. since becoming a U.S. citizen. 
Applicant’s character witness was both a schoolmate of Applicant’s growing up in
Nigeria and an active-duty military officer with 23-years combined enlisted and
commissioned service. A naturalized U.S. citizen himself, he has held a clearance for
over ten years. He described the depth of Applicant’s commitment to the U.S. and
voiced no concerns with Applicant having access to classified information. He also
confirmed that many Nigerians retain their U.S. passports after becoming U.S. citizens
because of the visa hassles with the Nigerian Embassy. Applicant’s character
references (A.E. B), both of whom know Applicant professionally, consider him
extremely honest and trustworthy and eligible to retain his clearance.
Nigeria—a part of the British Empire first as a sphere of British influence in 1885,
then as a colony and protectorate in 1914—was granted independence from the United
Kingdom in October 1960. Since independence, the government has experienced
multiple periods of political unrest, including military takeovers of the government.
However, the military has generally ceded power back to civilian government, most
recently in May 1999. Although Nigeria has a poor human rights record, it has been a
staunch supporter of the U.S. global war on terrorism. Furthermore, since independence
Nigerian foreign policy has been characterized by a focus on Africa and adherence to
several fundamental principles: African unity and independence; peaceful settlement of
disputes; nonalignment and nonintentional interference in the internal affairs of other
nations; and regional economic cooperation and development. Nigeria is the largest
U.S. trading partner in sub-Saharan Africa, and the U.S. is second only to the United
Kingdom in trade with Nigeria. The U.S. is the largest foreign investor in Nigeria. Nigeria
is not a known collector of U.S. intelligence or sensitive economic information. Nigeria is
not known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information. The U.S. Department
of State characterizes the foreign relations between the U.S. and Nigeria as excellent. 
Nevertheless, violent crime, committed by ordinary criminals as well as by
persons in police and military uniforms, can occur throughout the country. Kidnaping for
ransom of persons associated with the petroleum section, including U.S. citizens,
remains common in the Niger Delta region. A travel warning issued in January 2007
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
4
warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to Nigeria and of further deterioration of the
security situation in the Niger Delta region. The travel warning also notes that al Qaida
leadership has expressed an interest in overthrowing the Nigeria government.
Although the civilian government since 1999 was characterized by political unrest
and corruption, an opposition candidate was elected in May 2007 and power transferred
peacefully. The new government has been working on necessary electoral and other
reforms.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guidelines are Guideline
C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline C by
showing that Applicant obtained and used a Nigerian passport after becoming a
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 10(a) exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship3
after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This included but is not
limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport; (b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign
citizenship by an American citizen;
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 11(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in4
a foreign country;
¶ 11(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred before the individual5
became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor;
¶ 11(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security authority;6
¶ 11(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;7
¶ 11(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise8
invalidated; 
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6.9
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(a).10
5
naturalized U.S. citizen.  However Applicant mitigated the Guideline C security3
concerns. Record evidence demonstrates that his exercise of Nigerian citizenship was
innocuous, sensible, and unwitting. That alone would not excuse the exercise of
Nigerian citizenship. His dual citizenship was based on his actively renewing or affirming
his Nigerian citizenship.  All exercise of dual citizenship occurred while he was an4
adult.  Applicant's use of his Nigerian passport was not sanctioned by the U.S.5 6
However, Applicant has met the two most salient mitigating conditions. He has
expressed—and acted upon—a willingness to renounce his foreign citizenship.  He7
stated—and acted upon—willingness to invalidate his passport.  Applicant has resided8
in the U.S. nearly 30 years. His interests and his roots are well established here. I
resolve Guideline C for Applicant.
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and
interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign
financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign influence adjudications can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is known
to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information9
requires careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target
protected information, and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that
information, and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive.
More specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk or foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.10
6
In this case, the government failed to establish a case for disqualification under
Guideline B. Considering first the foreign country involved, Nigeria and the U.S. enjoy
excellent foreign relations. However, while Nigeria focuses its foreign policy largely in
the region, it has actively cooperated with the U.S. in ending global terrorism. Nigeria is
not known to target protected U.S. information, nor is it known to target U.S. citizens to
obtain protected information. Further, in this case it is not clear what further claim
Nigeria might have on Applicant. He has both renounced his Nigerian citizenship and
surrendered his Nigerian passport to the Nigerian government. The risk that Nigeria
might seek protected information from Applicant is low, if not non-existent.
Considering Applicant’s situation in relation to the Nigerian government, the
government produced no evidence that there was any risk, much less a heightened risk,
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of
Applicant’s limited family contacts in Nigeria. Applicant’s travel to Nigeria has no
independent security significance given that Nigeria is not known to be targeting U.S.
citizens for information. The security significance of travel under most circumstances is
demonstrating an applicant’s affection for family members, which Applicant’s December
2005 and December 2007 trips to visit his brothers certainly corroborate, and which
Applicant does not dispute. But neither brother is connected to the Nigerian government
nor otherwise situated to be exploited for information gathering. There is nothing in the
circumstances of their being in Nigeria, or in Applicant’s contacts with them, to heighten
the risk that he could be impelled to provide protected information to Nigeria. Applicant’s
trip to Nigeria to show his family the country where he grew up (2001) and to give his
complacent teenage daughter a life lesson (2003 and 2004) lack even that attenuated
security concern. I resolve Guideline B for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
