  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )
SSN: --------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 07-15624
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on February 13, 2008. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline H based on Applicant’s illegal drug involvement
(marijuana) and  Guideline E for personal conduct. For the reasons discussed below,
this case is decided against Applicant.
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR was received on March 13, 2008, and he
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on April 10, 2008. The hearing took
place as scheduled on May 15, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 27,
2008.
Procedural Rulings
At hearing, the government moved to amend the SOR in two ways. First, it was
amended to correct a typographical error by changing SOR ¶ 1.f to ¶ 1.e, thereby
eliminating ¶ 1.f (Tr. 14–15). Second, it was amended to conform to the evidence of
Applicant’s recent marijuana use by changing SOR ¶ 1.a to read as follows: “You used
marijuana from January 2001 to March 6, 2008” (Tr. 116–117). Applicant had no
objections and the motions were granted.  
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H for drug involvement, the SOR, as amended, alleges: (1)
Applicant used marijuana from January 2001 to about March 6, 2008; (2) that in a
March 2007 interview he admitted that he currently used marijuana approximately five
to seven times per week; (3) that he currently used marijuana for anxiety and planned
on continuing its use; (4) that he occasionally bought marijuana; and (5) that his
marijuana use took place after he was granted a security clearance in February 1992.
Under Guideline E for personal conduct, the SOR alleges: (1) Applicant used marijuana
after being granted a security clearance; and (2) Applicant falsified material facts on a
July 2001 security-clearance application by failing to disclose his marijuana use in
January 2001 as alleged under Guideline H.
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with reservations, the factual
allegations under Guideline H. He averred that the January 2001 start date of his
marijuana use was an estimate and that he believed his use started after October 2001.
Also, he stated that he no longer used or purchased marijuana and did not intend to do
so in the future. Under Guideline E, he admitted using marijuana while holding a
security clearance, but he denied the falsification allegation. Based on the record
evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by substantial evidence.
3
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has lived and
worked in the same community since 1988. He has worked for his current employer
since December 1991. He worked for another federal contractor from July 1988 to
December 1991. His current position or job title is senior project scientist. He has held a
security clearance since at least 1992. He is seeking to upgrade the security clearance
from secret to the top-secret level (Tr. 6). 
Applicant has been married since 1983. He and his wife have four children
between the ages of 15 and 19. His educational background includes a Ph.D. in physics
awarded in 1988. 
To retain a security clearance, Applicant completed a security-clearance
application in July 2001 (Exhibit 3). In response to three questions about illegal drugs
(Questions 27, 28, and 29), Applicant replied in the negative thereby denying any illegal
drug involvement.
To upgrade to a top-secret security clearance, Applicant completed a security-
clearance application in December 2006 (Exhibit 1). In response to three questions
about illegal drugs (Questions 24a, 24b, and 24c), Applicant admitted illegal drug use
within the last seven years, he admitted using illegal drugs while possessing a security
clearance, and he denied illegal drug trafficking. In explanation, he described his drug
use as the occasional use of marijuana from January 2001 to December 2006. He
stated that the from date was estimated, and that he occasionally used marijuana and
had for the past several years. 
He confirmed and provided additional information about his marijuana use in his
background interview of March 2007 (Exhibit 2 at 8–11). Among other things, he  stated
the following about his marijuana involvement:
• He admitted that he currently used marijuana on a regular basis, about five to
seven times per week.
• He admitted that his most recent usage took place the day before the interview.
• He admitted that he intended to continue using marijuana.
Several months later in November 2007, Applicant replied to interrogatories
issued to him by the government (Exhibit 2). He admitted using marijuana (“cannabis”)
five to seven times per week, he admitted using marijuana as recently as November 19,
2007, and he stated that his intentions for future use of marijuana were unknown. In
addition, he explained his marijuana use while possessing a security clearance as
follows: 
My use of cannabis came about initially due to anxiety issues. I briefly
investigated standard treatments for anxiety and they were ineffectual and
had undesired side effects. However, the use of cannabis resolved the
anxiety problems I was having and did so with minimal side effects. I have
4
continued its use due to both its resolving of my anxiety issues and the
lack of negative side effects (Exhibit 2 at 5). 
In his hearing testimony, Applicant explained that he noticed he was becoming
more and more on edge in the early 2000s (Tr. 53). His anxiety was causing difficulties
in his marriage and he decided to consult an physician in April 2001 (Tr. 54; Exhibit B).
He was prescribed a medicine, took it for a brief period, and found the negative side
effects unacceptable as it interfered with marital relations. He was uncomfortable
discussing that aspect with his doctor and therefore did not disclose the negative side
effects. 
His symptoms continued and became worse. Applicant had used marijuana when
he was a college student and thought it might help. He obtained some, used it, and
experienced immediate relief, characterizing it as “a miracle drug” (Tr. 61). He recalls
beginning to use marijuana in about October or November 2001, and he ties that date
to an October 2001 visit to his doctor for a comprehensive physical examination (Tr. 98;
Exhibit B).  When he began using marijuana, he did not intend for it to be permanent,
but he ended up using the drug frequently, although rarely becoming impaired, for an
extended period (Tr. 62). He used marijuana for three reasons: (1) it provided effective
and reliable relief for his anxiety and depression; (2) he did not fully understand or
appreciate that marijuana use was considered a serious matter by the federal
government; and (3) he became complacent (using marijuana was easier than
changing), and he remained concerned about the negative side effects of standard
treatment (Tr. 63–65).  
Under cross-examination, he acknowledged having a security clearance since at
least 1992 if not 1988 when he began his first job (Tr. 70). He admitted that he has
abstained from marijuana since about March 6, 2008, which was the day he returned to
his doctor and reported his marijuana use as an alternative treatment (Tr. 74–75; Exhibit
B). Also, he admitted continuing to use marijuana after receiving the SOR in February
2008, and he admitted using it a few days before he filed his Answer in March 2008 (Tr.
75). And he agreed that his description of his marijuana use as occasional—in his
December 2006 security-clearance application—was “somewhat of a
mischaracterization” (Tr. 88–89). 
His most current usage took place in 2007 and 2008. He used marijuana during
all of 2007, never less than once a week and at most seven times a week (Tr.
100–101). For 2008, his usage continued from January until about March 6 at a
frequency of about five times a week (Tr. 101–102).
   He is currently under the care of his doctor who prescribed an anxiety drug and
an antidepressant drug for Applicant (Tr. 103–105; Exhibit B). The combined effect of
the medicines has been effective, and Applicant has obtained relief without the negative
side effect previously experienced. He has had no desire to use marijuana since the
end of March 2008, and he no longer has a desire to use it (Tr. 106, 113). To that end,
in April 2008, he underwent a drug screen and the results were negative for all
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
5
substances of abuse, including marijuana (Tr. 112–113; Exhibit B). In addition to the
drug screening, Applicant submitted a signed statement, dated March 10, 2008, wherein
he declared an intent to never use illegal drugs of any sort in the future, and the
statement included a clause where he consented to automatic revocation of a security
clearance for any violation (Exhibit G). 
Professionally, Applicant is a well-regarded employee. A senior vice president for
the company verified Applicant’s good employment record dating back to 1991 (Tr.
32–45; Exhibit A). The vice president described Applicant as a person of integrity with
outstanding job performance, and he has no reservations about Applicant’s
trustworthiness (Tr. 36–37). In addition, Applicant submitted four letters of character
reference from longtime colleagues who view Applicant as a highly capable scientist as
well as a person of good character and trustworthiness (Exhibit E). 
Other than his marijuana use, Applicant appears to be a law-abiding citizen. He
submitted a driver’s license abstract to verify that he has no convictions (Exhibit F). 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2)  revokes5
any existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 17–18 (setting forth the security concern as well as the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions). 
6
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
1. The Drug Involvement Security Concern
Under Guideline H for drug involvement,  the security concern is that “use of an14
illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 15
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 16
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 17
7
regulations.”  The definition of drug abuse is “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal15
drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.”16
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following conditions raise a
security concern:
• Any drug abuse (see above definition);  
• Illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase,
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and
• Any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.17
Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement raises security concerns because it
calls into question his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness to obey the
law. Beginning in October or November 2001, he used marijuana to self-medicate his
anxiety and depression. He obtained the marijuana by buying it, and in doing so he
associated himself with a drug dealer. He used marijuana, typically at his home, on a
regular and frequent basis for several years until about March 6, 2008. His usage took
place while possessing a security clearance. These circumstances show that Applicant
used grossly poor judgment for several years.  
The four mitigating conditions under Guideline H have been considered and none
apply in Applicant’s favor. The evidence in his favor is minimal, as his use of marijuana
is too frequent and too recent to be mitigated. Although he signed a statement of intent
not to abuse any drugs in the future, he did so a few days after his last use of marijuana
on about March 6, 2008. It is too soon to determine how he will progress and if his
efforts will result in a permanent change in his behavior.  
In addition, I considered Applicant’s motivation to use marijuana was an effort to
treat his conditions without the negative side effect he experienced. His desire to avoid
the negative side effect is completely understandable. But his chosen course of action
was wrongheaded and illegal. A reasonable person in the same or similar
circumstances would have returned to his physician and sought further assistance.
Given his age, education, and experience, Applicant should have taken that course of
action in 2001 instead of in 2008.
Applicant is now under the care of his doctor who is treating Applicant with
success using prescribed medicines. Applicant has agreed to this course of treatment
and has abstained from using marijuana since beginning treatment on March 6, 2008.
Applicant receives credit for doing so, but it is insufficient to mitigate the security
concerns. His recent corrective actions amount to the first step toward reestablishing his
 Revised Guidelines at 10–12 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and m itigating18
conditions).  
 Revised Guidelines at 10.19
8
record as a law-abiding citizen, and his actions are not a substitute for an established
track record of reform and rehabilitation. In short, his actions are insufficient to
overcome several years of grossly poor judgment. Accordingly, Guideline H is decided
against Applicant.    
2. The Personal Conduct Security Concern
Personal conduct under Guideline E  includes issues of false statements and18
credible adverse information that may not be enough to support action under any other
guideline. In particular, a security concern may arise due to:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  19
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
As alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b, the issue here is the truthfulness of Applicant’s answer
to Question 27 in his July 2001 security-clearance application. He denies that his
negative response to Question 27 was intentionally false because his marijuana use did
not begin until October or November 2001, not January 2001, as he estimated in the
2006 security-clearance application (Exhibit 1).  
His contentions and explanations are credible. The time line of events
establishes that his drug abuse started in late 2001 as opposed to January 2001.
Indeed, Applicant stated that the January 2001 start date was an estimate when he
reported his drug use (Exhibit 1). In addition, the time line is generally corroborated by
the medical records and his wife’s recollection of events (Exhibits B and E). Based on
the record evidence as a whole, Applicant has successfully rebutted the falsification
allegation. 
In addition to the falsification allegation, SOR ¶ 2.a alleged the circumstance that
Applicant used marijuana after being granted a security clearance. This allegation is
redundant with and repetitive of the facts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. This circumstance was
adequately covered under Guideline H—indeed, a specific DC applies to this
 Revised Guidelines at 1–2. 20
9
circumstance—and I gave this circumstance substantial weight. Additional discussion
under Guideline E would add little to the analysis, and it will make no difference in the
ultimate outcome of the case. Accordingly, Guideline E is decided for Applicant.  
3. The Whole-Person Concept 
Under the Directive, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant facts and circumstances. This analysis includes nine
adjudicative factors:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  20
I considered these nine factors, as well as Applicant’s good employment record
and the circumstance that Applicant voluntarily reported his marijuana involvement
when he completed his security-clearance application in 2006. He deserves credit for
coming forward with this adverse information. But the credit is somewhat reduced
because Applicant understated or minimized his drug use when he described himself as
an occasional user of marijuana, a description that was a mischaracterization (Tr. 88-
89). 
A core value or principle of the industrial security clearance program is that the
government must have confidence that those people with access to classified
information can be relied on to exercise good judgment. Based on the record evidence,
Applicant remains under a cloud of doubt due to his history of marijuana involvement
while possessing a security clearance, which ended a few months ago. Without an
established track record of reform and rehabilitation, the record evidence is not
sufficient to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the drug involvement security
concerns. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
10
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e:  Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.b:  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest  to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
