 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
 As authorized by Paragraph E3.1.7,  Additional Procedural Guidance, Enclosure 3 of the Directive.
2
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-13123
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence and foreign preference concerns
that exist in this case due to his wife’s family ties to the People’s Republic of China, his
financial interest in China, and his likely retirement in China. 
On March 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and C (foreign
preference). Applicant submitted a response to the SOR that was received by DOHA on
April 7, 2008. Applicant admitted all SOR allegations and requested a decision based on
the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel requested a hearing by
memorandum dated April 16, 2008.2
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
The case was assigned to me on April 22, 2008. A notice of hearing was issued on
April 24, 2008, scheduling the hearing for May 20, 2008. The hearing was conducted as
scheduled. 
The government submitted eight documentary exhibits that were marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-8. GE 1 and GE 2 were admitted into the record without
objection. Administrative notice was taken of the contents of GE 3-8 without objection.
Department Counsel submitted a document containing written comments on the contents
of GE 3-8 for my consideration which was marked as Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex.) I, and
made part of the record without objection. Applicant testified but did not submit any
documentary exhibits. The transcript was received on June 2, 2008.     
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 46-year-old man who has been employed as an electronics engineer
by a defense contractor since January 1996. He has held a secret level security clearance,
when required by his employment assignments, since about 1981, and no previous
adverse action has been taken to revoke or downgrade that clearance. Applicant was
awarded a bachelor of science degree in electrical engineering in 1989.
Applicant was first married in January 1993. That marriage ended in divorce in
October 2000. He has two children from this marriage, ages 14 and 11, and shares
custody of them with his ex-wife.
Applicant has been remarried since June 2004. He met his current wife through an
internet dating service in November 2002. Although the internet site he used was designed
for Jewish singles to meet, his wife was a resident and citizen of the People’s Republic of
China (China) at the time. Applicant visited with her in China in March 2003, and a couple
of times thereafter. He sponsored her entry into the U.S. on a fiancé visa in March 2004.
She presently has conditional permanent resident status in the U.S. 
Applicant’s wife worked as a municipal police officer in China. As such, she was
required to be a member of the Communist party. Her father is a citizen and resident of
China and a retired municipal police officer. One of her brothers is a citizen and resident
of China and is currently employed as a municipal police officer. Applicant presumes his
father-in-law and brother-in-law are members of the Communist party based upon his
wife’s required membership as a condition of her employment as a police officer.
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of China and a retired factory
worker. He has a second brother-in-law who is a citizen and resident of China and who
works as an electronics salesman. His wife also has several close friends who are citizens
and residents of China and who are employed as either police officers or civil servants.
Applicant presumes her friends are members of the Communist party as a condition of
their employment.
3
Applicant and his current wife have two children, ages two years and nine months,
who were born in the U.S. and are U.S. citizens. His wife has daily e-mail/webcam contact
with her mother, weekly contact with the brother who is a salesman, and once a month
contact with the brother who is a police officer. Additionally, Applicant’s wife spends 90
days a year in China visiting with her family and close friends. She takes their children to
China with her while vacationing there. Applicant last vacationed in China with his wife
about two years ago.
Applicant gave his Chinese parents-in-law $41,000 as a gift to purchase a home.
The parents-in-law gave an additional $6,000 that Applicant provided to them for the
purchase of the house to their salesman son for use in his business. In April 2006,
Applicant and his wife paid $103,750 to purchase a house in China for use as a potential
retirement home. While Applicant has not definitely committed to retiring in China, he
believes living there would be in his wife’s best interest because she is much closer to her
friends and family members in China than he is to anyone in the U.S. 
Applicant and his wife attempted to start a business importing granite tiles from
China to resell in the U.S. With the assistance of his father-in-law, Applicant paid $14,000
to buy and import the tiles from China. However, he has concluded he is not a very good
salesman and has given up on that effort for the time being. 
China is a Communist party-led state. It has a well-documented and continuing
practice of abusing human rights in violation of internationally recognized norms, stemming
both from the authorities’ intolerance of dissent and the inadequacy of legal safeguards for
basic freedoms. (GE 3) 
The U.S. is a primary intelligence target of China. (GE 4) Chinese espionage
activities in the U.S. are so extensive that they comprise the single greatest risk to the
security of American technologies. (GE 5) 
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guidelines B (foreign influence) and
C (foreign preference), with their disqualifying and mitigating conditions, are most relevant
in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 Id at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
4
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of3 4
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,5
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the6
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to7
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable8
clearance decision.9
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard10
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      12
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as
whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
5
Applicant’s wife is a citizen of China with conditional permanent resident status in
the U.S. Her parents, brothers and close friends are citizens and residents of China. Her
father, one brother, and close friends are, considering the requirement that she had to be
a member of the Communist party to work as a police officer, most likely either current or
former members of the Communist party themselves. She visits with her relatives and
friends in China for 90 days each year and maintains daily contact with her mother and
regular contact with other family members and friends when she is in the U.S.   
Disqualifying Condition (DC) 7(a): contact with a foreign family member . . . or other
person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;
and DC 7(d): sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion apply. 
Applicant has provided $41,000 to his parents-in-law for the purchase of a house
in China. He indirectly provided an additional $6,000 to his brother-in-law. Applicant and
his wife have purchased a house in China to potentially use as a retirement home.
Applicant has vacationed in China on numerous occasions, most recently about two years
ago. China is a Communist party-led state that aggressively targets the U.S. for intelligence
collection. 
DC 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create
a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information; and DC 7(e): a substantial business, financial, or
property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business,
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation
apply. I have considered all mitigating conditions and conclude that none apply.
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Foreign preference is a concern because when an individual acts in such a way as
to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may
be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the
United States.
Applicant has purchased a residence in China and may decide to reside there when
he retires. While he is presently uncertain if he will actually relocate to China, he believes
that would be in his wife’s best interest because of her very close relationship with her
family and friends who are citizens and residents of China. Although the record does not
contain information about what is required of an American citizen to purchase real estate
in China and to permanently relocate to China, it is obvious that Applicant’s ownership of
a potential retirement home in China is sufficient for application of Disqualifying Condition
(DC) 10(a): exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship . . . through
the foreign citizenship of a family member. 
6
Applicant’s wife spends one-fourth of each year residing in China and visiting with
her family and friends. She maintains daily contact with her mother and regular contact with
other family members and close friends. While Applicant equivocates on whether or not
he will eventually relocate to China, the evidence indicates it is more likely than not that he
will. I have considered all mitigating conditions and conclude none apply.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” In this case, there is no reason to doubt that Applicant is a loyal American
citizen or suspect he would consider doing harm to the interests of the United States. Still,
his and his wife’s contacts with China through her relatives and friends, their ownership of
real estate in that country, and the likelihood they will one day take up residence in China,
coupled with the nature and history of the Chinese government, create a security concern
that has not been overcome.    
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying conditions, Applicant has failed to mitigate the foreign influence
and foreign preference security concerns that exist in this case. He has failed to overcome
the case against him or satisfy his ultimate burden of persuasion. Guidelines B and C are
decided against Applicant. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
Applicant a security clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-g: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline c: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion               
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
