1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-16009
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Brian Cruz, Esquire
McKenna Long & Aldridge
June 23, 2008 
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), dated June 15,
2007.  On February 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the
Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an
Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on March 26, 2008, and
requested a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to
the undersigned on April 29, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on May 12, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for June 9, 2008.  At the hearing the Government presented two
exhibits.  The Applicant presented fifteen exhibits and testified on his own behalf.  The
official transcript (Tr.) was received on June 18, 2008.
2
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 25 years old and engaged to be married.  He has a Bachelors
Degree in Engineering.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Payload Systems
Engineer, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted that he has used marijuana less than 25 times between
August 2003 through May 2007.  (Government Exhibit 1).  He has never purchased or
sold marijuana or used any other illegal drug.  (Tr. p. 25).  In his answers to
interrogatories dated January 8, 2008, he indicated that he has used marijuana at least
20 times.  (Government Exhibit 2).  
The Applicant was Valedictorian of his high school and then attended a
prestigious University where he graduated with a GPA of 3.667.  He explained that he
first used marijuana in 2003, while attending college, and while studying abroad in
Ireland for a year.  He met some Irish citizens who offered it to him, and he used it with
them at social gatherings.  When he returned from Ireland to the United States in 2004,
he continued to use marijuana on a couple of occasions, again at a party or social event
where a friend, or friend of a friend, offered him marijuana.  (Tr. p. 24).  He last used
marijuana at his going away party in May 2007, when it was offered to him, even though
he knew at the time that he was going to be working for a defense contractor that
prohibited illegal drug use.  The Applicant attributes his use of marijuana as an
aberration, a serious lapse in judgement, and a stupid mistake that will never happen
again.  
Since moving to a new state to start his job with the defense contractor, the
Applicant has made new friends who do not use illegal drugs, and is involved in a more
active lifestyle.  He no longer associates with anyone that uses illegal drugs.  He shares
a home, that he is renting, together with three other engineers from his company who
hold security clearances and do not use illegal drugs. He is currently engaged to be
married, and his fiancé does not use any illegal drugs of any sort.  He admits that he
now has a “fantastic job” and a “beautiful fiancé” that he will not jeopardize under any
circumstances.  For investment purposes, he has purchased a house in another state
that he is renting to tenants.  He regrets using marijuana in the past and indicates that
he will never use any illegal drugs again.   
He understands the law and DoD policy that prohibits the use of any illegal
drugs.  He understands that holding a security clearance is a privilege and not a right.
He realizes that he has worked too hard establishing his career and does not ever want
to do anything to jeopardize it.  He has now committed himself to a drug free lifestyle.    
  
Five letters of recommendation submitted by various individuals who know the
Applicant, including his supervisor, coworkers and friends, collectively reflect that the
3
Applicant is intelligent, responsible, conscientious, organized, and thorough.  He is
considered to be a person who upholds the values of leadership, integrity, loyalty, and
dependability.  He always produces quality work.  He has regularly handled proprietary
documentation as part of his job and has never mishandled the information in any way.
He is said to have a high respect for company rules, procedures and standards.  The
Applicant is held in such high esteem by the company that he was chosen to represent
the company at recruiting events.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A through E).     
Applicant’s performance appraisal for 2007 reflects that he either “meets” or
“exceeds expectations” in every category.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F).
The Applicant has received a number of achievement awards from his company,
which were received November 1, 2007, December 3, 2007, December 11, 2007,
March 27, 2008 and most recently on May 17, 2008.  (Applicant’s Exhibits G through K).
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24.  The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
4
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about th his performance evaluation reflects
that he is a valuable asset to his company e person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
5
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has  engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline H of the SOR.
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, disqualifying conditions, 25(a) any drug
abuse, and 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution or possession of drug paraphernalia, apply.  However,
mitigating condition 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment also applies.  
Applicant’s history of marijuana use started in college and continued until 2007,
until he became employed in his field of study, that of an Engineer.  Applicant’s last use
of marijuana occurred in 2007, just over a year ago.  His illegal drug use of the past was
obviously an aberration given his outstanding academic achievements and his favorable
work performance.  Since starting to work for the DoD, he has matured and
understands the responsibilities involved in holding a security clearance.  He is trusted
by his supervisor and coworkers on the job, and is currently living with three engineers
from the company who all hold security clearances and do not tolerate drug use of any
kind.  He admits his mistakes of the past and realizes that it can never happen again.
He credibly testified that he has no intentions of ever using any illegal drug in the future.
I have also considered the “whole person” concept by considering the totality of
the Applicant’s conduct and all of the circumstances, using the nine adjudicative
process factors listed above.  The Applicant is a young, intelligent individual who
displayed poor judgment in the past.  Over the past year, he has grown up, matured,
and realizes his mistakes.  He is now a home owner, is engaged to be married, and
understands the responsibilities that go along with it.  His performance evaluation
6
reflects that he is a valuable asset to his company.  He understands the privilege and
seriousness of holding a security clearance and will do nothing to jeopardize it.  Under
the particular facts of this case, I do not find his past use of marijuana to be recent or of
security significance (factor A(3)), and that the likelihood of recurrence is close to nil
(factor A(8)).      
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and that he meets the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find for the
Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    
   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
