 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXX, XXXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-13935 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to Foreign Influence. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November 
16, 2006. On March 31, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
B (Foreign Preference) for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 14, 2008. He answered the SOR in writing 
on April 16, 2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA 
received the request on April 21, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on April 30, 2008, and I received the case assignment on May 2, 2008.  
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 7, 2008, scheduling a hearing for May 
15, 2008. The hearing was convened and completed as scheduled. The government 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received without objection. 
Department Counsel prepared a list of government exhibits, which was marked Exhibit 
(Ex. VIII). Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through L, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 
23, 2008.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of the certain facts relating to Taiwan, which has previously been marked Exs. I through 
VII. The request, which contained a country summary, was marked as Ex. IX. Without 
objection from Applicant, I took administrative notice of the documents (Exs. I through 
VII, IX) offered by Department Counsel, which pertained to Taiwan. (Tr. 13-15).  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
Taiwan were derived from Exs. I through VII, IX as indicated under subheading 
“Taiwan” of this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR 
except SOR ¶ 1.a. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of 
fact.   
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old associate, who has been employed by his defense 
contractor employer since October 2000. He is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was born in the Taiwan in October 1968, where he was raised and 
spent his formative years. He attended college in Taiwan and was awarded a Bachelor 
of Arts degree majoring in economics in June 1991. GE 1. He served almost two years 
of mandatory military service in the Taiwanese Army from July 1991 to June 1993 as an 
officer. He was honorably discharged as a second lieutenant. (SOR ¶ 1.e.) 
 
In 1994 at age 26, Applicant came to the U.S. on a student visa to attend 
graduate school and in June 1996 was awarded an MBA in information systems 
management.  Tr. 62. He subsequently applied for and was granted permanent resident 
alien status (green card), and in November 2005 became a naturalized U.S. citizen. He 
was issued a U.S. passport in March 2006. GE 1, Tr. 80-81. The SOR alleged Applicant 
is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Taiwan. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) During his background 
investigation interview in February 2007, he expressed a willingness to renounce his 
Taiwanese citizenship. GE 2. In his Answer to SOR, he denied he held dual citizenship 
citing documentation from the government of Taiwan that he lost his Taiwanese 
citizenship when he voluntarily acquired U.S. citizenship. 
 
Applicant married his wife in September 2001. She was born in the People’s 
Republic of China (PRC), moved to the U.S. with her parents while in grammar school, 
and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 2002.  Applicant and his wife have 
two U.S. born daughters, ages five and three. Applicant’s wife is employed as a project 
manager. Tr. 40, 79.  His in-laws are naturalized U.S. citizens, live in the U.S., and are 
retired. GE 1, GE 2.   
 
Applicant’s mother and two brothers are resident citizens of Taiwan. His father is 
deceased and his mother is a 67-year-old retired housewife. GE 1, Tr. 41-42. His late 
father worked for a private agriculture company as a biotech engineer. Tr. 42. (SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. – 1.c.) His mother lives with his 43-year-old brother, discussed infra. Tr. 50-51. 
 
Applicant is the youngest of three brothers.  His oldest brother is a 45-year-old 
mechanical engineer, who works for a private automobile parts company. GE 2, Tr. 43-
45. He is married, his wife is an accountant for a middle school, and they have one 
minor daughter. GE 2, Tr. 46. His other brother is a 43-year-old elementary school 
teacher. He is married, his wife is a nutritionist employed at an elementary school, and 
they have two minor sons. GE 2, Tr. 46-49. Applicant’s 45-year-old brother did not serve 
mandatory military service as a result of a physical deferment, and his 43-year-old 
brother served three years of mandatory military service in the Taiwanese Air Force as 
an enlisted person. Tr. 45, 47-48. 
 
Applicant has a cousin, who is a citizen of Taiwan and is currently attending 
graduate school in the U.S. (SOR ¶ 1.d.) Applicant stated his cousin visited him at his 
home one time. His cousin intends to return to Taiwan upon the completion of his 
studies. GE 2, Tr. 57-59.   
 
Applicant’s contact with his relatives in Taiwan varies. Referring to the frequency 
and type of contact with his mother in Taiwan, Applicant stated, “Probably once a week. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
. . . by telephone.” Tr. 49. Referring to frequency and type of contact with his two 
brothers in Taiwan, Applicant stated, “Probably once a quarter or six months. Depends 
time to time.” His contact with his brothers is by telephone and is usually initiated by 
him. Tr. 50.  He describes the relationship with his family in Taiwan as “close.” Tr. 52. 
No evidence was presented indicating Applicant’s immediate family members in Taiwan 
were agents of the Taiwanese government. 
 
From approximately March 1999 to July 1999, Applicant traveled to Taiwan to 
care for his father, who was diagnosed with liver cancer. GE 2, AE J, Tr. 51-53. 
Applicant’s security clearance application identifies eight visits to Taiwan since 2000. 
They occurred in February 2001, October 2002, February 2003, October 2003, 
February 2004, December 2004, March 2005, and March 2006. With the exception of 
the March 2005, which was to attend to father’s funeral, the remainder of his visits were 
for pleasure. (¶ 1.g.) GE 1, Tr. 51-52. 
 
When Applicant’s father passed away, he and his brothers inherited 
approximately 10 acres of farmland in Taiwan. (SOR 1.f.) Applicant’s mother currently 
permits one of his aunts to farm the land. Applicant derives no income from this land 
and is unsure whether he would be able to acquire the property since becoming a U.S. 
citizen. He “guess[es]” one of his brothers will buy him out. GE 2, Tr. 63-67, 77-78, 81-
83.  
 
Applicant estimates his net worth which includes his home, 401Ks, checking and 
savings accounts at “around half [a] million [dollars].” Tr. 71. He regularly votes and 
enjoys all rights and privileges of U.S. citizenship. He professed his loyalty to the U.S. 
and is very proud to be a U.S. citizen. He enjoys karate, playing the guitar, and 
spending time with his children. 
 
Applicant is an Oracle8 Certified Database Administrator. He submitted one 
work-related reference letter from a senior associate, and performance evaluations 
covering the years 2002 to 2007. His reference letter described his work as 
“consistently outstanding.” His performance evaluations lauded Applicant’s diligent and 
dedicated work performance. AE B – I.   
 
Taiwan1 
 
In 1949, two million refugees fled to Taiwan from a civil war in mainland China. 
That same year, Communists in mainland China established the Peoples’ Republic of 
China (PRC or China), and Chiang Kai-shek established a separate, provisional capital 
for his government in Taipei, Taiwan. The PRC does not recognize Taiwan’s 
independence, and insists that there is only “one China.” After long recognizing Taiwan, 
on January 1, 1979, the U.S. formally recognized the government of the PRC as the 
sole legal government of China. The U.S. does not support independence for Taiwan 
1 The contents of the Taiwan section are taken in whole or in part from Exs. I through VII, IX. 
 
5 
 
 
and is committed to a “one-China policy,” under the Taiwan Relations Act, signed into 
law on April 10, 1979.  
 
 Taiwan is a multi-party democracy that has significant economic contacts with 
China, and it has developed a strong economy since its separation from the PRC in 
1949. However, Taiwan’s own national security remains under constant threat from the 
PRC and this has led to Taiwan’s large military establishment. The PRC’s Ministry of 
State Security is the “preeminent civilian intelligence collection agency in China,” and 
maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan, through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals 
with Taiwan connections.  
 
 Taiwan is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence, and the 
National Counterintelligence Center (NACIC)’s 2000 Annual Report to Congress on 
Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage lists Taiwan as being among the 
most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information. The 2000 Report 
highlights specific incidents wherein Taiwan engaged in attempts to acquire export-
restricted products.  
 
 These collection activities are ongoing, as evidenced by the January 2006 
conviction and four-year prison sentence of Jonathan C. Sanders on charges related to 
the theft of sensitive and proprietary information by and for Taiwanese companies.   
Additionally, in December 2005, Donald Keyser, the Principal Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, pled guilty to illegally removing 
classified materials and to providing false statements to the U.S. Government.  Mr. 
Keyser was engaged in a relationship with, and met with, an intelligence officer 
employed by the National Intelligence Bureau, the foreign intelligence agency of the 
government of Taiwan. 
 
The PRC maintains active intelligence operations in Taiwan utilizing PRC 
nationals with Taiwan connections. The PRC is a nuclear power with vast resources,  
and the PRC aggressively competes with the United States in a variety of areas. PRC’s 
competitive relationship with the United States exacerbates the risk posed by 
Applicant’s connections to Taiwan.  
  
Policies 
 
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security or trustworthiness suitability, an 
administrative judge must consider the “Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information” (AG(s)). The AGs include brief 
introductory explanations for each AG, and provide specific disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions. 
 
 These Guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply these guidelines 
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. AG ¶ 2. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
sense decision. Because the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept,” an administrative judge should consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. AG ¶ 2(c). 
 
 Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AGs ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) 
the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”  
  
 Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the 
final decision in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified [or sensitive] information 
will be resolved in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts by “substantial evidence,”2 demonstrating, in accordance 
with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue an applicant’s access to classified information. Once the Government has 
produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant 
to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).3 
 
A person seeking access to classified or sensitive information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
2 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-
11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the weight 
of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not 
prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime 
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a 
preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
3“The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
7 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. It is 
because of this special relationship the government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to such 
information. Decisions under this Directive include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified or sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of such 
information. 
  
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited. Nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism.  Executive Order 10865, § 7.  
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
 AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
If the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant has frequent 
contacts with his mother and siblings, who are resident citizens of Taiwan. Applicant 
visited his family numerous times since he emigrated to the U.S. in 1994, and owns 
property in Taiwan. Applicant’s close relationship with his immediate family creates a 
significant risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because Taiwan has an 
active information collection program.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence of these two disqualifying 
conditions as it pertains to Applicant’s family and Taiwanese property, and the burden 
shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. As previously 
indicated, the burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. 
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AGs ¶ 84 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
4 Dual citizenship and service in the Taiwanese Army would have been more correctly alleged 
under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) inasmuch as those concerns are specifically addressed either in 
the disqualifying and/or mitigating conditions. Applicant’s dual citizenship is based solely on his parents’ 
citizenship and birth in Taiwan. He expressed a willingness to renounce his Taiwanese citizenship as well 
as offering unrebutted evidence that he lost his Taiwanese citizenship by operation of Taiwanese law 
when he became a U.S. citizen. His mandatory military service in the Taiwanese Army occurred before he 
became a U.S. citizen. If alleged under Guideline C, these facts allow application of AGs 11(a) “dual 
citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country;” (b) “the individual has 
expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;” and (c) “exercise of the rights, privileges, or 
obligations of foreign citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor.” Applying the Guidelines, I find for Applicant on SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.e. 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AGs ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply to his relationships with his parents and two 
siblings in Taiwan. Applicant maintains frequent contact with these immediate relatives, 
some more than others, and this frequent contact supports the conclusion his 
relationship with them is close. In 1999, he returned to Taiwan for approximately five 
months after learning his father was diagnosed with liver cancer. Since 2000, he has 
visited Taiwan eight times. These facts are indicia of the nature of his relationship with 
these family members, and that such contact is not casual and infrequent.    
 
Applicant did not establish “it is unlikely [he] will be placed in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of [his immediate family members] and the interests of 
the U.S.” His frequent contacts with them could potentially force him to choose between 
the United States and Taiwan. He did not meet his burden of showing there is “little 
likelihood that [his relationship with his immediate family members] could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies because Appellant has developed a significant 
relationship and loyalty to the U.S. He has continuously lived in the United States since 
1994. He and his wife are U.S. citizens. His two children are U.S. born citizens. He 
received a graduate degree in the U.S. He is heavily vested in the U.S., professionally, 
financially and emotionally. 
   
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to 
the whole person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole person concept, 
the Administrative Judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life 
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
circumstances.”5 The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) which are 
used for “whole person” analysis.  Because foreign influence does not involve 
5 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. 
Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
misconduct, voluntariness of participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the 
eighth APF, “the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ 
E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this adjudication.6 In addition to the 
eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”  
Directive ¶ E2.2.1.  Ultimately, the clearance decision is “an overall common sense 
determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3.     
 
 The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).  
  
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs towards grant of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Applicant has lived in the United States for 14 years, and he has been a 
naturalized citizen for almost three years. When he became a U.S. citizen, he swore 
allegiance to the United States. His wife is also a naturalized U.S citizen and his two 
children are U.S. born citizens. He has emphasized his loyalty to the U.S. and how 
much he values and enjoys his life in the U.S. There is no evidence he has ever taken 
any action which could cause potential harm to the U.S. He takes his loyalty to the U.S. 
very seriously, and he has worked diligently for a defense contractor for seven years. 
His financial in the U.S. are much more substantial than his financial ties to Taiwan. No 
derogatory evidence was developed against him. The evidence points to the fact that 
Applicant is a decent, honest, loyal and productive member of society. 
 
Five circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole person analysis. First, 
Taiwan actively seeks classified and industrial/economic information. Taiwan may 
attempt to use his immediate relatives who live in Taiwan to obtain such information. 
This may occur notwithstanding his family members’ assertion that they would resist 
such overtures. Second, Applicant had significant connections to Taiwan before he 
emigrated to the U.S. in 1994 at age 26. He was born there and spent his formative 
years there. Third, he has immediate family members consisting of his mother and two 
siblings, who are resident citizens of Taiwan. Fourth, Applicant has frequent and non-
casual contact with his immediate family members as evidenced by his frequent 
telephone contact as well as his eight visits to Taiwan since 2000. These contacts are 
manifestations of his strong affection and regard for his immediate family members, 
especially his mother. Fifth, he owns property in Taiwan. 
 
6 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
11 
 
 
                                                          
“Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . . it 
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by 
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.  This is a close case, but 
ultimately the evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s security eligibility and 
suitability. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”7 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has 
not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he 
is not eligible for access to classified information.    
     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
        
   Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b. – 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f. - g.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge  
 
 
7See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
