 
 
 
 
1
                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-15344 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
On November 18, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On August 11, 2006, he submitted a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86). On March 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 20, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On May 8, 2008, DOHA assigned the case to 
me. A Notice of Hearing was issued on May 7, 2008, and the case was heard on May 
30, 2008, as scheduled.  Department Counsel offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through H 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 11, 
2008.                                                           
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.c of the SOR. Those admissions are incorporated into the following 
findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 39 years old and single. He earned a Bachelor of Science in 
Accounting and a Bachelor of Science in Finance. In January 1994, he enlisted in the 
U.S. Air Force and served until August 2002 when he received an honorable discharge. 
He was a Sergeant (E-4) when he was discharged. While in the Air Force, he had a Top 
Secret clearance and access to classified information as a computer specialist. He 
comes from a family with a history of military service. His father was in the Marine Corps 
for 20 years, one of his four brothers recently retired from the Air Force, and another 
brother is in the Air Force reserves. (Tr. 50). 
 
 After his discharge from the Air Force in 2002, Applicant worked for a federal 
contractor until October 2004. He was a communications center operator with access to 
a classified internet, essentially performing the same duties he did when on active duty. 
In November 2004, he began a position with his current employer, a defense contractor. 
From October 2005 to December 2006, he held a second full-time computer position, 
working for another defense contractor. (Tr. 21-22, 45, 57). 
   
 During Applicant’s 14-year career with the government, he has held a security 
clearance. In December 1994, he was granted a Top Secret security clearance, and in 
April 2001, he was granted access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI). In 
2006, he received a work-related polygraph. (Tr. 24). There is no evidence of any 
incidents indicating breaches of security policies or other violations. 
 
 In 2001, Applicant placed a personal advertisement on the internet. He 
subsequently met a woman with whom he had a long-distance internet relationship until 
February 2008. (Tr. 27-28). He never met her in person and in 2002, she wanted to 
become engaged and he agreed. (Tr. 40). Over the course of the years, he asked to 
visit her on occasion, but she refused. They interacted by daily email and phone calls, 
but never met in person. He considered her to be his friend. (Tr. 27). He “loved her,” but 
sometimes was distressed with the long distant relationship. (Tr. 46). He told his friends 
about the relationship and they advised him to terminate it. At times, he considered the 
possibility that the situation was a “scam,” but believed she was a good person. (Tr. 41-
42).   
 
 
 
 
3
 
 After communicating for about six months, the woman began asking Applicant for 
money. From 2001 until October 2005, Applicant sent her $500-$800 per month. (Tr. 
37). After he began working two jobs in October 2005, he earned $132,000 annually, 
and sent her $2,000 per month. (Tr. 55). He continued depositing that amount into her 
bank account until December 2006 when he left his second job. Thereafter, he sent her 
what he could afford. (Tr. 31). Applicant asserted that he could afford to give her money 
and never experienced financial problems as a result of doing so. He listed her as a 
dependent on his 2005 income tax return because she did not work and he was her 
sole source of income. He acknowledged that it was a mistake to do that. (Tr. 30).  The 
last time he sent her money was in January 2008. (Tr. 44). 
 
 Applicant lost his Top Secret clearance and access to SCI as a result of the 
relationship. In November 2006, the National Security Agency denied Applicant access 
to sensitive compartmented information (SCI), noting in its Clearance Decision 
Statement that: “[Applicant] was being considered for access to some of the most 
sensitive and perishable information in the U.S. government. Yet his conduct with [the 
woman] raises considerable doubt relative to his character, judgment, discretion, 
trustworthiness and reliability.” (GE 5). As a result, he left his second job at the end of 
December 2006 or early January 2007. (Tr. 45). The following year, in January 2008, he 
lost his primary position after his Top Secret clearance was revoked, pending the 
outcome of this proceeding. 
 
 Applicant admitted that the reason he terminated the relationship in February 
2008 was because he lost his job. (Tr. 34-35). He realizes that he may lose his job 
permanently as a result of his involvement with the woman. He insisted that he never 
did anything to jeopardize classified information while in the relationship. (Tr. 33). He 
told the woman that he worked for the government, but not the nature of his work.  
 
 While testifying, Applicant expressed great sadness and grief over the loss of his 
relationship. He is currently unemployed and attending college. (Tr. 23). In addition to 
the stress of being without a job, he came to realize that he “needed to move on” with 
his life. (Tr. 29).  He has not sought any form of counseling or grief therapy to assist him 
in managing his disappointment and understanding the underlying dynamics of the long-
distance relationship. He believes he is “fine.” (Tr. 48). He is attempting to rebuild his 
life. (Tr. 52). 
 
 Applicant submitted letters of recommendation from his most current supervisor, 
his former manager from his second job, and a program director with whom Applicant 
worked from August 2002 to October 2004. All of them consider Applicant to be 
professional, competent and ethical.  (AE A).  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
 
 
 
 
4
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the Government’s security concern pertaining to personal 
conduct:  
 
 
 
 
5
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any 
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
AG ¶ 16 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern, two of 
which may be specifically disqualifying in this case: 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information; and, 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
In November 2006, Applicant lost access to SCI and his second job. After an 
investigation the National Security Agency determined that he did not meet the 
standards for access to SCI because of his long-term relationship with a woman he 
never met and whom he intended to remain in contact. Despite that decision and notice 
that the Government had security concerns about him, Applicant stayed in the 
relationship and continued to send money to her for the next year, raising further 
questions about his judgment in personal matters. Based on that evidence, the 
Government raised 16(d). Although Applicant disclosed his long-term, long-distance 
internet relationship to his family, friends, and supervisors, he maintained the 
relationship after he lost his second job. Because his unorthodox relationship could be 
construed as embarrassing, it could also affect his standing in the community and 
provide an opportunity for exploitation in the future. The Government established 16(e).    
After the Government raised a disqualification, the burden shifted to Applicant to 
provide evidence to rebut or mitigate it.  AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns: The following three have potential applicability to the facts:  
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
 
 
 
6
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
Applicant had a relationship with someone he never meet, but chose to 
support. His decision to engage in questionable behavior for seven years and 
under such circumstances is not minor and raises questions about his judgment. 
Hence, 17(c) does not apply. Although he acknowledges his behavior and the 
problems it presented, he did not obtain counseling or demonstrate that he has 
taken steps to understand or alleviate the circumstances that underlie seven 
years of exercising questionable judgment. Without such evidence, similar 
behaviors may recur and 17(d) is not applicable. Applicant asserted that he 
terminated his long-distance relationship three months before the hearing. That 
evidence, alone, is not sufficient to warrant the full application of 17(e) in view of 
the length of time he participated in the relationship.  
“Whole Person” Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered all the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including the many positive aspects 
in Applicant’s life. He is a 39-year-old man, who honorably served his country for eight 
 
 
 
 
7
years in the Air Force, during which time he held a Top-Secret clearance. After leaving 
military service, he began employment with a federal contractor and continued 
successfully supporting the Government, while maintaining a Top Secret security 
clearance and access to SCI for several more years. He is intelligent, honest and 
hardworking; he has maintained two important full-time positions for more than a year.   
 
I also considered a seven-year “blind spot” in Applicant’s life. From 2001 to 2008, 
he maintained a relationship with a woman whom he considered to be his fiancée, but 
never met. He provided her substantial financial support and believed he was legally 
authorized to claim her as a tax exemption. He desired a conventional marriage, but she 
deterred him with serial excuses for not meeting him. Even after this relationship cost 
him his second job, he persisted in communicating and sending her money for another 
year. Unfortunately, the relationship demonstrates an on-going pattern of poor judgment 
in matters of personal significance. In spite of the anguish that this situation has brought 
to his life, he offered limited insight into his behavior and adamantly refused 
professional counseling, which could provide understanding of the relationship and 
bring meaningful closure. Without such assistance, similar incidents could arise and 
create further security concerns.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance at this time. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
