                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16179 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Thomas Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph E. McGuire, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
On February 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guidelines F and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 12, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was originally assigned to another 
administrative judge on April 29, 2008, and reassigned to me on May 21, 2008. DOHA 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
issued a notice of hearing on May 13, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on June 4, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. Applicant did not 
object and they were admitted. The government also offered a chart as demonstrative 
evidence, which was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A-D. Department Counsel did not object and they were 
admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 16, 2008.  
 
Procedural Matter 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the Statement of Reasons by adding 
allegations that were raised at the hearing. Department Counsel provided a written 
motion with the detailed allegations that was marked as HE II. Applicant through 
counsel had no objections and the motion was granted. The additional allegations are: 
 
 Guideline F:  
 
1.i. You owe child support arrearage in [State A]. 
 
 Guideline E:  
 
2.c. You falsified material facts on an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing, signed on November 30, 2006, in response to Section 14/15 Your 
Relatives and Associates “Give the full name, correct code, and other requested 
information for each of your relatives and associates, living or deal, specified below…6. 
Child (Adopted and Foster Child also).” You deliberately omitted two children. 
 
 2.d. You falsified material facts on an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing, signed on November 30, 2006, in response to Section 27 Your Financial 
Record. “c In the last 7 years have you had a lien placed against your property for 
failing to pay taxes or other debts?” You answered “NO.” You deliberately omitted a 
2004 [State B] tax lien.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old security officer who has worked for a federal contractor 
since December 2006. Applicant retired from the military as an E-7 and receives 
retirement pay.1 He was married in 1982 and divorced in 1984. He remarried in 1984 
and is currently separated from his second wife and is going through a divorce.2 He 
1 Tr. 40. Applicant accepted an early retirement in 1997 and then entered the reserves and was 
recalled to active duty in September 2001.  
 
2 GE 1. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
published notice of the divorce in the newspaper because he does not know the 
whereabouts of his wife and child.3 Applicant testified he had one child with his second 
wife and a stepchild for whom he provided support. He acknowledged he was not 
required to provide support for the stepchild, but has cared for her since she was an 
infant.4 Applicant was asked if the child support allegation listed in SOR 1.c pertained to 
the child with his second wife and he answered “no.” That allegation pertains to a child 
from a different relationship.5 Applicant was then asked the following question: “Walk 
me through how many kids and who they’re from?”6 He acknowledged the child from his 
relationship is 11 years old. He does not know where this child and mother are located. 
He has been paying child support through the state for this child since she was born.7 
 
 Applicant has three biological children. On his security clearance application 
(SCA) he listed one biological child. The government had been unaware of the 
existence of the other two children. One child is 22, one is 20 and the third is 11. He 
pays child support for the 22 year old and 11 year old. When questioned why he was 
paying child support on a 22-year-old, he stated: “That’s what they’re doing to me.”8 
When questioned further it was learned he is paying arrearages on child support he 
owed. He thought he was in arrears for two or three years. He could not answer why he 
failed to pay his child support for this child or why he did not list all of his children on his 
SCA.  
 
 Applicant stated that he did not apply for the credit card listed in SOR ¶ 1.a and 
1.b, but rather his wife did. He became aware of the credit card in 2001, when he 
reviewed his credit report. He believes these two debts are duplicates. He did not 
provide documentation to support his belief. He contacted the credit card company 
about the debt, claiming he was deployed when the card was issued. They requested 
further information. No other information was provided about this debt. The debt has not 
been paid.9 
 
 Applicant completed his SCA in 2006 and in response to Question 27 which 
asked if he was delinquent on any debts over 180 days or if he had any debts 90 days 
past due, he responded “no.” He explained the reason he did not list the debts was 
because his employer was rushing him to complete the SCA.10 He stated he knew he 
3 Tr. 42. 
 
4 Tr. 42-43. 
 
5 Tr. 43. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Tr. 44-53; AE A and B. 
 
8 Tr. 130-131. 
 
9 Tr. 26-27. 
 
10 Tr. 53-54. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
was delinquent 180 days on the debt listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1. b, at the time he 
completed the SCA. He stated: “Now I may have at that time meant to, you know, put 
a[n] X, but unfortunately, like I said, they was rushing us at that time.”11 I find Applicant’s 
testimony was not credible.  
 
 Applicant was asked if he ever had a state lien against him for failing to pay child 
support. His response was: “Right. Understood. No.”12 Applicant was presented with GE 
2, a credit report, which reflects a state tax lien for $888. The lien was released. 
Applicant acknowledged being aware of the lien and confirmed that it was for back 
taxes that had been owed because he failed to pay his taxes in either 1997 or 1998; he 
could not remember. His explanation for why he did not pay his taxes on time was 
because “At that particular time, I wasn’t making as much money.”13 He went on to say 
“Ma’am, at that time I never said I neglected it, but it was an oversight at the time.” He 
then explained “They eventually got paid. But the bottom line was at that time I was a lot 
younger, and there were other things.”14 Applicant paid this tax bill sometime in 
approximately 2000. He did not list this tax lien on his SCA as was required. 
 
 Applicant believes the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d. (a charged off account for 
$8,331) and 1.e (a judgment for $9,791 from January 2007) are the same debt. He did 
not provide documentation to support his belief. He has been aware of the debt since 
2003 and stated he challenged the debt by phone, but no documentation was provided. 
He stated this debt is for a car repossession. He claimed his wife was responsible for 
paying the loan on this car and failed to do so. He acknowledges he owes the debt, but 
not the amount claimed.15 It remains unpaid. 
 
 Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR that he owed the debt listed in SOR 
¶ 1. f (a judgment for $3,369 from May 2001). He became aware of it when he saw it on 
his credit report. He was unaware of the judgment, but acknowledged he owed the debt 
for a loan. The debt has not been paid. 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g is a judgment for a dentist bill entered in March 1998 
(amount owed $415). Applicant acknowledged that his daughter had dental work 
completed by the creditor and he was responsible for paying the bill. He disputes he 
owes the remaining balance. When asked if he ever contested the debt with the dentist 
he responded “Not as of yet, cause I didn’t find out about it until she sent it to me.” He 
claimed he did not become aware of this debt until two weeks ago.16  
11 Tr. 55. 
 
12 Tr. 56. 
 
13 Tr. 56-62. 
 
14 Tr. 56-57. Applicant was approximately 40 years old at that time. 
 
15 Tr. 27-28, 71-74. 
 
16 Tr. 75-76. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.h is a judgment entered in March 1998 (amount 
$1,802). Applicant denied this debt at his hearing, but when confronted with his answer 
to the SOR where he previously admitted the debt, he acknowledged that it was his 
debt.17 Applicant stated he has not paid this judgment, but he will.18 
 
 Applicant was asked if he had been delinquent on the debt listed in SOR ¶ 2.a 
(2) he stated “no,” and further stated “I have always been current.” When presented with 
GE 2 and directed to page 5, where it showed the account was charged off for $1,287, 
Applicant’s response was “Yes, but it’s also paid.” He then admitted at one time the 
account was delinquent, but he then paid it.19 Applicant claimed he was confused about 
which account was at issue. He admitted that this account was delinquent. 20 I do not 
find his testimony credible.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that after he pays his monthly expenses he has 
approximately $1,500 remaining in expendable income. He has a person who lives with 
him and she pays some of the expenses. He also acknowledged he has approximately 
$47,000 in assets.21 He testified as follow: 
 
Q. Mr. [Applicant], you also listed on your personal financial statement 
that you had approximately $8,000 in savings; is that correct? 
A. That is correct. 
Q. Have you increased that since the time you completed the financial 
statement? 
A. Have I increased it? 
Q. Is it---do you have more than $8,000 in savings today? 
A. Yes, sir. 
Q. Approximately how much in savings do you have? 
A. About ten thousand. 
Q. Ten thousand. Is there any reason why you didn’t use the $10,000 
to pay off the debts we’ve discussed today? 
A. I can. I’d planned on taking my-like I said-refinancing my home, and 
paying everything off with my home. 
Q. But you’ve been made aware of these debts for, at the very least, 
according to your testimony, two weeks; correct? You stated that 
the dentistry bill you were only made aware of two weeks ago. 
A. Right. That is correct, sir. 
Q. But you received the Statement of Reasons in February, correct? 
A. Okay. 
17 Tr. 76-79. 
 
18 Tr. 94-95. 
 
19 No documentation was provided to show it was paid. 
 
20 Tr. 79-82. 
 
21 Tr. 83-90. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Q. I think the question is if you’re testifying that you have $10,000 in 
savings, why didn’t you take some of that money and pay some of 
these debts? You admitted that you owe some of these debts. 
A. That is correct, ma’am.22 
 
Applicant went on to testify that he had $27,000 in stocks. He further testified: 
 
Q. Okay, so at the time you had $8,000 in the bank, you just testified 
that that’s up to about $10,000. Counsel’s merely asking, you’re 
looking at me like I made that up. You just testified. 
A. No, no, no. 
Q  That $10,000, is what you testified that your savings has now 
increased since you filled out this personal financial statement. 
A. No. The savings have dwindled, ma’am.23 
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) which was completed on 
December 29, 2007, listed he owned three cars. At his hearing he testified he still owns 
three cars, but one car is different. He stated he owned a 1990 Datsun, a 1994 
Suburban24 and had a truck he sold and then purchased a 2006 Mazda. 25 He has a car 
payment on the Mazda. Applicant then contradicted himself several times. He was 
specifically asked if had purchased any additional cars or were these the same two cars 
he had. He confirmed he had purchased the Mazda. He did not admit to any other car 
purchases until he was questioned further. Applicant was asked about how many car 
loans he had. He testified one. When he was shown AE D and the car loan that was 
listed, he testified that car was sold two to three weeks ago when he traded it in for the 
Mazda he now owns. He confirmed that the car loan he is currently paying is for the 
recent 2006 Mazda purchase. When he was shown there is a second car loan listed in 
AE D and asked about which car this pertained to. He testified that that vehicle was also 
traded in for the 2006 Mazda. He confirmed he traded in two cars, a Toyota26 and a 
Mercedes for the Mazda. The following testimony was provided: 
    
Q.  Okay. But wait a minute. What car was traded in? 
A.  That was a Mercedes that I had, and the Toyota. 
Q Okay. And the Mercedes was—you had it three weeks ago? 
A. Yes; it’s gone now. 
Q. And what did you owe on the Mercedes? 
A.  $25,000. 
22 Tr. 103-105. 
 
23 Tr. 106-107. 
 
24 Tr. 90-92. Applicant testified he had a 1994 Suburban, but later testified it was a 2000. 
 
25 Tr. 90. 
 
26 It is unclear whether Applicant owned a Toyota and was confused or whether he had another 
car. 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
Q. $25,000? 
A.  That’s correct. 
Q.  And when did you purchase the Mercedes? 
A.  The Mercedes was purchased in 2006. No, 2007. 
Q.  When in 2007? 
A. April. 
Q. All right, Now you want to explain to me, when you put down three    
cars, why didn’t you just tell me back when you said, when we were 
ask-when the Counsel was asking on your personal financial 
statement, and you said, Oh, those three cars are the 1990 Datson, 
the 2000 Chevy Suburban and the 2006 V6 truck. And now you’re 
telling me you also had a Mercedes. But you didn’t tell me that 
before, did you? 
A.  No. I didn’t, ma’am. 
Q.  Yes. Why didn’t you tell me that? 
A. I don’t know, ma’am.  
Q.  So you had four cars? 
A.  Four cars. That’s correct. 
Q.  And you listed three? 
A. Right. 
Q. And one was a $25,000 Mercedes. But you neglected to list that? 
A. That is correct, ma’am. 
Q.  Do you have any explanation for that, Mr.[Applicant]? 
A.  No. ma’am.  
Q. None? 
A. No.27 
 
 Applicant has approximately $100,000 in equity in his house and has equity in a 
time-share28. He stated he has paid his taxes on time and “I’ve cherished my credit 
report.”29 He stated the following with regards to his delinquent debts: “What I had 
planned on doing was coming up with an agreement and just pay all the debts off....”30 
He was going to refinance his home and pay them.31 He had not taken action on his 
plan because he was waiting to see how far “the market was going to go down.”32 
 
27 Tr. 109-111. 
 
28 Tr. 93. AE D is a credit report that shows that the time share account was opened in July 2006 
and has a balance of $9,762. He is current on the payments. 
 
29 Tr. 94. 
 
30Tr. 95. 
 
31 Tr. 96. 
 
32 Tr. 114. 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant testified he currently has about $4,000 in his savings and the reason 
the balance has decreased is because he purchased furniture. He paid for it in cash.33 
He admitted he checked his credit report in 2001, 2003 and 2006 and was aware of 
some of his delinquent debts. When asked why he did not do something about them he 
responded: “I can’t answer that, ma’am.”34 Applicant testified he intends to resolve his 
delinquent debts. 
 
 Applicant’s testimony throughout the hearing was evasive, incomplete, false and 
deceptive. I find Applicant lied about numerous issues at his hearing and his testimony 
lacked credibly and was unbelievable. I find he deliberately and intentionally falsified 
information on his SCA. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
33 Tr. 125-126. 
 
34 Tr. 126-127. 
 
 
9 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: “Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them and especially considered AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Applicant had 
numerous delinquent debts that have remained unpaid for years, despite having the 
income and assets to resolve the debts. I find both disqualifying conditions have been 
raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”); (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”); (c) (“the individual has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”); (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”); and (e) (“the individual has a 
 
10 
 
 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue”).  
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because he has many delinquent debts that remain 
unpaid, despite his ability to pay them. His conduct casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. I find (a) does not apply. Applicant claimed he was 
originally unaware of some debts that his wife incurred and that his wife was 
responsible or paying one of the car loans. He became aware of these issues as far 
back as 2001 and 2003 and has not resolved them. Although his wife may have some 
responsibility for these debts they are listed in his name and he has not acted 
responsibly toward resolving them. Therefore, I find (b) only partially applies. There is 
no evidence Applicant has received any financial counseling or that he has initiated a 
good-faith effort to pay overdue creditors or resolve the debts. Applicant has not 
provided documented proof of debts he disputes. I find none of the remaining mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct. Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered (a) (“deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities”); and (b) (“deliberately providing 
false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative”) under this guideline. I have considered all of the facts and find 
Applicant deliberately omitted, concealed, misled, and falsified information on his SCA 
and at his hearing. He deliberately failed to list all of his children. He deliberately failed 
to list some delinquent debts, despite being aware of them for many years. He 
deliberately failed to list he had a tax lien at one time. Applicant’s testimony was often 
incomplete, misleading and false.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered AG 17(a) (“the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts”); (b) (“the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
 
11 
 
 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”); (e) (“the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress”). Applicant did not make an effort 
to correct the omissions and falsifications on his SCA before being confronted. His 
actions can not be considered minor because he failed to divulge information that was 
pertinent to his security clearance investigation thereby casting doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. No evidence was presented to confirm he has 
taken steps to reduce his vulnerability. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has had delinquent debts 
and judgments that he has been aware of and has failed to resolve for many years. He 
has the financial means to pay these debts, but has not. He deliberately and 
intentionally failed to divulge information that was required for his security clearance 
investigation. I considered his demeanor and credibility at his hearing and conclude his 
testimony was evasive, lacked candor, and was untruthful. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs  1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph    1.d:   For Applicant 
 
12 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e-1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs  2.a-2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
