DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )       ISCR Case No. 07-12623
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 5 March 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline
H.  Applicant answered the SOR 19 March 2008, and requested a hearing. DOHA1
assigned the case to me 23 April 2008, and I convened a hearing 28 May 2008. DOHA
received the transcript (Tr.) 5 June 2008.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the SOR allegations. He is a 23-year-old software engineer
employed by a defense contractor since June 2007. He has not previously held a
clearance.
Applicant used marijuana about 75 times between February 2002 and February
2007. On a handful of occasions during this period, he purchased user amounts of
marijuana. Occasionally, he put someone who wanted to buy marijuana in touch with a
seller, but never for money. There is no record evidence of physiological or
psychological impairment as a result of his marijuana use.
Applicant disclosed this drug history on a clearance application he executed in
June 2007 (G.E. 1). He disclosed essentially the same information during a July 2007
subject interview (G.E. 2). He also disclosed his drug use on his employment
application. He took, and passed, a company drug screen in May 2007.
Applicant began using marijuana late in high school. He used sporadically with
neighborhood friends, none of whom have remained in contact with him. His marijuana
use increased in college, but was still haphazard. Some months he would use more
frequently; some months not at all. Most of his marijuana use during college occurred
during parties with dormmates and roommates, and involved drinking. 
Applicant stopped using marijuana around February 2007, because he—and his
roommates—realized that continued marijuana use was inconsistent with the
professional careers they hoped for. He has not used since, and does not believe that
any of his former roommates have used either. Applicant moved to a different state from
where he attended college, and now sees these former roommates only 2-3 times per
year because they all live in different states. He does not intend to use in the future. He
expressed his willingness to sign a statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation, but has not been requested to make any such statement.
Applicant’s former supervisor is aware of the clearance issues, but opines that
Applicant’s demonstrated trustworthiness and reliability on the job warrants his getting
his clearance (A.E. A). Nevertheless, Applicant does not believe that his job is at risk if
he does not obtain his clearance.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
§ 25.(a) any drug abuse ; (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,3
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
¶ 26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that4
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment [Emphasis supplied];
¶  26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug5
using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
3
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline H
(Drug Involvement).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline H, by
demonstrating Applicant’s use and purchase of marijuana between February 2002 and
February 2005.  However, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns, by3
demonstrating that the use was under circumstances unlikely to recur,  and further4
demonstrating intent to not abuse drugs in the future.  While Applicant’s use is fairly5
characterized as “recent,” this term has less meaning under the new adjudicative
criteria, where the corresponding language “the behavior happened so long ago. . .” [¶
26.(a)], is used in the disjunctive with language that clearly applies to Applicant. In
addition, while his marijuana use was not “infrequent,” neither is it properly
characterized as frequent or regular. The bulk of Applicant’s marijuana use occurred
while he was in college in a state he moved from to take his current job. With the
4
exception of his former roommates, he no longer associates with any of the individuals
he used marijuana with, and his roommates foreswore further drug use. Finally, while
his abstention from marijuana use since February 2007 might not necessarily constitute
an appropriate period of abstinence, given the minimal marijuana use by Applicant and
his change in environment—both physical (new state) and psychological (career versus
school)—I conclude that this abstinence is appropriate [¶ 26.(b)]. On this record, it is
extremely unlikely that Applicant would return to illegal drug use. Accordingly, I resolve
Guideline H for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
