 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-00422 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Foreign Influence security concerns raised by his 
four siblings in Iran. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On March 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 4, 2008, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the government’s written case on April 25, 2008. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
 
2 
 
Applicant received the FORM on April 30, 2008. He responded on May 21, 2008, with a 
letter and seven pages of documents. I received the case assignment on May 29, 2008. 
I have marked the seven pages of documents as Exhibit (Ex.) A, and they are admitted.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. Applicant did not object. The request for administrative 
notice is approved. The request and the attached documents are not admitted into 
evidence but are included in the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out in 
the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He was born in Iran. 
Applicant came to the United States when he was in his early twenties to attend college. 
He graduated from an American college and also obtained a Master of Science degree 
from an American university. He became a U.S. citizen in 1993. Applicant’s wife was 
born in a country in the western hemisphere. She became a U.S. citizen in 1985. They 
have two children who were born in the United States, ages 17 and 15.1 
 
 Applicant visited Iran on three occasions between about 2000 and 2006, when 
his parents were ill. His parents are now both deceased. He traveled to Iran using an 
Iranian passport, which has since been relinquished.2  
 
 Applicant has two brothers and two sisters who are citizens and residents of Iran.  
None of his siblings are employed by the government of Iran. His brothers and sisters 
have never visited him in the United States. Applicant speaks with them on the 
telephone about once or twice a year.3 
 
 When Applicant’s mother passed away, the family home was inherited by 
Applicant and his four siblings. The house is old and is not worth much. Applicant has 
declared his desire to divest himself of any property right he might have in the house. 
He does not have any other Iranian assets. He has considerable U.S. assets. He has a 
stable work history. Applicant is not a member of Iran’s official religion and has 
expressed disdain for their repressive regime.4 
 
 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 6; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
2 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
3 Items 4, 5, 6; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
4 Id. 
 
 
3 
 
Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. The President’s National Security Strategy has stated 
that the United States “may face no greater challenge from a single country than from 
Iran.” The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
  
• Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD);  
• Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
• Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and 
• Its dismal human rights record. 
 
Iran’s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq is also a concern. 
 
 The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the world’s leading state 
sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. 
 
 The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens, even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian, 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter/depart Iran using their U.S. 
passport; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. 
U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. 
Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, 
telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personal possessions in hotel 
rooms may be searched. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  Applicant’s two brothers and two sisters are citizens and residents of Iran, a 
country that is clearly hostile to the United States.5 It is considered the world’s leading 
state sponsor of terrorism, and the government of Iran has committed numerous, 
serious human rights abuses against its people. His siblings’ presence in Iran creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by the 
evidence. Applicant’s minimal interest in the family home in Iran is insufficient to raise a 
disqualifying condition. SOR ¶ 1.c is resolved in Applicant’s favor.  
 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007). 
 
6 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant has been in this country for more than 25 years and has been a U.S. 
citizen since 1993. His wife is an American citizen and his two children were born in the 
United States. However, because of his close family ties to Iran and the nature of the 
government of Iran, I am unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be fully 
applicable.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Iran. He came 
to the U.S. when he was in his early twenties and became a U.S. citizen in 1993. His 
wife and two children are U.S. citizens. He has a stable work history and considerable 
U.S. assets. Applicant agreed with Department Counsel’s characterization of the Iranian 
government and expressed disdain for its repressive regime.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is clearly 
hostile to the United States, and the heavy burden an applicant carries when he or she 
has family members in a hostile country. Iran is the world’s leading state sponsor of 
terrorism and has a dismal human rights record. His four siblings are citizens and 
residents of Iran. That raises considerable security concerns that Applicant was unable 
to mitigate. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
