 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-02899 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial history. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On March 18, 2008,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 7, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on April 22, 2008. DOHA 
                                                          
1 The SOR was undated. The date was added without objection. 
 
 
2 
 
issued a notice of hearing on May 8, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
June 2, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, but did not submit documentary 
evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 12, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel made an oral motion to amend SOR ¶ 1.j by changing the 
date in the allegation from “1007” to “2007.” Applicant did not object to the motion and it 
was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, but noted that the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d were duplicates, and the debts 
in ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f were also duplicates.  
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He married in 1997 
and was earning a good salary. He separated from his wife and moved to another city in 
about 2001. He worked a series of lower paying jobs. He had a car voluntarily 
repossessed in about 2002. He and his wife divorced in late 2002 or early 2003. He has 
no children. Applicant decided he needed a change in his life. He was accepted into a 
premier engineering university and started in the fall of 2003. He graduated Summa 
Cum Laude with a 3.98 grade point average and received a Bachelor of Science degree 
in engineering in 2007.2  
 
 When Applicant went to college, he made a conscious decision to not pay the 
debts he had accrued. He could not afford to go to college and pay his past debts. He 
worked part-time during school. He paid his living expenses but did not earn enough to 
address his delinquent debts. It was his intention to pay his debts after he graduated 
and started earning a salary. He additionally has almost $70,000 in student loans.3   
 
 Applicant was hired by his current employer in July 2007. He bought a car 
through financing after he graduated, but 3,000 miles later the engine blew out. A co-
worker was moving and sold Applicant his car for $15,000. Applicant is making 
payments of $505 to him every two weeks for the car. The loan is down to about 
$6,000. He believes the loan will be paid in full by about November 2008. He has not 
started paying his delinquent debts because of the auto loan. His company paid him for 
relocation expenses and he used that money to replace the engine on the original car. 
He stated that car was paid off and he has put it up for sale. He plans on using the 
money he receives from the sale of the car to negotiate settlements on his delinquent 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 19-20, 34-35; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-23. 
 
 
3 
 
debts. He plans on addressing any remaining delinquent debts after his car is paid off in 
November 2008.4  
 
 Applicant admitted at the hearing that the debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d are not 
duplicates. I find that the debts in ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f are duplicates. He has made no 
payments on the remaining nine debts alleged in the SOR, totaling more than $34,000. 
He has not received financial counseling.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 20-30; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. at 18-19, 24; Applicant’s Answer to SOR. 
 
 
4 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay his 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both of these 
potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
5 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant made a conscious decision to disregard his debts in order to pursue his 
education. That is not a condition that was largely beyond his control. His stated intent 
was to pay his debts after he graduated and started earning a decent salary. He 
graduated in 2007, and obtained a good job as an engineer in July 2007. His plans were 
again placed on hold when the engine of his car blew out. He is paying more than 
$1,000 per month on another car and expects to pay it off in November 2008. He fixed 
the engine on the first car and has it for sale. He plans on using the proceeds to 
negotiate settlements for his debts. While Applicant has stated his intentions to pay his 
debts, he has not started addressing any of them. I find that none of the mitigating 
conditions are fully applicable.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f are duplicates. SOR ¶ 1.f is concluded for Applicant. SOR 
¶1.k alleges that Applicant had an automobile voluntarily repossessed in 2002. It is 
unclear if this resulted in a deficiency. It is also unclear if any of the debts alleged in the 
SOR reflect that deficiency. SOR ¶ 1.k is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. It is difficult to fault Applicant’s 
decision to pursue his engineering degree. He made a conscious choice to put off 
paying his delinquent debts until after he graduated. He was tremendously successful in 
college, graduating Summa Cum Laude, and he obtained a good job as an engineer. 
He has an accelerated payment schedule of $505 every two weeks on his car loan. He 
again decided not to address his delinquent debts until after he pays off his car. I am left 
with Applicant’s bare assertions that he will begin paying his delinquent debts. Without 
some good-faith effort to address his debts, I am unable to find on his behalf. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
