 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-15104 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 5, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 In an undated answer to the SOR, Applicant elected to have his case decided on 
the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 3, 2015, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was provided 
to Applicant on March 4, 2015, and it was received on March 19, 2015. Applicant was 
 
2 
 
 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant did not submitted additional information and did not object to 
evidence included in the FORM. The evidence provided was admitted into the record. 
The case was assigned to me on May 20, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. He denied the remaining 
allegations. I have incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. He received a general equivalency diploma, attended 
trade school, and earned a certificate. He has been employed by a federal contractor 
since May 2009. Before then he was unemployed after being laid off in February 2009. 
He never served in the military. He married in 1993 and has a 20-year-old son and a 24-
year-old stepson. 1 
 
After reviewing a credit bureau report (CBR), Applicant disclosed on his July 
2010 security clearance application (SCA) numerous debts that were delinquent.2 He 
was unaware of each account until he reviewed the CBR. In a background interview on 
November 15, 2010, he attributed his financial problems to a lack of steady and 
insufficient income from 2002 to approximately May 2005. He also admitted that they 
were due to poor financial management.3  
 
During a December 18, 2013, interview with a government investigator, Applicant 
disclosed that his use of alcohol had a negative impact on his personal life and 
finances. He did not keep current with financial obligations because he was using 
alcohol excessively. He consumed alcohol on a daily basis until he passed out. He 
drank a 750 milliliter bottle of whiskey daily after consuming a case of beer. He drank to 
intoxication. He drank by himself and with others. In February 2013, he and his brother 
were riding motorcycles, and he witnessed his brother killed in an accident. Both he and 
his brother had been drinking alcohol on the day of the accident. After the accident, 
Applicant decided to never drink again. He disclosed in the interview that his use of 
alcohol impacted his relationship with his spouse, as they would argue about his 
drinking and the financial strain it put on the family. Applicant would forego paying bills 
to purchase alcohol. He intends to remain sober in the future.4 
 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Item 8. 
 
4 Item 9. Applicant’s alcohol abuse is not alleged. It will not be considered for disqualifying purposes but 
will be considered when analyzing mitigating conditions and the whole-person.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant disclosed to the government investigator that during the time he was 
drinking alcohol, he did not care whether debts were paid or not paid. When he became 
unemployed, he did not have the financial means to keep up with financial obligations. 
He did not know how to contact each creditor to resolve the debts. He also disclosed he 
had defaulted loans; had debts turned over to collections; had credit cards suspended; 
had accounts charged-off or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; had been evicted for 
non-payment; had been 180 days delinquent on debts; and was then currently 90 days 
past-due on debts.5  
 
Applicant stated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($970) was paid. He did not provide 
documentary proof of payment or resolution. He believes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($79) 
was for an account that was fraudulently opened by his sister-in-law. He did not provide 
evidence of actions he has taken to resolve or dispute the debt. He denied the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($258) stating it was charged off. He did not provide information as to what 
actions he has taken to resolve the debt. He denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($817) 
because he is unaware of what it is for. He did not provide information as to what 
actions he has taken to contact the creditor or dispute the debt. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e 
($2,186) Applicant admitted, but stated he did not plan on paying it. The debt in SOR ¶ 
1.f ($25,204) is for a repossessed vehicle. Applicant admitted the debt, but stated he 
cannot afford to pay it.6 CBRs from January 2013, November 2013, and February 2015 
verify the delinquent debts.7 Applicant’s November 2013 and February 2015 CBRs 
reflect an account opened in May 2012 from a motorcycle company for $14,150. It 
appears Applicant is current on the payments.8 No other information was provided 
about actions Applicant is taking to resolve debts or address current finances. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
5 Items 8 and 9. 
 
6 Items 2 and 8. 
 
7 Items 5, 6, and 7. 
 
8 Items 6 and 7. 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has six delinquent debts totaling approximately $29,514, which are 
several years old, not paid, or resolved. I find the above disqualifying conditions have 
been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant did not provide evidence of actions to pay or resolve his delinquent 
debts. He stated in his initial interview that he was underemployed and unemployed for 
a period of time, which contributed to his financial problems. In a subsequent interview, 
he admitted he was a heavy drinker, consumed an excessive quantity of alcohol, and 
did not care about the debts. His excessive drinking caused marital strife and negatively 
affected his finances. It was not until his brother was killed while they were both 
intoxicated and operating motorcycles that he stopped drinking. He did not provide 
evidence that he has paid any of the debts alleged in the SOR. His financial problems 
may be partially due to his employment issues, but they were likely exacerbated by his 
 
6 
 
 
indifference to paying his financial obligations. Although he indicated he is now sober, 
he has not provided evidence that he has taken action on his delinquent debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’ s debts are recent, did not happen 
under unique circumstances, and cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies due to Applicant’s underemployment and 
unemployment, however that occurred six years ago and is only a partial cause of his 
financial problems. He has been employed since May 2009. There is no evidence he 
has acted responsibly under the circumstances. To the contrary, he ignored his debts 
while he was drinking. He did not stop drinking until February 2013. There is no 
evidence of financial counseling, a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve debts, or 
a clear indication that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant 
disputed debts, but failed to provide a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
debt or provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of or actions taken to 
resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 41 years old. He experienced financial difficulties when he was 
underemployed and unemployed. He has been steadily employed since 2009. He 
admitted he ignored debts when he was drinking excessively. He has not taken action 
to resolve his financial problems. He provided insufficient evidence of mitigation to meet 
 
7 
 
 
his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
