 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02329 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On November 22, 2014, and December 8, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me 
on March 30, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on April 3, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 29, 
 
2 
 
 
2015. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, and he offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
and B, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open 
until May 14, 2015, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did. 
They were marked as AE C and D and admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 7, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in ¶¶ 1.c and 1.f of the SOR. He denied the 
remaining allegations. I have incorporated his admissions into the findings of fact. After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He earned technical degrees after high school. He has 
been married four times. He has two grown children from his first marriage and one 
grown child from his third marriage. He last married in 2011 and is presently separated 
from his wife. He does not provide financial support to anyone. He has worked for his 
present employer since 1985 and has held a security clearance during his 
employment.2  
 
Applicant stated that when he divorced his third wife in 2008 their settlement 
agreement provided that he was responsible for certain marital debts, and she was 
responsible for others. He did not have a copy of the settlement agreement that detailed 
which debts were his responsibility. He stated that in 2008 he provided his attorney 
about $7,000 to pay the debts that were his responsibility. He does not know which 
debts were paid. He does not have documented proof of debts that were resolved. He 
stated his attorney has since died. Credit reports from October 2011, June 2013, and 
January 2015, detail Applicant’s debts.3 
 
Applicant stated he was suspended from his job, without pay, due to issues with 
his security clearance in January, February, April, May, and two weeks in June 2014. 
He has been suspended without pay since November 2014 until his security clearance 
issues are resolved. He indicated that when he goes back to work he will be entitled to 
six months of back pay and will be in a better financial situation to resolve debts. He and 
his son’s family live together.4 
 
Applicant does not believe the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($279-communication services) 
belongs to him. He stated in his answer to the SOR that he believed his ex-wife 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 13-14, 20-21, 24. 
 
3 Tr. 54-56, 59-60; GE 3, 4. 5. 
 
4 Tr. 23-24, 26-30, 83-84. 
 
3 
 
 
obtained this account in his name a long time ago and when they divorced he was not 
aware if she maintained the account. He stated he disputed it with the three credit 
bureaus when he sent each a letter sometime in January 2014. He did not provide 
copies of his dispute letters or evidence that the account was removed from his credit 
report or resolved.5 
 
Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($343) owed for household utilities. He 
stated he lived in the residence in 2012 and paid a bill of $72 when the electricity was 
turned off. He also stated that he paid the bill in January 2014, but does not have a 
receipt. He stated the receipt was illegible and he lost it.6  
 
Applicant believed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($450) was for his corporate credit card 
provided by his employer. In his answer to the SOR, he indicated the debt had a zero 
balance. He indicated that this should have been paid through his employer. The debt is 
listed on his credit report as belonging to him, and it is delinquent. It is unresolved.7 
 
Applicant disputes the account in SOR ¶ 1.d ($4,459) stating he has never done 
business with this creditor. In his answer to his SOR, he stated that the account was 
opened a year after his 2008 divorce, and he did not know if perhaps his ex-wife 
opened it in his name. His answer also indicated that he wrote the creditor to get 
information about the bill, but the creditor closed their local offices a few years ago. He 
disputed it with the credit bureaus. He did not have copies of his dispute letters. The 
account was opened in January 2008 and is listed on all three credit reports.8 
 
Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($402). He believed it belonged to his 
ex-wife and she was supposed to pay the debt as part of their settlement agreement. 
He does not have a copy of the settlement agreement. It is unresolved.9 
 
Applicant acknowledged he owed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($15,545). It is for a 
credit card that he was to pay subsequent to his divorce in 2008. He stated that he 
contacted the creditor after his divorce and he had been making payments of $500, but 
he got behind during the period he was going through his divorce. The creditor insisted 
he make payments that Applicant stated he could not afford. The creditor would not 
agree to lesser payments. He advised the creditor he was required to make child 
support payments and owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) because he withdrew 
funds from an account as part of his divorce settlement. His wages were garnished by 
the IRS for 10 months to resolve his tax debt. Applicant stated he contacted the creditor 
in 2010, but the debt was sold. He did not contact the new creditor until approximately 
                                                          
5 Tr. 35-37; Answer to SOR, GE 3 and 4.  
 
6 Tr. 32-34, 40-41; GE 4. 
 
7 Tr. 46-52; GE 3 and 4; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. 44-45; GE 3, 4, 5. 
 
9 Tr. 40-46, 52-54. 
 
4 
 
 
two to three months ago. He indicated he is in negotiations with the creditor to resolve 
the debt. The debt is unresolved.10  
 
Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($1,336). He stated he has never done 
business with this creditor. He disputed the debt with the credit bureaus, but did not 
provide proof of his dispute. He believes he is a victim of identity theft for this debt. He 
stated he attempted to file a report with the police department, but they referred him to 
the state’s attorney general’s office. When he contacted the state’s attorney general’s 
office, he was told to go to the police. He did not contact the creditor directly.11  
 
Applicant disputed the two medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i ($27; 
$214). He stated that his medical bills are consistent and the dollar amount reflected do 
not correspond to co-payments he is familiar with. He was unable to determine the 
actual medical creditors due to insufficient information on the credit bureau reports. He 
does not believe these are his debts. I find in his favor for these two debts.12 
 
Applicant disputes the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.j ($2,090), 1.k ($75), and 1.l ($1,773). 
He stated he sent the credit bureaus dispute letters in January 2014. He did not provide 
copies of the letters. He stated he has never done business with these creditors.13  
 
Regarding the debts that Applicant disputes, he stated he sent handwritten 
letters to the credit bureaus in January 2014. He stated he never received a response 
back from any of them. He did not follow up on his disputes. He did not contact the 
individual creditors. He received a letter from a credit card company in April 2015 
advising him that it believed an account may have been fraudulently opened in his 
name. This credit card company is not the same as any of the above mentioned 
delinquent debts.14 
 
Applicant indicated that his checking account is overdrawn because someone 
has obtained his account information and fraudulently withdrew funds. He stated this 
has happened before, and he closed the account. He has not closed his current account 
because it takes a couple of months to arrange an automatic deposit of his pay and he 
wants to have an active account. He stated he has completed a report of fraud with his 
bank indicating his account has been tampered with. Applicant has not had credit 
counseling since the mid-1990s. He has not contacted any of the creditors directly.15  
                                                          
10 Tr. 25-32, 79. 
 
1111 Tr. 41-53, 60; GE 4. 
 
12 Tr. 37-40; GE 3, 4, and 5. 
 
13 Tr. 52-60; GE 3, 4, and 5.  
 
14 Tr. 42-44, 60-71; AE A. 
 
15 Tr. 81-87, 91-92. 
 
 
5 
 
 
On December 1, 2011, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator. 
At that time he was confronted with numerous debts, including those listed on the SOR. 
He indicated he had no knowledge about any of the delinquent debts, and he was 
greatly concerned. He did not realize at the time that the debts were on his credit report 
and believed his ex-wife may have been responsible for them. He also indicated that he 
had not retrieved a copy of his credit report since 1999. He indicated he would order a 
new credit report and possibly seek legal counsel. In January 2014 his daughter-in-law 
helped him retrieve a credit report.16 
 
Applicant had his wages garnished for 10 months by the IRS in 2010. His tax 
debt was satisfied. He has filed his 2014 federal income tax returns and expects a 
refund.17 
 
Applicant indicated his desire to resolve the alleged debts even though he 
believes most of them do not belong to him. He believes he is a victim of identity theft 
and stated that no one wants to help him. He indicated that he received three packets of 
information from the DOD and that he took care of many things and the allegations in 
the SOR were all that remained. He is hopeful that if he can go back to work he will be 
able to hire an attorney to help him. He stated he has good moral character and would 
never do anything wrong. He stated these allegations were the result of circumstances 
beyond his control.18  
 
Applicant provided documents after his hearing that reflect on May 10, 2015, he 
applied for a hardship loan from his 401(k) retirement account for the total amount of the 
debts alleged in the SOR. He provided a statement indicating he would use the loan 
money to pay all of the debts rather than addressing them the “proper way” by disputing 
them. He stated he has researched the debts to obtain the names of the creditors and 
their addresses.19 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
16 Tr. 60. 
 
17 Tr. 25-32, 79. Applicant’s past tax debt is not considered for disqualifying purposes but will be 
considered when analyzing the “whole person,” his financial situation, and his credibility.  
 
18 Tr. 76-78, 93. 
 
19 AE C, D.  
 
6 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
7 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
The SOR alleged 12 delinquent debts totaling approximately $26,993. Applicant 
admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($15,545) and denied the remaining debts. Sufficient 
evidence supports the validity of the debts. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to his ex-wife, believing she may have 
opened accounts in his name, and to identity theft. He has been aware of the DOD’s 
concerns about delinquent debts detailed on his credit reports since he was interviewed 
by an investigator in December 2011. He admits he owes the largest debt in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
 
8 
 
 
He is negotiating with the creditor, but has not made payments toward resolving it. He 
disputed the other debts with the credit bureaus, but has not provided documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or evidence of actions to resolve the 
issues. He claims he paid his divorce attorney $7,000 after his 2008 divorce to resolve 
certain debts, but was unable to detail the debts that were paid, or provide a copy of his 
settlement agreement with his ex-wife. He did not keep copies of any of his dispute 
letters. He did not provide an updated copy of his credit report to show if any of the 
debts were released.  
 
Applicant’s numerous debts remain unresolved and therefore are recent. He has 
not presented evidence to conclude the debts were incurred under unique 
circumstances and are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant’s financial 
problems may have occurred due to his divorce, which occurred in 2008, or identity 
theft. This was somewhat beyond his control and AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. In order 
for the complete application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. He has not. His divorce was seven years ago. He became aware of 
the DOD’s concerns about his finances in at least December 2011 when he was 
interviewed. He believes the debts may have been incurred by his ex-wife, but did not 
provide evidence to support his supposition. He believes he may be the victim of identity 
theft, but did not provide documents to support his actions to address the issue. He 
stated he disputed the debts with the credit bureaus, but did not provide copies of his 
letters, or a copy of a credit report that shows the matter was investigated. Applicant 
has not provided any documented proof to substantiate the basis of his disputes or 
evidence of actions he has taken to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
There is evidence that Applicant had financial counseling in the 1990s. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are under control or being 
resolved. There is no evidence he has initiated a good-faith effort to repay his creditors. 
Although he is negotiating with the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.f he has not yet made payments 
toward this debt. He has not contacted any of the other creditors directly to inquire 
about the validity of the remaining debts. Applicant provided post-hearing documents 
that he has applied for a loan from his retirement account to address the alleged debts. 
At this point, it is too early to conclude the debts are being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) partially 
applies. AG¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
9 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He has been employed with the same employer since 
1985. He has delinquent debts totaling approximately $26,993. He has been aware 
since 2011 that his finances were a concern to the DOD. He attributed his financial 
problems to his divorce in 2008 and identity theft. He did not offer evidence to 
substantiate actions he has taken to resolve his financial problems. He has not made 
any recent payments to resolve the one debt he admitted he owed. After his hearing, 
Applicant applied for a loan from his retirement account to address the debts. It is too 
early to conclude the debts are no longer a security concern. Applicant failed to mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.l:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
