 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 12-08055 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided proof that he resolved six of the eight alleged delinquent 
debts. He is resolving the remaining two delinquent debts, which have a combined 
balance of about $11,400, through monthly payments. He is demonstrating a good-faith 
effort to resolve financial obligations. Financial security concerns are mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 In December 2010, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On December 12, 2014, Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 29, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On February 24, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned Applicant’s case to me. On March 10, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing notice, 
setting the case for April 1, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered five exhibits (GE), and Applicant offered 12 exhibits (AE) 
into evidence. (GE 1-5; AE A-L.) All were admitted. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on April 9, 2015. The record remained open until April 20, 2015, to give 
Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted a 
document that I marked as AE M and admitted into the record without objection from 
Department Counsel. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all eight allegations contained in the SOR. His admissions are 
accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 64 years old. He and his wife have been married for more than 42 
years. They have two adult children. In 1971 he enlisted in the Air Force and served 
until 1973. He then enlisted in the Air National Guard, and served until 1976. In 1982 he 
re-enlisted in the Air National Guard and served until 2000, when he transferred to the 
Air Force Reserve. He received an honorable discharge in 2009, at the rank of senior 
master sergeant. He received numerous awards and medals. He maintained a security 
clearance throughout his military service. In 2010 he began working for a U.S. defense 
contractor in the Middle East. (Tr. 21-22, 54; GE 1; AE M.)  
 
 In 2005 Applicant and his wife started a real estate company. They developed 
and sold residential lots. In 2007 and 2008 the economic downturn adversely affected 
their ability to finance or sell properties. By about 2009 or 2010 they had lost their 
properties to either the bank or previous owners. (Tr. 26.) Their financial situation 
deteriorated over those three to four years, which caused them to accumulate 
delinquent debts.  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR), dated November 2014 and May 2012, the 
SOR alleged eight delinquent debts that totaled $52,975 and became delinquent 
between 2008 and 2013. (GE 3, GE 4.) The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a: The $308 debt was owed to a utility company. Applicant paid the debt 
in January 2014. (AE B.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b: The $17,042 debt was owed to a credit card company. In December 
2014 the company issued a 1099-C, cancelling the debt. Applicant sent that form to his 
accountant to file with his 2014 income tax returns. (Tr. 30; AE C.)   
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: The $9,948 debt is owed to a credit card company and is being 
resolved through monthly payments of $100.  The balance had risen to $12,848 when 
he started making payments. (Tr. 32; AE D.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: The $5,435 debt was owed to a credit card company. In September 
2012 the company issued Applicant a 1099-C, cancelling the debt. He sent that form to 
his accountant to file with his 2012 income tax returns. (Tr. 33-34, 37; AE E.)   
 
  SOR ¶ 1.e: The $2,727 debt was owed to a credit card company. In September 
2012 the company issued Applicant a 1099-C, cancelling the debt. He sent that form to 
his accountant to file with his 2012 income tax returns. (Tr. 33-34, 37; AE F.)   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: The $2,400 debt is owed to a credit card company and is being 
resolved through monthly payments of $100. The balance had risen to $5,470 when he 
started making payments. The balance is $1,975. (Tr. 38; AE G.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g:1 The $2,000 debt was owed to a credit card company. It was paid in 
August 2014. (Tr. 39; AE H.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i: The $13,118 state tax lien for tax years 2011 and 2012 was paid and 
resolved in September 2014. (Tr. 40; AE I.)  
 
 Applicant resolved six of the eight SOR-alleged debts, and is resolving the 
remaining two, which currently total about $11,400. As of May 2014, he and his wife 
have net monthly income of $5,728 and expenses of $2,319. They recently refinanced 
their home to help with monthly cash flow. All of their financial obligations are current. 
(Tr. 44-47.) They do not use credit cards. Applicant said he intends to make payments 
on the two outstanding debts until they are paid. (Tr. 48.) If he obtains another position 
with a defense contractor, he will eliminate all debt within a year. (Tr. 49.) 
 
 In his concluding remarks Applicant stated, “The Department of Defense put their 
trust in me back in 1971 and for 33 years I did not let them down. I assure you they can 
keep their trust in me in 2015.” (Tr. 54-55.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                 
1
 There is no SOR ¶ 1.h allegation.  
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Between 2009 and 2013, Applicant accumulated debts that he was unable or 
unwilling to resolve until 2014 and later. The evidence is sufficient to raise both  
disqualifications, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate 
those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s delinquent debts: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant offered evidence that his financial problems began arising when the 
economy spiraled downward in 2008. Those were circumstances beyond his control. 
However, he did not provide sufficient documentation that he attempted to address 
debts while they were accumulating, which evidence is necessary for the full application 
of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Applicant did not document participation in credit or other financial counseling. 
However, he submitted evidence that he resolved six debts and is resolving the 
remaining two. He provided a budget that addresses all financial obligations within his 
means. The evidence establishes clear indications that his finances and debts are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) applies. His efforts to pay or resolve all debts alleged in the 
SOR also demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve financial obligations. AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies to all debts.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a credible 64-year-
old man who honorably served in the military for over 20 years, during which time he 
held a security clearance. Since encountering financial problems, he has responsibly 
taken steps to manage them. He has a budget that easily accommodates expenses, 
including two debts that he is paying. He is aware of the negative effects that future 
unaddressed financial obligations could have on his employment. There is sufficient 
evidence to believe he will continue to honor his repayment agreements and pay any 
other obligations.  
  
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubts or concerns as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:       For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                  
    
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
