 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-06311 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kenneth M. Roberts, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual 
behavior) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 23, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2015. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
March 4, 2015, scheduling the hearing for March 31, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
 
2 
 
objection. Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through O, which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s closing brief is 
marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 7, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2012. He served in the U.S. military from 1987 until he 
retired in 2011. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he has held for more 
than 25 years. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married without children.1 
 
 Applicant attended college in the early to mid-1980s. His longtime friend, who 
was also his college roommate, met and married a woman after college. The friend and 
his wife lived near Applicant’s home. Applicant met his friend’s wife while she and his 
friend were dating. Applicant, his friend, and his friend’s wife spent a lot of time together. 
Unbeknownst to his friend, Applicant and his friend’s wife began having an affair in 
about 1988 or 1989.2 
 
 Applicant and his friend’s wife had sexual relations when Applicant went home on 
leave from the military, which amounted to about once or twice a year. They also had 
sexual-related communications by phone and the Internet after that technology became 
prevalent. The affair continued after Applicant married in 1991, and then off and on for 
more than 20 years.3 
 
 Applicant’s friend and his wife moved to a distant state for about five to seven 
years. Applicant never saw her during this period, but the affair resumed when she and 
her husband moved back to Applicant’s home state.4 
 
 In 2011, the woman moved temporarily for work to the state where Applicant has 
lived, except for overseas deployments, since 2005. Her husband remained in his home 
state.5 
 
 Applicant’s friend and Applicant’s wife did not know about the affair when it was 
going on, nor did anyone in the military. Applicant did not think he was required to report 
it. He was aware that adultery was a crime under the Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), and he could have been subjected to disciplinary action.6  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 37, 45, 57, 64, 71-72; GE 1, 2; AE A, D, O. 
 
2 Tr. at 56, 64-65, 78; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 37, 64-65, 88; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 66; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 66, 77-78; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 43, 80-82, 88-89; GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
January 2012. He was applying for an upgraded clearance to work in a sensitive area, 
and he felt that he should divulge his affair. There is no specific question that required 
him to reveal the affair, so he discussed it under Additional Comments. Applicant also 
discussed the affair during his background interview in March 2012. He told the 
investigator that he intended to continue with the affair.7  
 
 Applicant’s friend is aware of the affair. He discussed it with Applicant’s parents 
and siblings. He called Applicant at one point and asked him if he was having an affair 
with his wife, but Applicant lied and said he was not.8 
 
 Applicant and his friend’s wife ended the affair in 2013. Applicant has not seen or 
talked to her in about two years. He believes that she is still married and living in their 
home state.9 
 
 Applicant told his wife about the affair in October 2014. His wife testified that it 
was difficult, but they are still together and working through their problems. Applicant 
denied having any other affairs.10 
 
 Applicant deployed in support of Operations Desert Shield, Iraqi Freedom, and 
Enduring Freedom. Three witnesses testified, and Applicant submitted several letters 
attesting to his excellent duty and job performance, dedication, work ethic, honesty, 
dependability, reliability, trustworthiness, patriotism, and integrity.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 67-71, 82-87; GE 1, 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 70-71, 85, 91. 
 
9 Tr. at 67-71, 76; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
10 Tr. at 40-44, 48, 81, 9; AE O. 
 
11 Tr. at 16-50; AE A, D-O. 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
 The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which can 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
5 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
 Applicant, a married man, engaged in an extramarital affair with his friend’s wife 
over the course of more than 20 years. His conduct could have subjected him to 
disciplinary action under the UCMJ. All of the above disqualifying conditions have been 
established.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate sexual behavior security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 14. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 Applicant ended the affair in 2013. He divulged the affair on his SF 86 even 
though no specific question required that response. He informed his wife. It was difficult 
for his wife, but they are still together and working through their problems. I find that the 
conduct is unlikely to recur; it no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and it does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 14(b), 14(c), and 14(d) are applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
 
6 
 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant’s extramarital affair showed questionable judgment. It also created a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are 
applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Under the same rationale discussed above for sexual behavior, I find that the 
conduct is unlikely to recur; it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment; and it no longer serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and honorable military 
service, particularly his deployments in support of his national defense. Applicant 
marred an otherwise outstanding career with decades of infidelity and poor judgment. 
However, the DOD is aware of the affair because Applicant disclosed it on his SF 86; 
the affair is over; and the key people in Applicant’s life are aware of it.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
