 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11252 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems could have been aggravated, in part, by 
circumstances beyond his control. Notwithstanding, he failed to present sufficient 
evidence to show that he acted responsibly under the circumstances, and that his 
financial problems are resolved or under control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted security clearance applications (SCA) on February 23, 2011, 
and June 9, 2012. On September 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F 
(financial considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on October 7, 2014, and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record.  
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated December 
22, 2014, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated December 23, 2014. 
Apparently, Applicant acknowledged he had received the FORM in his e-mail response 
to an email from a legal assistant from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). The e-mail response, dated April 6, 2015, indicating he had no other 
information to submit.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Issues 
 
 The Government withdrew SOR ¶ 1.i, because it is a duplicate allegation of SOR 
¶ 1.a. (FORM, pg. 3; See letter dated September 25, 2014, from a state’s child support 
enforcement agency.) 
 
 In the FORM, the Government offered as evidence a summary of Applicant’s 
interview (PSI) with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator conducted 
on August 17, 2012. (Item 6) The Government noted that Item 6 had not been 
authenticated by Applicant, and acknowledged that the document was subject to an 
objection to its admissibility on that ground. (Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20 (An ROI 
may be received with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible . . . 
.)) The Government invited Applicant to correct, revise, or update the information in Item 
6, or to object to its admissibility in its entirety. (FORM, Footnote 1, pg. 2) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on April 6, 2015, when he 
responded to an e-mail from a DOHA employee. The e-mail to Applicant states: “Per 
our conversation . . . could you please confirm that you received your “your eyes only” 
packet and that you have no rebuttal.” Applicant e-mail response is also unclear: “I 
received the packet from my company. I have no other rebuttal paperwork to send.” 
(Because the file contains no rebuttal beyond his e-mail response, I will presume 
Applicant meant the email as his response.) 
 
 The Government’s footnote provided Applicant with sufficient knowledge of his 
right to object to the admissibility of Item 6. However, there is no evidence to show that 
Applicant received notice that his failure to correct Item 6 (the equivalent of certifying or 
authenticating the document), or to object to Item 6, would be considered a waiver of his 
right to object, and that his waiver would then allow an administrative judge to consider 
the document on its face.  
 
Conversely, Applicant may have relied upon the Government’s inclusion of his 
PSI (Item 6) in the record, and he may have wanted that evidence considered, and 
chose not to repeat facts contained in his PSI in his FORM response. (Section VII of the 
FORM states that if “you do not file any objections, or submit any additional information 
. . . the case will be assigned to an administrative judge for a determination based solely 
on the FORM.”)  
 
The Supreme Court has explained that “waiver is the ‘intentional relinquishment 
or abandonment of a known right.’ Kontrick v. Ryan, 540 U.S. 443, 458, n. 13 (2004) 
 
3 
 
 
(quoting United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 733 (1993)). I presume Applicant read 
the FORM and elected not to submit a response or objection. When evidence is 
submitted in a case, an Applicant is expected to object to the evidence, if there is a 
reason to do so. As a general statement of the law, failure to object to consideration of 
evidence results in waiver. There is no requirement that Department Counsel discuss 
the benefits or merits of making a rights’ election. 
Applicant’s election not to object may have been better “informed” if Department 
Counsel’s advice in the FORM had included comment that if Applicant elects to object 
to consideration of his PSI, it will not be accepted as evidence in his case; that if he 
does not object the PSI will be considered as evidence; and that Applicant’s failure to 
respond to the FORM will be considered a waiver. Considering the circumstances in this 
particular case, the evidence is insufficient for me to conclude that Applicant knowingly 
waived his right to object. Accordingly, Item 6 was not admitted as evidence and will not 
be considered. 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR, with explanations, except 
for SOR ¶ 1.i, which he denied. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. 
After a review of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a government contractor. He received a 
General Education Development (GED) certificate before he enlisted in the U.S. Army in 
2000. While on active duty, he was deployed to Iraq from June 2005 to May 2006. 
Applicant was discharged in 2006 with a characterization of service of under other than 
honorable conditions (OTH). Apparently, he was charged with drug-related offenses and 
elected to be administratively discharged in lieu of a trial by court-martial. Applicant was 
first granted a secret-level security clearance in 2001, incidental to his service.  
 
Applicant is currently divorced. He married his first spouse in 2002 and divorced 
in 2006. He married his second spouse in 2006 and divorced in 2009. He has a 13-year 
daughter, born out of wedlock, who resides with her mother. Applicant claimed that he 
has a verbal support agreement with the mother and provides $186 monthly in child 
support. He presented no documentary evidence to support such payments. He also 
has a seven-year-old son from his second marriage. Applicant has a court order 
requiring him to pay $250 monthly in child support. As of September 2014, he was 
$9,474 in arrears. 
 
After his discharge, Applicant was unemployed for a short period, and then 
worked for a short periods for a temporary work agency and a private company. He 
worked full time for several defense contractors from September 2007 until January 
2012. He was unemployed from January 2012 to May 2012, after he resigned from his 
overseas job. He started working for his current employer, a government contractor, in 
June 2012. Pursuant to his employment with several defense contractors, Applicant was 
deployed to Iraq (from January to September 2008, and November to January 2011) 
 
4 
 
 
and to Afghanistan (from January 2011 to January 2012) in support of U.S. interests in 
those countries. Apparently, he also worked overseas in 2013 – 2014, but the dates of 
actual service are not in the record. 
 
Applicant disclosed in Section 26 (Financial History) of the 2012 SCA that he had 
financial problems, which included some of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR and 
his delinquent child support. The subsequent background investigation and credit 
reports disclosed the eight delinquent SOR debts, totaling over $25,000.  
 
Based on the 2011 and 2012 SCAs, and his answer to the SOR, the status of the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – This is a collection from a state agency for $9,474 of child support in 
arrears. In response to financial questions in his 2011 SCA, Applicant stated that he 
was up to date with his child support payments. In the 2012 SCA, Applicant stated that 
he “missed payments by accident, he was overseas,” but that he was “paid up and 
current.”  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed the account was in good standing. 
He submitted a letter from the state’s child support division indicating that Applicant was 
paying $250 monthly, plus an average of $96 extra each month to pay the arrearages. 
As of September 2014, he was $9,474 in arrears. Applicant presented no additional 
evidence to show whether he has been making consecutive payments since September 
2014 to present.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – In his 2012 SCA, Applicant stated that he had paid this debt in full. 
In his response to the SOR, he indicated that he had entered into a payment agreement 
with the creditor to pay $240 monthly, starting in October 2014. A letter from the law firm 
collecting the debt, dated September 30, 2014, confirmed the agreement. However, 
Applicant provided no documentary evidence to show the he has been complying with 
the agreement and is current on his payments. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d - In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted both debts 
and indicated that he had “set up a payment plan” and “requested copy of supporting 
documentation” for both debts. He claimed that he delayed sending his SOR answer 
waiting for the documents, but they did not arrive on time. The July 2014 credit report 
included in the FORM (Item 9) shows both debts as “charged off,” and that Applicant 
disputed them. There is no information to show whether the disputes had a reasonable 
basis or were resolved favorably for Applicant.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that the account was in 
collection by a different collector, and that he had “been working to pay this account off” 
and currently owed $380. A credit card statement submitted by Applicant, dated 
October 13, 2014, shows that in September 2014, he made a $370 payment. As of 
October 2014, he owed $380. He provided no documentary evidence showing that he 
 
5 
 
 
had made any payments prior to September 2014, or that he has made any additional 
payments since.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – In his 2012 SCA, Applicant stated that he had just found about this 
account, and that he would be making payment arrangements. In his response to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted this was his debt, but claimed it was being reported 
inaccurately. He further claimed that he disputed the debt, and it was removed from his 
credit report. Applicant provided no documentary information showing when he disputed 
the debt, the reasons for the dispute, or why the debt was removed from his credit 
report. 
 
A June 2012 credit report (FORM, Item 8) shows that the original creditor was a 
cellular service provider. The account has been delinquent and in collection since at 
least January 2012. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – In his 2011 SCA, Applicant stated that he had just found about this 
account, and that he would be making payment arrangements. In the 2012 SCA, 
Applicant stated that he could not afford to pay the account and disputed it. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant admitted this was his debt, but claimed it was being 
reported inaccurately and he disputed it. He stated that the debt was removed from his 
credit report. Applicant provided no information stating the reasons for the dispute, or 
the reasons for the removal of the debt from his credit report.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – In his 2011 SCA, Applicant stated that the debt was cancelled, and 
that he received an IRS 1099 Form to file with his taxes. In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted this was his debt, but claimed it was being reported inaccurately. He 
claimed that he disputed the debt and it was removed from his credit report. Applicant 
provided no information stating the reasons for the dispute, or the reasons for the 
removal of the debt from his credit report.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – This allegation is a duplicate of SOR ¶ 1.a, and it was withdrawn by 
the Government. 
 
Applicant provided little information about when he acquired the debts, why they 
became delinquent, what efforts he took before he was issued the SOR in September 
2014 to stay in contact with his creditors, or to pay his delinquent debt. In his 2011 and 
2012 SCAs, Applicant alludes to not having sufficient funds to pay some debts, and to 
missing some payments by accident because he was deployed overseas.  
 
Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and financial 
position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, his monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day 
living expenses and his debts. There is no information to indicate whether he 
participated in financial counseling or whether he follows a budget.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
7 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant admitted, and the credit reports established, the eight delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 
19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists five conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Financial considerations mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and he did not present sufficient evidence to 
show that his financial problems occurred under unusual circumstances and are unlikely 
to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not fully mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems could have been, in 
part, aggravated or caused by circumstances beyond his control – his period of 
underemployment between January and May 2012, his divorces, and his deployments. 
However, Applicant presented no evidence explaining the circumstances of his 
resignation in January 2012, or how his five-month period of unemployment prevented 
him from addressing his delinquent debts from May 2012 to present.  
 
 Additionally, Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to show that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances, and that he made a good-faith effort to repay 
 
8 
 
 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. He presented little documentary 
evidence of payments made, contacts with creditors, or efforts to otherwise resolve any 
of the delinquent SOR debts prior to his receipt of the SOR.  
 
 I considered that Applicant disputed a number of debts. Notwithstanding, 
Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to establish that he had a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debts. Furthermore, Applicant’s 
contradictory statements (in the 2011 and 2012 SCAs and in his answer to the SOR) 
create doubts about the accuracy of his statements. The remaining mitigating conditions 
are not applicable to the facts in this case. 
 
 In sum, Applicant provided little information about his current earnings and 
financial position. He did not provide any information about his monthly income, monthly 
expenses, and whether his current income is sufficient to pay his current day-to-day 
living expenses and debts. There is no information to show that he participated in 
financial counseling or that he follows a budget. The available information is insufficient 
to establish clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved or are under 
control. Applicant presented no reasonable plan to address his delinquent debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant failed to submit documentary evidence to show that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances and that his financial problem is being resolved or 
is under control. He failed to mitigate the Guideline F security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a -1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.i:     Withdrawn 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
