1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-02394
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On October 9, 2014, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2015.  A notice of
hearing was issued on March 17, 2015, scheduling the case for April 30, 2015.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-3 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified and presented six documents for the record (AX A-F). The transcript was
received on May 7, 2015. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegation under
Guideline F, with explanations.
Applicant is 43 years old. He is a telecommunications specialist. Applicant
obtained his undergraduate degree in 1996 and has attended post-graduate classes.
Applicant is divorced and has no children. Applicant has been with his current employer
since 2014. Applicant has held a security clearance since 2004. (GX 1).
 The SOR alleges one delinquent debt, which is a home equity account in the
amount of almost $48,000. (GX 2)
Applicant purchased a townhome in March 2006, which was Applicant’s
residence. (Tr. 25) The purchase price was $398,500. The structure of the home
mortgage was a first mortgage loan and an equity loan of $50,000. The monthly
mortgage payment was initially $2,100. By 2010, the monthly amount was $2,500.
In 2008, Applicant purchased a single family home as an investment. (Tr. 33)
The purchase price was $217,000. Applicant financed the total amount of the loan. The
monthly mortgage payment was about $1,500. Applicant hired a management company
and rented the property for about one year (from August 2008 until August 2009). (Tr.
34) The property was in a “poor” area and renters would stay for a while and then leave
the property. Applicant did not have sufficient income to cover the townhome mortgage
and the single family home. (Tr. 36) He used some of his savings to help with the costs.
He stopped paying on the single family mortgage loan in about May 2011. (AX B) In
2012, this home went to foreclosure. Applicant believes the deficiency balance is
$122,000. He is trying to settle the amount. He contacted the mortgage company by
letter in March 2014. (AX B )
Applicant purchased a third property in May 2008 for a purchase price of
$158,000. (Tr. 39) This house was another investment property. Applicant was able to
rent this property for about one year. The rent covered the mortgage payment.
Applicant acknowledges that this was a bad decision to purchase this home in the
same location as the second property.  Applicant stopped payment on this home in May
2011. The home went to foreclosure and left a deficiency balance that Applicant settled
for $1,000. (Tr. 41; AX A)
Applicant’s job required him to move to another state. He left the townhome (his
residence and first purchase) in 2009. He rented the home and utilized a property
manager. The tenant paid a monthly rent of $1,950. (Tr. 28) Applicant subsidized the
remainder of the loan. After one year the renter left the property. When Applicant
located another renter later, the rent was reduced to $1,700. The second tenant
remained in the property until about 2011. However, this tenant did not pay rent
consistently. Applicant stopped paying on the property in about August 2011. (Tr. 30)
He tried to restructure the loan with the bank, but the bank did not agree to a
modification. Applicant could not refinance because he had been current with his
3
mortgage payment. In 2013, he pursued a short sale. (AX C) The bank agreed to settle
the first mortgage on the property. (Tr. 45) The home equity loan (SOR 1.a) was not
forgiven. Applicant called the bank and sent a letter in March 2014 (AX D). Applicant
stated that the bank could not find the mortgage record and referred him to the charge-
off department. Applicant did not contact the bank in writing before receiving the SOR.
However, when Applicant moved back to his home state in 2011, he did not move back
into his townhome residence. There was a friend living in the home. Eventually,
Applicant had to evict him for not paying rent. (AX F) However, the friend did pay about
$1,100 for some months he stayed in the home. (Tr. 75) Applicant did not provide the
rent money he received from his friend to the bank. He believed he would not be able to
refinance the loan if he did. (Tr. 76) Applicant moved back into the home in February of
2013 until May 2013. At the time, he did not pay any mortgage money. The foreclosure
proceedings had started. (Tr. 76)
At the same time, Applicant incurred additional expenses by taking care of his
father’s medical expenses. His dad lives abroad. Since Applicant is the first son, it is
tradition that he care for his father. Applicant sent money each month to his father in
the amount of $500 to $800. (Tr. 51) His father had a stroke in 2013 and Applicant had
to fly abroad to help. This took more of his savings. He believes he spent about $6,000
caring for his father. (Tr. 52)
Applicant submitted documentation that he paid another equity loan. (AX E ) His
earlier credit report supports his claim that he paid his accounts as agreed. (GX )
Applicant acknowledges that the real estate investments were a one-time
mistake and he does not intend to indulge in this any more. He had a friend who was
“flipping” houses and he thought it might be a good idea. (Tr. 64)
Applicant’s current position is stable. He earns $125,000 a year. Applicant’s net
monthly income is about $5,200. He lives with a girlfriend who helps pay expenses.  He
believes he has a net monthly remainder is about $2,340 a month. He acknowledged
that he is current with his expenses. He is adamant that he is not a frivolous spender.
He acknowledged that he does financially help relatives on different occasions. (Tr. 58)
Applicant explained that he is not running away from his financial issues. He
believes he has been responsible and is working toward a resolution with the home
equity loan. He states he has never gambled and has settled other debts. He believes
he was not reckless. This was a one-time failure on his part. He intends to resolve the
issues. He will contact the bank again.(Tr. 82)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
5
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant has a delinquent mortgage amount of almost $48,000. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the
case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant incurred delinquent debt when he could not find renters for his home
and had to move to another state for work. At the same time, he invested in two other
properties that caused him to incur debt. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
partially applies.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
partially applies.  As noted above, Applicant’s financial difficulties are the result of his
purchase of three properties in a period of two years. His first home has a delinquent
home mortgage that he has not resolved. He failed to show that he acted responsibly
under the circumstances. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has limited application. Applicant states that he
has settled another mortgage loan on another investment property. He still has another
one unresolved as well as the delinquent debt alleged in SOR 1.a. He presented
documentation that he has recently pursued the delinquent mortgage on his first
property which was his residence. He does not have a plan in place to resolve the
second mortgage. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
6
counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications that the  problem is being
resolved, or is under control) does not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 43 years old. He was candid and well-meaning at the hearing. He helps his
father and his family abroad. He admits that it was a mistake to invest in multiple
properties. He did not have sufficient income to support all the properties if something
went wrong. He has tried to address the issues, but he has not been proactive with the
home equity loan that is delinquent on his residence. He did not contact the bank about
the issue until after receipt of the SOR. He intends to remedy the problem, but a
promise to pay in the future is not sufficient. 
Applicant submitted documentation that his has settled another loan. He is
current with his expenses. However, he has not met his burden of proof in this case.
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the financial considerations
guideline. Any doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government.
 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F : AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
