 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03306  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant has failed to mitigate security concerns 
raised by his use of a government-issued to computer to solicit prostitutes between 
2009 and 2012, as well as his January 2013 guilty plea to solicitation charges. 
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 15, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the criminal conduct, sexual behavior, use of 
information technology, and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on March 24, 2015. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant. He received 
the FORM on April 9, 2015, and submitted one document in response to the FORM. 
The case was assigned to me on May 1, 2015. I admitted the items attached to the 
FORM as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1- 6 and Applicant’s Exhibit A, without objection 
from either party.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 31, has worked for a federal contractor since July 2007. He was 
initially granted a security clearance in 2005 and was granted access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI) in 2009. He completed his most recent security 
clearance application in November 2013, wherein he disclosed a January 2013 guilty 
plea and sentence on a misdemeanor solicitation of prostitution charge and an instance 
of unlawful use of a government-issued computer that occurred in October 2012. In his 
January 2014 subject interview, which Applicant verified as being accurate, he provided 
details about the circumstances of his criminal conduct.3  
 
 In 2009, Applicant claims that he learned his wife was having an affair. Shortly 
thereafter, as he attempted to sell an item on a popular classified advertisement 
website, he discovered the website had a section of ads soliciting prostitution. Applicant 
decided to post his own ad. Between 2009 and 2012, Applicant chatted with and met at 
least 10 women through his solicitation ads. He used his personal email to monitor his 
ad and to chat with the women who responded to it. He admits using his government -
issued computer, on average 15 minutes, two to three days a week, to correspond with 
interested women. Applicant concealed his activity from his wife.4 
 
 In October 2012, Applicant began communicating with a woman by email. They 
made plans to meet in the parking lot of a local commuter train station. Applicant 
described his car to the woman so that she would be able to identify him. Unbeknownst 
to Applicant, the person with whom he had been chatting was working with law 
enforcement. When Applicant arrived at the train station, he was stopped by a police 
officer in an unmarked car. The police officer recorded Applicant’s information and told 
Applicant that he would receive, by mail, a summons to appear in court. He was not 
arrested. Applicant self-reported the incident to his facility security officer (FSO). Soon 
after making the report, Applicant’s government client audited his computer, locating the 
email traffic between Applicant and the women he solicited between 2009 and 2012. In 
January 2013, Applicant pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor solicitation of prostitution 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 1, 4. 
 
4 GE 4.  
 
3 
 
charge and received one day of unsupervised probation before judgment. Six months 
later, the government revoked Applicant’s SCI access.5  
 
 Applicant continues to work for a government client. He claims that he has 
neither solicited women for sex nor misused government information systems since 
being caught in October 2012. He is remorseful about his behavior and has put 
measures in place to prevent its recurrence. Applicant has joined a church and he now 
shares an email account with his wife. In this way, Applicant’s wife is able to monitor his 
email. Applicant also believes the shared email “keeps him honest.” Applicant believes 
that he has learned from and improved his behavior.6 
 
 While Applicant admits the SOR allegations, he denies that he intentionally 
solicited prostitutes. According to Applicant, “the ads received and posted were not 
known to be prostitutes [sic]. Many were women seeking financial assistance.”7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
5 GE 2-4. 
 
6 GE 1; AE A.  
 
7 AE A.  
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Sexual Behavior 
 
 An individual’s sexual behavior becomes a security concern when his conduct 
involves a criminal offense, reflects a lack of judgment or otherwise raises concerns 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.8 For three years between 2009 and 2012, Applicant solicited and engaged 
in sex with women he found through a commercial advertising website. Not only was 
Applicant’s conduct illegal (which will be discussed in the analysis of the criminal 
conduct guideline below), it also violated DOD Instruction 2202.01: Combating 
Trafficking in Persons (TIP). The policy, enacted in September 2010, opposes 
prostitution and any related activities that may contribute to TIP and seeks to deter 
activities of contract personnel that would facilitate TIP domestically and overseas.9 In 
addition, his conduct made him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, and duress. Using 
his government-issued computer to facilitate these encounters also raises concerns 
about his judgment.10    
 
 Although Applicant admits that he engaged in the conduct, he does not take full 
responsibility for his actions. Despite Applicant’s ability to describe the women he 
solicited as being in need of financial assistance, it does not change the fact that he 
actively participated in prostitution. This characterization makes Applicant’s behavior 
even more abhorrent. It suggests Applicant preyed on vulnerable women, providing 
‘financial assistance’ in exchange for sex. Applicant began soliciting prostitutes to deal 
with his marital problems. He has not provided any evidence to indicate that his 
behavior will not recur if confronted with similar stressors in the future. He did not 
present any evidence of marital or individual counseling. Although he implies that his 
wife is aware of his misconduct, Applicant did not provide any corroborating evidence. 
Therefore, he has not established that his misconduct is not a continuing source of 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. Because his acts were illegal it does not matter if the 
behavior was strictly private, consensual, or discreet.  None of the sexual behavior 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.11 Applicant pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 12. 
 
9 GE 6. 
 
10 AG ¶ 13 (a), (c) - (d).  
 
11 AG ¶ 30. 
 
 
5 
 
solicitation charge in January 2013 and was sentenced to probation before judgment.12 
He also admitted engaging in uncharged criminal conduct — soliciting and using 
prostitutes on at least 10 occasions between 2009 and 2012.13 Although his last act of 
criminal conduct occurred over two and a half years ago, this is not enough to mitigate 
the concerns about Applicant’s ongoing security worthiness. As discussed in the 
analysis of the sexual behavior guideline, Applicant has not shown that the stressor that 
ostensibly caused Applicant to seek the services of prostitutes has been addressed, or 
that his conduct happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. 
Nor has Applicant provided evidence of rehabilitation or reform. 
 
Use of Information Technology 
 
 Noncompliance with rules, procedure, guidelines or regulations pertaining to the 
information technology systems may raise concerns about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.14 An internal investigation revealed that between 2009 and 2012, 
Applicant used his government-issued computer to engage in illegal activity.15  It has 
been almost three years since Applicant’s last known misuse of a government 
computer. However, aside from promising not to engage in similar conduct in the future, 
Applicant has not provided any evidence to mitigate security concerns raised by his 
conduct. None of the relevant mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a concern when his actions show 
questionable judgment, an unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations, or raises 
questions about an applicant’s ability to protect classified information.16 As discussed in 
the previous guidelines, Applicant’s misconduct creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress that he has not mitigated.17 Although Applicant promptly and 
properly disclosed his misconduct to his employer, it is unclear from the record if 
Applicant disclosed his misconduct to his wife. Because this remains unclear, it cannot 
be said that Applicant has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate the potential area 
of vulnerability caused by his actions. Even though the legal disposition of Applicant’s 
criminal acts amounted to nothing more than a slap on the wrist, it does not mitigate the 
underlying concerns. As stated before, Applicant has not provided any evidence to 
support a finding of reform, rehabilitation, or that his conduct is unlikely to recur. 
 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 31(a).  
 
13 AG ¶ 31(c). 
 
14 AG ¶39.  
 
15 AG ¶ 40(e).  
 
16 AG ¶ 15.  
 
17 AG ¶ 16(e).  
 
6 
 
Accordingly, doubts remain about Applicant’s ability to protect classified 
information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person 
factors at AG ¶ 2. Ultimately, Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production and 
persuasion. In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on 
the written record. In doing so, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts necessary to 
mitigate the concerns raised by his conduct, or establish evidence of rehabilitation.  
Because the security concerns raised in the SOR remain, following Egan18 and the 
clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national 
security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Criminal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Sexual Behavior:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph  3, Use of Information  
Technology Systems:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 4, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 4.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
18 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
