KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge said or nothing that would persuade a reasonable person that he lacked the
requisite impartiality.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-02207.a1
DATE: 05/27/2015
DATE: May 27, 2015
In Re:
-----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02207
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James E. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July 18,
2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 3, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Francisco Mendez denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against him;
whether the Judge denied him due process; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has served in the U.S. military, where in 1982 he was granted his first security
clearance.  He has worked with his current employer for over ten years.  Applicant has a serious 
medical condition, along with other health problems.  He has financial problems dating back to the
mid-1990s.  In 2006, Applicant’s finances were the basis for a DOHA adjudication.  The Judge in
that earlier decision concluded that Applicant had mitigated the security concerns.  He cited to
evidence of Applicant’s having settled several large debts and his December 2005 discharge in
Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  After this favorable clearance decision, Applicant amassed more delinquent
debt.  According to the IRS, he has federal tax liens totaling over $150,000 for 2006 alone.  In 2014
the IRS notified him that his past-due tax debt for 2003-2004 and 2006-2011 was over $175,000. 
Applicant was not able to produce tax returns for the years at issue because they were “so long ago.” 
Decision at 4.  Applicant took no action on his debts because he was using his disposable income
to pay tuition and living expenses for his daughter.  Applicant has other delinquent debts, including
credit cards that he opened in 2006 and stopped paying in 2008.  He purchased an expensive vehicle
that was repossessed due to non-payment.  He also had two judgments against him that were
satisfied through garnishment of his wages.  Applicant has recently been discharged a second time
in Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  The bankruptcy petition listed about 60 overdue creditors.    
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s debt were not incurred under unique circumstances. 
To the contrary, Applicant appears habitually to incur debts and then refuse to pay them, despite
having the means to do so.  Although noting Applicant’s serious medical condition, the Judge also
found that the vast majority of his debts were not medically related and that Applicant had not
demonstrated responsible action in regard to them.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted
Applicant’s military service and civilian employment, his having held a clearance for many years,
and financial support he provided to an offspring.  However, he stated that Applicant had been
“evasive” at the hearing and that he actually submitted a credit report that he had altered so as to
make it appear that he has resolved one of his SOR debts.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge exhibited bias toward him.  He cites to portions of the
transcript in which the Judge repeated his warning to Applicant about his obligation to be truthful. 
2
He argues, in effect, that this shows a predisposition by the Judge not to believe his testimony.  A
Judge is presumed to be unbiased, and an applicant who contends otherwise has a heavy burden of
persuasion on appeal.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-05027 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 26, 2012).  The
record shows that, at the beginning of the hearing, the Judge advised Applicant of the requirement
set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 1001 to be truthful in his presentation.  Tr. at 15-16.  The Judge made further
reference to this advice during his general explanation of the procedures that applied to the hearing. 
Tr. at 18.  He also referred to it at the beginning of Applicant’s testimony:
[Judge]:  All right . . . give me a little bit of background information about yourself,
then tell me how you got into financial trouble, and then tell me how you’re–what
evidence you have of financial reform . . . so again, do you recall my warning about
telling the truth? 
[Applicant]: Yes, sir.  Tr. at 25.  
An examination of the entire transcript, with special attention to those portions cited by Applicant,
disclose no reason to believe that the Judge was exhibiting bias.  His language, viewed in its entirety,
appears to have been an effort to ensure that Applicant, who acted pro se, understood the nature of
the hearing and the procedures that would apply to it.  The Judge said or did nothing that would
persuade a reasonable person that he lacked the requisite impartiality.1  Applicant has not met his
heavy burden of persuasion that the Judge was biased against him.
Applicant contends that the Judge unreasonably limited his testimony, thereby impairing his
ability to show mitigation.  Specifically, he claims that the Judge erred by preventing him from
reading aloud from his documentary evidence.  The record shows that Applicant offered a
substantial number of exhibits, all of which the Judge admitted.  Moreover, the Judge permitted
Applicant to testify at length about his financial problems and the circumstances underlying them,
and he held the record open for thirty days after the hearing to enable Applicant to submit additional
evidence.  Tr. at 192, 198.  Applicant offered additional evidence, and the Judge admitted it,
including two exhibits that Applicant submitted beyond the allotted thirty days.  Decision at 2.  That
the Judge  curtailed Applicant’s effort to read aloud from documents already admitted reasonably
served the ends of judicial economy by preventing the inclusion into the record of merely cumulative
evidence.  Applicant was not denied the due process afforded him by the Directive.  See Directive,
Enclosure 1, SECTION 3.  See also ISCR Case No. 12-02596 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 12, 2015). 
Applicant argues that the Judge erred by admitting certain exhibits offered by Department
Counsel.  Applicant claimed unfair surprise, insofar as Department Counsel had not notified him of
his intention to submit the documents.  We examine a Judge’s rulings on evidence to see if they are
1Applicant also suggests that the Judge exhibited bias due to Applicant’s race.  There is a rebuttable presumption
that Federal employees carry out their duties in good faith.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-04713 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27,
2003).  In the case before us, as in the one just cited, Applicant has not identified anything in the record that would lead
a reasonable person to believe that the adverse decision was racially motivated.  A bare assertion of such motivation is
not enough to overcome the presumptions of good faith and impartiality.  Id. 
3
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-08390 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 30,
2012).  Department Counsel submitted the evidence in question to rebut the content of documents
that Applicant had presented in his case in chief.2  Tr. at 191.  As stated above, the Judge left the
record open for thirty days after the close of the hearing to enable Applicant to submit additional
evidence, including  documentary response to Department Counsel’s rebuttal evidence.  Tr. at 198. 
Moreover, in order to vitiate possible unfairness to Applicant, the Judge limited Department
Counsel’s scope of cross examination on the rebuttal evidence.  Decision at 2.  The Judge did not
err in his ruling on the challenged evidence. 
Applicant cites to favorable evidence, such as his having held a clearance for several years
without incident, that he pays his current debts, etc.  Applicant’s argument is not enough to rebut
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 10-04413 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2014).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  Applicant’s having been previously discharged in bankruptcy, having received a favorable
clearance DOHA adjudication that had addressed his financial problems, having subsequently
amassed a significant amount of delinquent debt, and having filed a second time for bankruptcy
protection supports the Judge’s adverse decision. The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
2“[T]he evidence tended to counter and rebut Applicant’s portrayal in his case-in-chief that his financial
problems were of limited scope and duration.  In addition, Applicant had previously been provided or had in his
possession the documents offered in rebuttal.”  Decision at 2.  The documents included a 2003 affidavit by Applicant
concerning his debts, a copy of the 2006 DOHA adjudication, Applicant’s 2005 bankruptcy filing, and a case summary
of Applicant’s 2014 bankruptcy filing.    
4
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
