KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s challenged credibility determination is sustainable given Applicant ‘s
failure to disclose judgements against him  after he had attended court hearings related to them.
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-01386.a1
DATE: 05/20/2015
DATE: May 20, 2015
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01386
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Sean M. Bigley, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
27, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 11, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Francisco Mendez denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his credibility
determination and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant served in the U.S. military from 1992 until 2001.  Since leaving active duty he has
worked continuously as a Federal contractor.  Applicant has held a clearance since 2002.
Applicant has several delinquent debts.  He failed to file his Federal tax returns and to pay
his taxes for tax years 2008 through 2010.  Applicant claims that he filed the returns but that the IRS
never received them.  In 2010 the IRS sent him notices about his 2008 and 2009 tax delinquencies. 
In 2012 it sent him notices about his 2010 delinquency.  In early 2013, the IRS sent Applicant a final
collection notice with intent to levy.  One month later Applicant filed his Federal tax returns for
2008 through 2010.  The IRS has a lien against Applicant for $135,000 for 2008 and 2009 and
another for $2,500 for 2010.  Applicant entered into an installment agreement, and his balance is
down to about $3,000.
Applicant also failed to file and pay his state tax returns for 2008 through 2010.  This debt
has been extinguished through garnishment.  Applicant’s state tax problems were not alleged in the
SOR.  The Judge stated that he was considering them for their bearing on Applicant’s credibility,
his case for mitigation, and for the whole-person analysis.  Decision at 2, note 3.
In 2007, Applicant took out a second mortgage on his home, investing $90,000 of the
proceeds in a real estate venture.  The business did not succeed, and Applicant defaulted on the loan. 
He owes over $150,000 and has recently entered into a repayment agreement.  Several of
Applicant’s debts have been reduced to judgments.  Some of these were for medical expenses, others
were for debts alleged to have been owed to his homeowners association (HOA).  He recently
contacted the attorney for the HOA in an attempt to resolve them.  Applicant testified that he was
aware of these judgments; however, he did not list them on his security clearance application.  As
with the state tax debts, the Judge stated that he was considering Applicant’s failure to disclose these
judgments for its bearing on his credibility, mitigation case, and for the whole-person analysis.  Id.
at. 3.   Applicant resolved other SOR debts after the hearing.
2
Applicant attributed his financial problems to his having provided help to his extended
family members, including five orphaned nieces and nephews.  He states that he has received
financial counseling and recently started up a new business selling items over the internet.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted Applicant’s contention that his debt problems were of limited duration. 
However, he stated that Applicant ignored the majority of his debts until creditors undertook
enforcement action or until his clearance was jeopardized.  The Judge cited to evidence of
Applicant’s family difficulties.  He also cited to Applicant’s failed business venture, which the Judge
termed “risky.”  Id. at 6.  He stated that these matters were undertaken at the expense of other
obligations, for example Applicant’s duty to pay his taxes.  The Judge stated that Applicant had
disregarded his taxes and other debts for several years and that some remain unresolved.  Though
noting that Applicant’s problems were affected by circumstances outside his control, the Judge
concluded that Applicant had not demonstrated responsible action in response to his debts.  He also
stated that Applicant did not corroborate his claim to have had financial counseling.  In the whole-
person analysis, the Judge noted evidence of Applicant’s years of service to the Government, both
in uniform and as a civilian.  He noted Applicant’s having held a clearance for many years without
issue or concern.  He also reiterated that Applicant’s debt problems were affected by his family
challenges, which was a circumstance beyond his control.  However, the Judge stated that Applicant
has demonstrated a history of placing his personal obligations over his duty to pay his debts.  The
Judge also stated that Applicant’s testimony was, in some significant regards, lacking in credibility. 
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s credibility determination.  He argues that his failure to have
disclosed some of the judgments against him was reasonable, in that he believed that he did not
actually owe the debts.  We give deference to a Judge’s credibility determination.  Directive ¶
E3.1.32.1.  See also ISCR Case No. 14-00998 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2015).  We note the Judge’s
finding that Applicant attended court hearings leading to the judgments and was aware of them, from
which a reasonable person could infer that Applicant knowingly omitted them from his application
because he did not want to draw attention to them.  Moreover, the Judge’s credibility determination
was also based on other aspects of Applicant’s presentation that the Judge found to be implausible.1 
On the whole, we find no reason to disturb the Judge’s credibility determination.  In any event, as
the Judge himself stated, he considered the omissions, along with Applicant’s state tax
delinquencies, in evaluating not only Applicant’s credibility but his case for mitigation and for the
whole-person analysis, which was within his authority.  See ISCR Case No. 13-00310 at 3 (App. Bd.
Aug. 15, 2013). 
1Applicant testified as to his belief that his delinquent second mortgage was incorporated into a 2012 refinancing
arrangement for his home.  The Judge concluded that this testimony lacked plausibility, in light of Applicant’s experience
in the real estate business.  He stated that incorporating such a large debt in a new mortgage “would have made a
noticeable difference regarding the terms of any new home loan.”  Decision at 6, note 9.  The Judge noted that Applicant
waited until after the issuance of the SOR to enter into a repayment plan for the delinquent second mortgage.    
3
Applicant contends that the Judge did not properly apply the whole-person concept, arguing
that the Judge did not extend appropriate weight to Applicant’s evidence about his family
circumstances.  He also argues that the Judge’s characterization of his business venture as “risky”
was not based on the record but, rather, on the Judge’s personal views of acceptable risk. 
Concerning the business venture, the Judge’s findings that Applicant invested the proceeds from a
second mortgage in a venture that failed, resulting in a $150,000 delinquency that remained
unresolved as of the close of the record supports his analysis of this matter.  The Judge gave
Applicant credit for circumstances outside his control.  However, given the extent to which
Applicant’s financial problems remained unresolved, the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had not
demonstrated responsible action is supportable.  Applicant’s argument on appeal is, in essence, an
alternative interpretation of the evidence, which is not sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the
evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
11-11920 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 24, 2014).  We conclude that the Judge made “a fair and impartial
common sense determination based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information”
in the record.  Directive ¶ 6.3.  Accordingly, we find no reason to conclude that the Judge’s whole-
person analysis contravened the requirements of the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-01328
at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 17, 2014).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
