 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02189 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s history of drug-related conduct, in particular, his use and possession 
of marijuana after he was granted eligibility for a security clearance, continues to raise 
security concerns. His lack of judgment and unwillingness to comply with the law raise 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on April 24, 2012. On 
August 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant stating security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement), 
Guideline J (criminal conduct), and Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant 
answered the SOR on August 22, 2014, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 27, 2015. The Defense 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on January 30, 
2015, scheduling a hearing for February 25, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted two exhibits (AE 1 and 
2). All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on March 9, 2015. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 At the hearing, the Government moved to amend the SOR by striking Paragraph 
3 in its entirety, and adding the following subparagraphs: ¶ 2.b. (cross-alleging SOR ¶ 
1.a), ¶ 2.c. (cross-alleging SOR ¶ 1.b), and ¶ 2.d. (cross-alleging SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant 
did not object and I granted the motion. (Appellate Exhibit 1) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the amended SOR allegations, with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, 
including his testimony and demeanor at hearing, I make the following additional 
findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old logistics analyst employed by a defense contractor. He 
graduated from high school in 1986, and enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1992. He was 
honorably discharged as a third class petty officer in 1998. He has been married for 19 
years and has two children, a daughter, age 22, and a son, age 14. Applicant’s 
daughter enlisted in the U.S. Air Force and is currently attending basic training.  
 
Applicant started working with his current employer, a government contractor, in 
1997, shortly before his discharge in 1998. He was granted a secret level security 
clearance in 2000. His clearance was revoked in 2008, because of some of the criminal 
incidents alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant’s security concerns are based on a number of criminal incidents. In 
1986, Applicant was charged with felony embezzlement. While working as a cashier, he 
allowed his friends to take merchandise without paying for it. He pled guilty to petit 
larceny, a misdemeanor offense, and was required to make restitution of $3,600. In 
1993, while in the Navy, Applicant was arrested for possession of a concealed weapon 
and marijuana. A shipmate admitted it was his weapon and marijuana, and Applicant 
was exonerated of any responsibility. 
 
In 2008, Applicant was charged with illegal possession of marijuana and drug 
paraphernalia. Applicant explained that he went fishing with a relative and they smoked 
a marijuana cigarette together. His relative left and Applicant stayed alone fishing. A 
police dog alerted to the presence of drugs in Applicant’s car and he was charged with 
possession of 17 grams of marijuana. Applicant pled not guilty, and claimed the 
 
3 
 
 
marijuana belonged to his relative. He was convicted of possession of marijuana. The 
sentence was suspended and he received probation before judgment. 
 
Applicant possessed a secret-level security clearance when he illegally smoked 
the marijuana cigarette in 2008. He reported the offense to his supervisors, and he was 
placed on psychiatric counseling for substance abuse by his employer. After successful 
completion of his counseling, Applicant returned to work, but his clearance was not 
reinstated.  
 
In 2011, Applicant was convicted of possession of marijuana. He explained that 
he was on his way to work on a Saturday morning when he was stopped by a police 
officer because his car windows were tinted too dark. When he opened the glove 
compartment searching for the car registration, a half-smoked marijuana cigar fell out. 
He was charged with possession of marijuana. Applicant pled not guilty, and claimed 
that it was not his marijuana cigar. He averred that his daughter’s friends likely left the 
marijuana cigar in his car when she borrowed it the night before. He was convicted and 
received probation before judgment. Applicant successfully completed the subsequent 
court-mandated substance abuse counseling. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant admitted he smoked marijuana in 2008, but claimed that 
the marijuana found in his car belonged to his relative. He denied that the marijuana 
cigar found in his car in 2011 was his or that he knew it was there.  
 
Applicant submitted his most recent SCA in April 2012. He disclosed his 2008 
and 2011 convictions for possession of marijuana, and that he used marijuana in 2008 
while possessing a security clearance. At his hearing, Applicant claimed that his last 
use of marijuana was in 2008. He denied using any other illegal drugs. He claimed he 
has not used marijuana since and does not intend to use marijuana, or any other illegal 
drugs, in the future. Applicant testified that his 2008 use of marijuana was a stupid 
mistake that he greatly regrets. He believes he let himself, his family, and his peers 
down because of his mistake. 
 
Applicant repeatedly expressed his need for a security clearance to retain his job 
and to be able to support his family. He noted that he is a highly regarded subject-
matter expert within his company. He provides direct logistics support to the Navy and 
deployed sailors. Applicant’s program manager confirmed his outstanding performance. 
In his opinion, Applicant has no equal in his job because of his dedication, knowledge, 
and outstanding support of the warfighters. He recommended Applicant receive access 
to classified information. 
 
Applicant testified that he was recently diagnosed with multiple sclerosis. He is 
taking medications, seldom consumes any alcohol, and he is living a healthier life doing 
exercise and eating well. He claimed he has learned his lesson, and that he changed 
his lifestyle to avoid illegal drugs.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant expressed regret and embarrassment for the irresponsibility he 
demonstrated with his illegal drug use. Because of his Navy service he knew that the 
use of marijuana was illegal and frowned upon by his employer.  
 
Applicant considers himself to be trustworthy, reliable, dependable, and a 
subject-matter expert. He highlighted that he was candid during the security clearance 
process. He noted his outstanding performance and his technical knowledge. Applicant 
also noted that his last marijuana-related conviction was in 2011. He believes that his 
completion of substance abuse treatment, the passage of time without any further 
misconduct, and his outstanding performance show his rehabilitation efforts, 
commitment, and good judgment.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
 
5 
 
 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt about a 
person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 In 1986, Applicant was charged with felony embezzlement. He pled guilty to petit 
larceny. In 1993, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of a weapon and 
marijuana. He was later exonerated when his shipmate took responsibility for the 
weapon and the marijuana. In 2008, Applicant illegally smoked marijuana while 
possessing a secret-level security clearance. He was convicted of possession of 17 
grams of marijuana and received probation before judgment. In 2011, Applicant was 
convicted of possession of a marijuana cigar and received probation before judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists two conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Considering the record as a whole, I find that both mitigating conditions partially 
apply, but do not fully mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s 1986, 2008, and 2011 
offenses were serious and violated the trust placed in him by his employers and the 
Government.  
 
 Because of his age, service, and job experience, Applicant knew that the use and 
possession of marijuana was illegal and against his employer’s and the Government’s 
 
6 
 
 
policies. Applicant’s criminal conduct violated the trust placed in him by his employers 
and the Government. There is no evidence of Applicant being involved in any additional 
criminal conduct after 2011. Applicant’s good service to his employer and the United 
States during the last four years serves as some evidence of his possible rehabilitation.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s past criminal behavior is aggravated by his service 
experience and his experience working for a government contractor and possessing a 
security clearance. Applicant knew that his use and possession of marijuana would 
adversely impact his eligibility for a clearance and his job. Nevertheless, Applicant used 
and possessed marijuana in 2008 and 2011. His actions demonstrate lack of judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It shows Applicant’s lack of reform and rehabilitation after 
2008, and his unwillingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 In 2008, Applicant illegally smoked marijuana while possessing a secret level 
security clearance. He was convicted of possession of 17 grams of marijuana and 
received probation before judgment. He participated in substance abuse psychiatric 
treatment. In 2011, Applicant was convicted of possession of a marijuana cigar and 
received probation before judgment. He used marijuana knowing it constituted a criminal 
offense to do so. He used marijuana knowing his employer and the Government had a 
policy against it. He used marijuana after he was granted a secret level security clearance 
in 2000, and knowing that his illegal use of marijuana could adversely impact his eligibility 
to hold a clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and are applicable in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 26 provides three potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
For the same reasons discussed above under the Guideline J, incorporated here, 
I find that none of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s most 
recent possession of marijuana conviction occurred in 2011. As such, his illegal drug-
related behavior could be considered somewhat dated. However, Applicant illegally 
used marijuana in 2008 – 10 years after he started working for his employer and after 
possessing a clearance for eight years. Applicant had full knowledge of his employer’s 
and the Government’s policies against illegal drug use. He was placed on notice of the 
illegality of use and possession of marijuana when he was arrested and charged for 
possession of marijuana in 1993. (He was later exonerated of that charge.) He was 
made aware of the Government’s security concerns about the use of illegal drugs when 
he completed his security clearance applications. Moreover, his clearance was revoked 
in 2008 for his marijuana-related offenses. Notwithstanding, he illegally possessed 
marijuana again in 2011.  
 
I considered Applicant’s age, experience, and maturity at the time of the 
offenses. I also considered that he received substance abuse treatment after his 
convictions in 2008 and 2011. I further considered Applicant’s claims that the marijuana 
in 2008 belonged to his relative, and that he did not know the marijuana cigar was in his 
car, and that it was not his. Notwithstanding his assertions, Applicant was convicted by 
a court of both offenses. On balance, I find that Applicant failed to establish his 
rehabilitation and that his illegal drug behavior is not likely to recur. At this time, his 
illegal drug behavior continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
judgment, and his ability to comply with the law, rules and regulations.  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant promised to never use or possess illegal drugs in the future. Applicant 
was aware of the criminal prohibition against the illegal use and possession of 
marijuana, and of the adverse consequences to his ability to hold a security clearance 
or his job if he illegally used or possessed drugs. That did not stop him from possessing 
and using marijuana. Applicant’s illegal drug use and possession are a violation of the 
trust placed in him by his employer and the Government.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a government contractor. Notwithstanding 
his outstanding work performance, his history of drug-related criminal conduct, in 
particular his use and possession of marijuana after he was hired by his employer and 
granted a security clearance, continues to raise security concerns. Considering the 
evidence as a whole, Applicant’s lack of judgment and unwillingness to comply with the 
law raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
