1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-03862
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David Hayes,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On January 3, 2015, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 10, 2015.  A notice of
hearing was issued on April 3, 2015, scheduling the case for April 28, 2015.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant
testified and presented eight documents for the record (AX A-H). I kept the record open
for a submission. Applicant timely submitted three pages from her debit account, which
was marked as (AX I). The transcript was received on May 6, 2015. Based on a review
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
2
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied six of the SOR allegations under
Guideline F, with explanation. Applicant admitted the remaining accounts and explained
that some were paid.
Applicant is 33 years old. She graduated from high school in 1998 and attended
community college courses. She is a records management specialist. Applicant
divorced in 2012, and she has two children from the marriage. Applicant has been with
her current employer for about three years. She believes that she has had a clearance
since 2002.
 The SOR alleges 12 delinquent debts, including judgments, medical accounts,
collection accounts, and a car repossession totaling about $23,000. The credit reports
confirm the delinquent debts. (GX 2-4)
Applicant explained that her financial difficulties, including (SOR 1.m). The
Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition discharged in July 2004, is the result of her husband’s
unemployment throughout the marriage. (Tr. 18) Since her divorce in 2011, Applicant
has not received any child support. (Tr. 8) She also incurred legal fees for the divorce.
(Tr. 31)
The Government stipulated that the delinquent accounts in the SOR have been
paid, and Applicant has submitted proof of payment. The accounts that are paid are
SOR 1.b,1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.j. (AX A-B-C-D)
As to SOR allegation 1.a, Applicant states that this is the largest account that is
delinquent. Applicant co-signed a loan for a truck that her husband used. She made
payments on the truck until the divorce. (AX I) Applicant’s former husband promised to
make payments as he was in possession of the truck. She gave the creditor her
husband’s information, but she is not sure that he is making payments. She reports that
the truck had engine trouble and her husband voluntarily returned the truck. The
amount in question is $9,530 for the charged-off account. She has no other knowledge
of the matter. Applicant submitted proof the payments that she made. (Tr. 16) The debt
in SOR 1.a is the same as 1.k, who was the original creditor. (AX I) Applicant has not
been contacted by the creditor to learn what the balance is after the truck was sold. (Tr.
26) She is willing to contact them to seek a resolution to the problem.
As to the SOR allegation 1.c, Applicant submitted post-hearing documentation
that the account in the amount of $250 has been paid. (AX I) I accept that the debt is
paid.
Applicant denied the accounts in 1.g ($37); 1.h ($469); 1.i $(65); and 1.l ($800).
She contacted the creditors but could not obtain any information. She believes that
these accounts might have been her husband’s responsibility. (Tr. 30) She is willing to
seek a resolution to the accounts as she wants to settle or arrange  payment plans. (Tr.
3
32) Before the security investigation, she had no idea that these accounts were on her
credit report. (Tr. 33) Her plan is to repair her credit and make payments on debts.
Applicant’s current position is stable. Her net monthly income is $5,642. After her
daily expenses and debt payments for her car and two credit cards, she has a net
monthly remainder of about $935. She has a roommate who provides her with $800 a
month for rent. She has a 401(k). Applicant uses a budget  and  is current with all her
expenses.  (AX E) uses a budget. 
Applicant submitted a character reference from her branch chief, who has known
her for 15 years. He describes Applicant as professional, trustworthy, and efficient.
According to her chief, Applicant has always abided by the rules and regulations and
respects classified information. He knows about the financial considerations security
concerns and believes that the issues were caused by circumstances beyond her
control. She is acting in a responsible fashion to remedy and resolve the financial
issues. (AX H)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
5
Applicant had delinquent debts. Her credit reports confirm the debts. She also
had a 2004 bankruptcy discharge when she was married. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns.  
Applicant incurred delinquent debt due to her former husband’s frequent
unemployment and 2012 divorce. She receives no child support and is raising two
children. She has paid many debts and was making payments on the largest debt for
years until the divorce. She is current on her expenses. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) partially applies.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
applies.  As noted above, Applicant’s financial difficulties are a combination of her
husband’s lack of financial responsibility, divorce, and single parenthood. She was the
sole provider during most of the marriage. She acted responsibly by paying her bills,
including the truck that was in the possession of her husband.  He has not made any
payments. She contacted creditors when she learned about the delinquent accounts
during the security investigation. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) has limited application. Applicant provided proof
that she has paid many of the delinquent accounts. She has made significant efforts
and has provided documentation of her payments. She presented a post-hearing
submission that confirms that the majority of the debts are paid. Her plan is to seek a
resolution to the remaining accounts.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are  clear indications that the
problem is being resolved, or is under control) applies.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
6
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 33 years old. She has held a security clearance since 2000. She has a
favorable letter of recommendation from her  employer. She has had no security
incidents. She is a single parent who provides for her children and does not receive
child support.  
Applicant states that the majority of her financial difficulties stem from her
husband’s lack of employment and the divorce. She paid on the largest debt (the truck)
that was returned to the company) until the divorce. She has paid many of the other
accounts. She contacted creditors. She has not ignored her situation. Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. She has
met her burden of proof. 
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
7
