                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  14-03635           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated security concerns covering personal conduct, but did not mitigate
the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On August 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR (undated), and requested a hearing. The case
was assigned to me on February 5, 2015, and was scheduled for hearing on March 25,
2015. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and two exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on April 6, 2015.  
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of his satisfaction
of the judgment covered by subparagraph 1.o. (Tr. 32-33) 
For good cause shown, Applicant was granted five days to supplement the record.
Department Counsel was afforded two days to respond. Applicant did not supplement the
record.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly incurred three judgments exceeding $3,500
and 21 delinquent debts exceeding $21,000. Based on the SOR, none of the alleged
judgments or debts have been paid or satisfied.
Under Guideline E, applicant allegedly falsified the security clearance application
(e-QIP) he completed in February 2013 by omitting the adverse judgments entered
against him and certain delinquent debts placed for collection. Each of these alleged
omitted debts preceded the completion of his e-QIP.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations. He denied
the allegations pertaining to the judgments covered by subparagraphs 1.o-1.q, claiming
that these judgments were already paid. He claimed he has monthly installment
agreements in place with creditors 1.a and 1.b. He claimed that several debts are
medically-related and occurred during a time when he was uninsured. He claimed that the
debt covered by subparagraph1.s represents the same debt covered by subparagraphs
1.a and 1.b. And he claimed he will address his remaining debts listed in the SOR. 
Addressing his e-QIP omissions, Applicant claimed he was not aware of the
creditor 1.o judgment when he completed the application, but provided the information in
his ensuing interview. He claimed he did not have all of the necessary information at the
time to complete the section about his remaining debts, but provided this information, too,
in his ensuing interview.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 29-year-old pipe-fitter for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
3
Background
Applicant is unmarried and has one child. (GE 1) He claimed no post-high school
educational credits or military service. (GE 1)
Applicant’s finances
Between 2007 and 2010, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts.
Several of these listed creditors reduced their debt claims to judgments: one in July 2007
for $764 (creditor 1.r), another in October 2007 for $1,283 (creditor 1.p), one in May 2008
for $2,200 (creditor 1.o), and another in August 2008 for $139 (creditor 1.q). Two of these
judgments have since been paid: creditors 1.p and 1.q. (AEs A and B) The two remaining
judgments remain outstanding. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 38-40)
Besides the debts covered by judgments, Applicant accrued other delinquent debts
during recurrent periods of unemployment between December 2009 and June 2010, and
again between August and September 2012 following a seizure. (GE 1; Tr. 34, 41) Three
of these accrued debts represent student loans: creditors 1.a-1.b and 1.s. Together, they
constitute one aggregate student loan of approximately $12,000. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 50-52)
None of the remaining debts, however, have been paid or covered by documented
repayment plans.  
Several of the listed debts involve medical bills related to Applicant’s seizure
incident in 2012 when he did not have insurance coverage. (Tr. 41-43) These medical-
related debts are owed to creditors 1.c, 1.e-1.g and 1.i-1.m and exceed $2,700. (GEs 2-3)
Payment documentation is lacking with respect to each of these medical debts. 
Applicant’s creditor 1.a-1.b and creditor 1.s student loan debts were at one time
covered by monthly installment arrangements. It is not clear when Applicant last made
payments on any of these loans. For none of them are documented with payment
histories. (Tr. 36-37, 45-46, 50-52) Afforded the opportunity to supplement the record to
provide receipts, Applicant did not do so. As a consequence, none of these debts can be
credited with recent payments
      
At this time, it is unclear what payment arrangements Applicant is prepared to
make with his individual creditors. He has no documented creditor contacts or payment
arrangements with his listed creditors, except for the judgments covered by
subparagraphs 1.p and 1.q, which Applicant has satisfied. While he assured he will
contact the listed creditors in the SOR to arrange for individual payment plans, he
provided no proof of his doing so. (Tr. 43-35, 46-48)  
All of Applicant’s remaining listed creditors remain unpaid and unresolved. With his
limited income, no inferences can be drawn at this point as to how Applicant will choose
to resolve his debts. He has not, to date, consulted with any credit counseling firm, and
expressed no intention of doing so in the foreseeable future.
4
e-QIP omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in February 2013, Applicant omitted the four
judgments entered against him in 2007 and 2008, (GEs 1-3) In the same e-QIP, he also
omitted the delinquent debts referred for collection and covered by subparagraphs 1.a-
1.b, 1.o, and 1.s-1.t. (GEs 1-3) Applicant attributed his omissions to unawareness and
lack of information necessary to answer the questions. Applicant’s explanations are
credible and are accepted.  
When asked about his delinquent debts in his first interview with an agent from a
federal agency (likely, the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)), Applicant fully
disclosed his debt delinquencies without any known confronting. Any evidence to
challenge his claims is not available.
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide any endorsements. Nor did he furnish any evidence of
community and civic contributions.
                      
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that could
mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be considered before deciding
whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
5
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
6
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts,
attributable in part to his recurrent periods of unemployment between 2009 and 2012
and a seizure he experienced in 2012, at a time when he lacked medical insurance.
Most of the listed judgment debts and other debts remain unpaid and unresolved.
Security concerns are also raised over Applicant’s omission of an incurred judgment
and certain delinquent debts referred to collection. 
Financial concerns
Applicant’s actions reflect ongoing difficulties in managing his finances. His
actions warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs:
DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not
meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s payment problems stem mostly from income deficits he experienced
during recurrent periods of unemployment and from medical incidents that occurred
when he had no medical insurance. Applicant’s mounting financial burdens have
continued to affect his ability to catch up with his old debts. His past financial problems
merit partial application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
Because Applicant has not developed any meaningful payment plans or other
means for resolving his remaining debts since he returned to full-time employment in
September 2012, full application of MC ¶ 20(b) is not available to him. Absent any
documented evidence of repayment initiatives or efforts to otherwise resolve his
remaining judgment debts and outstanding debts, Applicant may not take advantage of
7
MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.”
To date, Applicant has not provided any documented evidence of his contacting
his creditors and arranging for individual payment plans. Prospects for him doing so in
the foreseeable future, given his track record to date, are difficult to gauge. Currently, he
lacks any established payment initiatives, credit counseling, or payment plans to assist
him in addressing his debts. 
Without more tangible resources and initiatives to work with, Applicant cannot
demonstrate the level of financial progress required to meet the criteria established by
the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial
condition with responsible efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No.
08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant’s lack of any repayment actions to
date with the resources available to him prevent him from meeting the Appeal Board’s
requirements for demonstrating financial stability. ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd.
May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007)(citing
ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant failed to adequately document any
positive steps taken within the past three years to restore his finances to stable levels
commensurate with holding a security clearance. To date, Applicant has failed to
demonstrate sufficient progress in addressing his listed debts consistent with meeting
overall requirements for holding a security clearance. Whole-person assessment is less
helpful to Applicant without any endorsements and evidence of contributions to his
employer and his community to weigh.
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s payment history and
other features of his employment and personal profile, his actions to date in addressing
his finances are insufficient to meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline
governing his finances. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a-1.o, and 1.r-1-y of Guideline F. Favorable
conclusions are warranted with respect to subparagraphs 1.p-1.q. 
Personal conduct concerns
In the process of completing an e-QIP in February 2013, Applicant omitted his
judgments and delinquent debts that had either been charged off, assigned for
collection, or which were over 120 days delinquent. Applicant’s “no” answers were
based on his uncertainty at the time as to the identities of the debts and whether they
had reached charge-off, collection, or 120-day delinquent status. Security concerns over
Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are raised under Guideline E as the
result of his omissions of his judgments and delinquent debts in the e-QIP he completed
in February 2013. By his statements and actions, Applicant placed in issue his judgment
and fiducial commitment to safeguarding classified and other sensitive materials. 
8
Applicant’s “no” answers regarding his debt delinquencies in his 2013 e-QIP were
made without any demonstrated knowledge of any outstanding judgments and
information that would enable him to establish the creditor identities and payment status
of the listed debts in the SOR at issue (i.e., whether charged off, in collection, or over
120 delinquent within the past seven years or currently 120 days delinquent). Due
diligence on his part should have prompted him to investigate the condition of his debts
to ensure accurate reporting. 
Certainly, Applicant’s negative responses lacked any due diligence research or
investigation on his part. Still, his “no” answers lack any probative proof of motive
required to establish specific intent to conceal. His negative responses to the financial
questions inquiring about his outstanding judgments and debt delinquencies were not
accompanied by any signs or indicia of a desire to conceal debts from evaluators
assessing the information provided in his e-QIP. In his unverified response to the SOR,
he denied any awareness of one of the judgments and claimed he did not have the
identities and information pertaining to his listed delinquent debts to fill out the section
properly. At hearing, neither the Government nor Applicant provided any additional
evidence about  Applicant’s  state of mind when he completed his e-QIP.
Under the facts and circumstances of this case, Applicant’s omissions were
never established to be either knowing nor willful. His e-QIP responses were based on
inadequate knowledge and information about the identities and status of his creditors.
While yes answers with explanations of his uncertainty about the status of some
potentially delinquent accounts meeting the question’s criteria would have better served
himself and the Government, Applicant’s no answers do not reflect any knowing and
willful intent to conceal.
To the extent mitigating considerations are necessary to correct any due
diligence lapses associated with Applicant responses to the financial questions covered
in his e-QIP, Applicant’s volunteered corrections meet the prompt, good-faith
requirements of MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct
the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts,” as
well as the infrequent, unique circumstances requirements of MC ¶ 17(c), “the offense is
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened
under such unique circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Both MC ¶ 17(a) and  MC
¶ 17(c) of Guideline E apply to Applicant’s situation. 
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s withholding of
material information about his financial status in the e-QIP he completed and his
corrections and clarifications in his ensuing interview (likely with an OPM agent), his
explanations and timing of his corrections are sufficient to convincingly refute and
mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations. Questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, are each core policy
concerns of the personal conduct guideline (AG ¶ 15). 
9
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding his February 2013 e-QIP
omissions and ensuing accounts, Applicant’s  omissions of judgments and delinquent
debts attributed to him are refuted as to any knowing and willful omissions. Any imputed
due diligence lapses associated with his omissions are mitigated.
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is sufficient to demonstrate that
Applicant has mounted responsible, good-faith efforts to provide accurate background
information to the Government in the 2013 e-QIP he completed. In making a whole-
person assessment, careful consideration was given to the respective burdens of proof
established in Egan (supra), the AGs, and the facts and circumstances of this case in
the context of the whole person. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b. 
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.o, and 1.r-1.y:      Against Applicant
Subparas. 1.p-1.q:      For Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):              FOR APPLICANT
          Subparas. 2.a-2-b:                                        For Applicant
      C  o   n  c  l u  s  i o  n s         
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
11
