KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: The Appeal Board cannot consider new evidence.  Neither can it consider the effect
that an unfavorable decision may have on an applicant.  A Judge must evaluate the evidence as a
cumulative whole.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 14-02496.a1
DATE: 05/14/2015
DATE: May 14, 2015
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 14-02496
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On July 18, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline B
(Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 13, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s
request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline C are not
at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was born in Israel.  He served in the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) for four years. 
Applicant came to the U.S. in the late 1980s, where he received a bachelor’s degree, and became a
U.S. citizen in the mid-1990s.  Applicant’s wife is a native U.S. citizen, as are his three offspring. 
One of the children went to Israel at age 18, becoming an Israeli citizen and joining the IDF.  This
child, with whom Applicant maintains daily contact, is currently employed by the IDF.  
Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of Israel, as is his sibling, who retired after a
career in the IDF.  Applicant contacts his mother weekly and his sibling monthly.  Applicant and
his mother jointly own a bank account is Israel, worth about $40,000.  His joint ownership is to
facilitate access in the event of an emergency involving his mother.  
Applicant traveled to Israel to visit family seven times between 2003 and 2013.  Each time
he used an Israeli passport.  Applicant surrendered his passport to his Facility Security Officer and
obtained a letter from the Israeli Consul General’s office permitting him to enter and exit Israel
without it.
During his subject interview, Applicant stated that he would never relinquish Israeli
citizenship and that he is an “Israeli first.”  Decision at 3.  At the hearing he stated that he did not
recall making that statement but did not deny that he had done so.  A summary of Applicant’s
second interview shows that Applicant said that he holds no allegiance to one country over another
and that his allegiance to Israel is such that he would give his life to protect that country.    
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for trustworthiness and dependability.  One witness,
his rabbi, stated that Applicant’s loyalty to the U.S. is unquestionable.  Another witness provided
a similar opinion.
Israel is a close ally of the U.S., and the U.S. is its largest trading partner.  The two countries
participate in joint military planning and training and have collaborated on military research and
weapons development.  Israel is a “major practitioner” of industrial espionage against the U.S.  Id.
at 4.  The U.S. has disagreed with Israel about its sale of U.S. and Israeli technologies to other
countries, such as China and Russia.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge cleared Applicant of the Guideline C allegations.  However, he reached the
opposite conclusion under Guideline B.  He noted that Guideline B concerns are not limited to those
involving countries hostile to the U.S.  He concluded that Applicant’s Israeli family members,
viewed alongside their military connections, raised a “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation as
2
well as a potential conflict of interest.  In evaluating Applicant’s case for mitigation, the Judge cited
to Applicant’s foreign relatives, two of whom have military connections, and to Israel’s status as a
collector of U.S. proprietary information.  The Judge also noted Applicant’s strong ties to Israel,
concluding that Applicant’s “divided allegiances” suggest that he would not necessarily resolve
conflicts of interest in favor of the U.S.1  Id. at 9.  He concluded that Applicant had not rebutted the
presumption that his contact with his foreign relatives is not casual.  In the whole-person analysis,
the Judge cited to evidence that Applicant has previously held public trust positions without
incident.  However, he concluded that Applicant had not met his burden of persuasion regarding the
trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline B.
Discussion
Applicant’s brief makes assertions from outside the record, which we cannot consider. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  He argues that, without a trustworthiness designation, he will not have a job. 
We are not permitted to consider the impact that an adverse decision may have on an applicant.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03497 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 9, 2015).  
Applicant cites to evidence about his child who became an Israeli citizen, arguing that he has
no control over this relative’s actions.  However, the Judge’s decision does not rest solely or even
primarily on this relative but on the totality of the evidence–Applicant’s foreign relatives, their
military connections, and official notice material about the geopolitical situation concerning Israel. 
Judges are required to consider the evidence as a cumulative whole in deciding whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 14-00860 at 2 (App. Bd.
Mar. 12, 2015).  The Decision in this case shows that the Judge complied with this requirement in
reaching his ultimate conclusion.  See ISCR Case No.13-00917 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2014); see also
ADP Case No. 11-04085 at 2 (App. Bd. May 13, 2013) (The Judge analyzed the applicant’s
circumstances as a whole in concluding that he had not met his burden of persuasion as to
mitigation).  Applicant’s argument is not enough to show that the Judge weighed the evidence in a
manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 14-00700 at 2
(App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2014).   
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness
cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding
security clearances:  such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013). 
See also Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
1See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 6: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a . . . concern if the individual has
divided loyalties . . . may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”  
3
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan             
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                  
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
