KEYWORD: Guideline f
DIGEST: The Board does not read sentences in isolation.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-00714.a1
DATE: 05/27/2015
DATE: May 27, 2015
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00714
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 25, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 11, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Edward W. Loughran denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  Married with two adult children, he has held his
current employment since August 2013.  Applicant has a bachelor’s degree.  
Applicant has several delinquent debts, including a Federal tax lien for $15,797, filed against
him in 2007.  Applicant stated that he owes about $35,000 for tax years 2003, 2004, 2007, and 2011. 
The IRS has agreed to a repayment plan of $712 a month.  This plan has yet to be implemented,
because someone filed a tax return in Applicant’s name in 2013.  After this is resolved, Applicant
will start paying the IRS.  The IRS levied about $3,000 from his wages.  
Applicant also fell behind on his mortgage payments during a period of unemployment.  He
and his wife filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  The petition was dismissed and refiled several more
times until it was finally dismissed in 2008.  The house was eventually lost to foreclosure.
Applicant has several judgments against him.  One was in favor of his landlord in 2009. 
Applicant has made no payments on this judgment and has been unable to locate the landlord, who
has moved to another state.  Applicant has also had two vehicles repossessed, resulting in deficiency
balances.  He has offered to settle, but the creditors have not accepted his offers.  Applicant has
settled another debt and entered into a repayment plan for yet another, and he paid a delinquent
parking ticket from 2008 in May 2014.  Applicant has other debts that he has not resolved.
Applicant states that his financial problems began with his and his wife’s periods of
unemployment.  He also incurred expenses connected with his father’s funeral.  He believes that his
finances have improved since he started his job.  He has received financial counseling.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted evidence of unemployment and Applicant’s father’s funeral expenses,
which he concluded were beyond Applicant’s control.  However, he also concluded that Applicant
had not demonstrated responsible action in regard to his debts.  The Judge characterized Applicant’s
presentation as a promise to pay debts in the future, which is not a substitute for a track record of
debt resolution.  He stated that the evidence was not sufficient to show that Applicant’s debts will
be resolved within a reasonable time.  The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial problems are
ongoing and continue to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
2
Discussion
Applicant argues that he cannot begin to pay his delinquent taxes until he resolves the
questions surrounding the fraudulent filing of his 2013 return, citing to his testimony in which he
advised the Judge of this matter.  He states that he did not know that he had to resolve all of his debts
within a specific period of time.  An applicant does not have to be debt-free or develop a plan for
paying all of his debts immediately.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29,
2014).   Applicant points to one sentence in which the Judge stated that Applicant’s debts did not
appear to be on track for payment within a reasonable time.  We do not read sentences in isolation.
We do not interpret the challenged language as meaning that the Judge contravened settled
precedent.  Rather, we take it to mean that Applicant’s case in chief consisted essentially of promises
for future debt resolution, with little to show by way of an existing and  meaningful track record.  
 See, e. g., ISCR Case No. 11-04176 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2012) (Promises to pay off delinquent
debts in the future are not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and
otherwise acting in a financially responsible manner).  The Judge made findings about Applicant’s
2013 tax problem and other evidence favorable to him.  However, given the evidence and analysis
as a whole, the Judge’s adverse decision is consistent with the record that was before him.  Applicant
has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence or that he mis-
weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01941 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 30, 2015).     
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
