 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-00480 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 20, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 31, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested that her case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on March 12, 2015. On that same date, the FORM was forwarded to Applicant.  
Applicant received the FORM on March 20, 2015. She had 30 days to submit a 
response to the FORM. She timely submitted a Response to FORM which is admitted 
as Item 4. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s Response to FORM. 
Department Counsel’s Response to Applicant’s Response to FORM is admitted as Item 
5.  On April 23, 2015, the FORM was forwarded to the hearing office and was assigned 
to me on April 24, 2015.    
 
2 
 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.h 
and 2.a – 2.b. She denies SOR allegations 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. (Item 1) 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old female employed by a Department of Defense 
contractor, seeking to obtain a security clearance.  Applicant has been employed with 
the company since April 2014. Prior to her current employment, she worked for a 
different defense contractor from 1997 to 2014. She is married and has two adult 
children, a daughter and a son. She has a high school diploma. (Item 2)   
 
Applicant completed an electronic questionnaires for investigations processing 
(e-QIP) on August 14, 2013. (Item 2) When completing her e-QIP, Applicant answered, 
“No” in response to section 26, Financial Record, “Other than previously listed, have 
any of the following happened to you? …Delinquency Involving Enforcement: “In the 
past 7 years, have you had a judgment entered against you?” (Item 2, Section 26). 
 
Applicant also answered, “No” in response to section 26, Financial Record, 
“Other than previously listed, have any of the following happened to you?...Delinquency 
Involving Routine Accounts: In the past seven (7) years, you had bills, turned over to a 
collection agency? …you had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? …you have been over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt not previously entered?... and you are currently over 120 days delinquent on 
any debt?.” (Item 2, section 26)  
 
   Applicant’s background investigation revealed eight delinquent accounts, a 
total approximate balance of $53,669.00. (Item 3) It is alleged Applicant deliberately 
failed to list the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a in response to the question pertaining to 
judgments in section 26 of the e-QIP (SOR ¶ 2.a) and that she deliberately failed to list 
her delinquent accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.h in response to section 26, 
Delinquency Involving Routine Accounts on her e-QIP, dated August 14, 2013. (SOR ¶ 
2.b)   
 
The delinquent accounts include an $8,200 judgment entered against Applicant 
in May 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 1 at 3, 5, 6; Item 3 at 1); a $14,737 account placed for 
collection (SOR ¶  1.b: Item 1 at 3, 7, 8); an $8,270 account placed for collection (SOR 
¶ 1.c: Item 1 at 3, 5); a $2,280 delinquent credit card account placed for collection (SOR 
¶ 1.d: Item 1 at 3, 10); a $7,211 charged-off account (SOR ¶ 1.e:  Item 1 at 3); a $7,379 
delinquent account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 1 at 3; Item 3 at 2); a $4,054 
delinquent account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.g:  Item 1 at 3; Item 3 at 2-3); and a 
$1,518 delinquent account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 3 at 2, 3, and 11).  
 
 
3 
 
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant states that when she completed her e-QIP in 
August 2013, she answered the questions truthfully to the best of her knowledge. She 
claims her husband did not tell her about some of the delinquent accounts. Her financial 
problems arose from her husband losing his full-time job in 2008. Finding other 
employment was difficult. He has been working part-time jobs for years. In order to deal 
with the loss of income, Applicant took out a loan against her 401(k) to pay her bills. 
She has since paid the loan back. In 2010, she and her husband modified their home 
mortgage to reduce the monthly payment. She believed their financial issues were 
finally under control. (Item 1)  
 
In 2012, Applicant’s son and his infant daughter moved into the household. 
Applicant’s granddaughter has medical issues. Applicant and her husband help out with 
baby food, diapers, and clothes for the baby. She and her husband share childcare 
responsibilities with her son by working different hours. Each person takes a turn during 
the day to care for the baby while the other two people work. (Item 1)  
 
Over the past few years, Applicant was employed in a position that allowed no 
room for promotion. Her company’s health insurance also increased yearly. On April 1, 
2014, she started a new job with better wages and with savings on health insurance. 
(Item 1)  
 
Applicant intends to contact each creditor to set up payment plans or attempt to 
consolidate. She claims some of the debts are duplicates. The status of the delinquent 
debts are as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: $8,220 judgment filed against Applicant in May 2010. Applicant 
states that she has been making payments since May 2010. She provided a copy of the 
payment agreement, but she did not provide proof documenting that she was making 
the monthly payments such as receipts, bank records, etc.  (Item 1 at 3, 5-6; Item 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $14,737 account placed for collection. Applicant disputed the amount 
owed. Applicant is trying to come to an agreement with the collection agency. However, 
she had not heard from them at the close of the record. (Item 1 at 3, 7-8; Item 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $8,270 account placed for collection. Applicant claims this is a 
duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. It appears the same account number that is 
alleged in the SOR ¶ 1.c is listed on the correspondence from the law office 
representing the company who entered the judgment against Applicant alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.a.  SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c are duplicates.  I find for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: $2,280 account placed for collection. Applicant states that they have 
entered into a payment agreement with the company on July 31, 2014. She provided a 
copy of the payment agreement. She agreed to pay $50 on the 30th of each month 
beginning on July 30, 2014. In her response to the FORM, Applicant certifies that she is 
making payments in accordance with the agreement. However, she did not provide 
 
4 
 
 
proof that she was making these payments, such as receipts, bank records, or 
verification from the attorney’s office of her payment history. (Item 1 at 3, 10; Item 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $7,211 charged off account. Applicant claims this is the same 
account as the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. I am unable to conclude from the record that 
this is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. (Item 1 at 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: $7,379 account placed for collection. Applicant claims this is the same 
debt as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. I am unable to conclude from the record that this is a  
duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Item 3 at 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g: $4,054 account placed for collection. Applicant claims this is the 
same debt as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d.  I am unable to conclude from the record that this is 
a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. (Item 1 at 4)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: $1,518 account placed for collection. Applicant entered into a  
payment plan on July 31, 2014. She agreed to pay $25 each month. In her response to 
the FORM, Applicant certifies that she has been making the payments. However, she 
did not provide additional evidence to verify this assertion such as receipts, bank 
statements, or a payment history from the creditor. (Item 1 at 4, 11, Item 4)  
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits that she did not list her financial 
issues in response to section 26 of the e-QIP. She also states that her husband 
withheld financial information from her. Her husband pays the household bills and she 
thought some of the debts had been paid. (Item 1 at 2-3) She misunderstood the 
questions pertaining to judgments. She and her husband entered into a payment 
agreement with the creditor. They never attended court. She did not believe the 
remaining debts were far behind. (Item 1 at 2-3) 
 
Applicant has been a contractor for over 29 years. She has been a good 
employee. She is saddened that she is now looked at as a risk. She promises to make 
payments in monthly installments until the debts are paid. She is not a position to pay 
the creditors in full. (Item 4)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
5 
 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
6 
 
 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts 
that she has been unable or unwilling to pay over the past several years. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Although Applicant maintains that she is on payment plans to resolve the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.h, she did not provide any documentation that she is regularly 
making payments towards these payment plans. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.d – 1.h are unresolved.  Applicant’s unresolved debt indicates irresponsible behavior 
and continues to cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies because Applicant’s 
husband lost his job in 2008 and has only found part-time work since that time. 
Applicant also took in her son and granddaughter who has medical issues.  Applicant 
encountered circumstances beyond her control which caused some financial problems. 
However, I cannot conclude that she acted responsibly under the circumstances 
because she provided no proof verifying her statement that she is making payments on 
three of her debts. The record evidence is insufficient to conclude Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG & 20(b) does not apply. 
  
     AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. While it 
appears Applicant has taken steps to resolve three of her delinquent debts by entering 
into payment plans with three of her creditors, she did not provide proof that she is 
making payments towards these payments on a regular basis. Several of the debts 
remain unresolved at the close of the record.  I am also unable to conclude that 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control because she provided no information 
about her monthly budget, including her monthly income and expenses.  AG & 20(c) 
does not apply.    
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. While Applicant maintains she entered into 
payment plans with three of her creditors SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d and 1.h, she did not provide 
 
7 
 
 
sufficient proof that she is regularly making payments towards those debts. The debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g are unresolved. Applicant failed to provide 
sufficient proof that she is making a good-faith effort to resolve the delinquent accounts.  
 
Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated.    
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because Applicant did not list all of her 
delinquent debts, including a judgment and accounts that were charged off or 
transferred to a collection agency, in response to section 26 of her e-QIP application. 
This raises the following Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition: 
 
AG &16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities) 
 
 For AG &16(a) to apply the omission must be intentional. I find Applicant’s 
omissions were not intentional. While she admits she answered section 26 incorrectly, 
she did not intend to deceive the government about her financial situation.  She did not 
think that she had to list the judgment in response to section 26 because she was 
making payments towards the judgment. She may not have understood that the creditor 
obtained a judgment against her based on her explanation that she never went to court.  
With regard to her charged off accounts, her husband paid the bills. She was unaware 
that several of these accounts were delinquent. She had no intent to falsify her e-QIP 
application. Guideline E is found for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered there were 
circumstances beyond her control which contributed to Applicant’s financial problems, 
including her husband’s inability to find full-time employment and granddaughter’s 
medical issues.    
 
The concern under financial considerations is not only about individuals who are 
prone to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Another concern is that failure to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations which raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. In other words, if individuals have trouble managing their finances, this can 
raise doubts about their ability to handle and protect classified information. Applicant’s 
history of financial problems raises doubts about her ability to handle and protect 
classified information. Mindful of my duty to resolve cases where there is doubt in favor 
of national security, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the concerns raised under financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b, 1.d – 1.h: Against  Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         
     _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
