 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
                                                              
           
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-00923 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges three charged-off accounts 
totaling $13,110 and a foreclosed $225,000 mortgage account. He paid one debt, has 
an established payment plan on one debt, and received an Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) Form 1099-A on his mortgage debt, indicating the fair market value of the 
foreclosed property was greater than principal outstanding. He provided sufficient 
documentation showing his progress resolving his financial problems. Financial 
considerations concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 20, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 4) On April 30, 2014, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national security to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On May 13, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived his 
right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated September 3, 2014, was provided to him on September 9, 2014.1 On September 
23, 2014, Applicant responded to the FORM and provided additional mitigating 
evidence. On April 1, 2015, Department Counsel did not object to my consideration of 
the additional evidence. On April 27, 2015, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility for the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d, and he said he believed he paid off the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. (Item 3) 
He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. (Item 3) His admissions are 
accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old facilities technician and carpenter, who has worked for 
a defense contractor since August 2003.3 He has not attended college in the previous 
10 years, and he did not disclose any degrees. He never served in the military. In 1997, 
he married, and his children were born in 1992, 1998, and 2003. There is no evidence 
of disciplinary problems with his employer, illegal drug use, criminal offenses, or alcohol 
abuse. 
   
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law has cancer, and Applicant and his spouse moved into 
his home to assist him.4 Applicant and his spouse had three offers to purchase 
Applicant’s home; however, the offers were too low to cover Applicant’s mortgage and 
equity loan. His mortgage companies refused to accept the offers. The mortgage 
company in SOR ¶ 1.d foreclosed on his residence. 
 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated September 4, 
2014, and Applicant’s receipt is dated September 9, 2014. The DOHA transmittal letter informed 
Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph is his September 20, 
2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 4) 
  
4Applicant’s response to DOHA interrogatories, SOR response, and FORM response are the 
sources for the facts in this paragraph. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in the following exhibits: his 
September 20, 2013 SF 86; his October 8, 2013 Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) personal subject interview (PSI); his February 12, 2014 response to DOHA 
interrogatories; his September 25, 2013, and his April 11, 2014 credit reports; his SOR 
response; and his FORM response. (Items 3-7) His SOR alleges three charged-off 
accounts totaling $13,110, and a foreclosed $225,000 mortgage account.  
 
Applicant had a first mortgage for $225,000 and a second mortgage for $10,593 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d). He unsuccessfully attempted to sell his residence several times. 
(Item 5) In November 2013, the property went to foreclosure. (Item 5) A 2013 IRS Form 
1099-A from the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.d indicates the balance of principal outstanding 
was $225,000, and the fair market value of the property was $252,827. (FORM 
response) There is no evidence that the creditors in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d are seeking 
payment of any deficiency. 
  
On September 10, 2014, the collection company seeking payment on the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.b for $253 wrote that it was paid on May 30, 2014. (Item 5) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a bank credit card charged off in the amount of $2,264. (Item 
1) Applicant provided proof that he has been paying $105 monthly since May 30, 2014. 
(FORM response) A December 2014 creditor statement indicates the balance owed is 
$1,949. (FORM response) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) indicates the following monthly 
information: gross salary for himself and his spouse of $8,533; net income of $5,478; 
expenses of $4,130; debt payments of $1,560; and a negative net remainder of $212. 
(Item 5) The monthly payments to address the debts listed on the PFS do not total 
$1,560, and it indicates “see 2nd page;” however, the second page of the PFS is 
missing. (Item 5)   
 
Applicant’s April 11, 2014 credit report shows 10 accounts with “closed or paid 
account/zero balance” indicated. (Item 6) The only derogatory notations on his April 11, 
2014 credit report are the four SOR debts; however, the amount for the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.c is shown as $527 rather than $2,264 as shown in the SOR. (Items 1, 6) There is no 
evidence of credit counseling.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in his credit reports, SF 86, OPM PSI, response to DOHA 
interrogatories, SOR response, and FORM response. His SOR alleges three charged-
off accounts totaling $13,110, and a foreclosed $225,000 mortgage account. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
to 20(c). His financial problems were affected by circumstances largely beyond his 
control. Applicant’s father-in-law has cancer, and Applicant and his spouse needed to 
move into his home to provide him care and assistance. He paid one debt, has an 
established payment plan on one debt, and received an IRS Form 1099-A on his 
mortgage debt, indicating the fair market value of the foreclosed property was greater 
than principal outstanding.  
 
An Appeal Board decision illustrates the analysis for applying AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 
20(b). In ISCR Case No. 09-08533 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010), the applicant had $41,000 in 
delinquent credit card debt and defaulted on a home loan generating a $162,000 
delinquent debt. Id. at 2. That applicant filed for bankruptcy the same month the 
Administrative Judge issued her decision. Id. at 1-2. The applicant in ISCR Case No. 
09-08533 was recently divorced, had been unemployed for 10 months, and had 
childcare responsibilities. Her former husband was inconsistent in his payment of child 
support to her. The Appeal Board determined that AG ¶ 20(a) was “clearly applicable 
(debt occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and [the debt] does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)” 
even though that applicant’s debts were unresolved at the time the Administrative 
Judge’s decision was issued. Id. at 3. The Appeal Board also decided that the record 
evidence raised the applicability of AG ¶ 20(b) because of the absence of evidence6 of 
irresponsible behavior, poor judgment, unreliability, or lack of trustworthiness. Id. at 4.   
 
  Similarly, in ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal 
Board addressed a situation of an applicant who had been sporadically unemployed 
and lacked the ability to pay his creditors, noting that “it will be a long time at best before 
he has paid” all of his creditors. The applicant was living on unemployment 
compensation at the time of his hearing. The Appeal Board explained that such a 
circumstance was not necessarily a bar to having access to classified information 
stating: 
                                                                                                                                            
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
6Applicant has the burden of proving the applicability of any mitigating conditions, and the burden 
to disprove a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
[T]he Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required to be 
debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). The applicant in ISCR Case 
No. 08-06567 used his limited resources to (1) resolve some of his debts; (2) had a 
repayment plan for the remaining debts; and (3) took “reasonable actions to effectuate 
that plan.” Id. The Appeal Board remanded the Administrative Judge’s decision because 
it did not “articulate a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,” emphasizing the 
Administrative Judge did “not explain[] what he believes that applicant could or should 
have done under the circumstances that he has not already done to rectify his poor 
financial condition, or why the approach taken by applicant was not ‘responsible’ in light 
of his limited circumstances.” Id.   
 
  Applicant’s delinquent debts “occurred under such circumstances that [are] 
unlikely to recur and [do] not cast doubt on [his] current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” He had to move in to the home of his father-in-law and was unable to 
sell his residence. His overall credit report has 10 positive entries and 4 derogatory 
entries. One derogatory entry involved a SOR debt that is now paid and another is a 
SOR debt that is now in an established payment plan. He acted responsibly under the 
circumstances by maintaining contact with his creditors,7 making payments, and 
bringing his debts to current status. Although he did not receive financial counseling, 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved and is under control.  
  
 AG ¶ 20(d) applies. Applicant admitted responsibility for and took reasonable and 
responsible actions to resolve three of his SOR debts, establishing some good faith. AG 
¶ 20(e) is not applicable. He did not dispute his responsibility for any SOR debts.      
 
In sum, Applicant fell behind on his debts primarily because of his father-in-law’s 
cancer and need for help in his home. Applicant has made substantial progress and 
taken reasonable actions to rehabilitate his finances. His efforts are sufficient to mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
                                            
7“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old facilities technician and carpenter, who has worked for 
a defense contractor since August 2003. There is no evidence of problems with his 
employer, illegal drug use, criminal offenses, or alcohol abuse. He is sufficiently mature 
to understand and comply with his security responsibilities. There is every indication 
that he is loyal to the United States and his employer. The need to support his father-in-
law caused his financial woes. I give Applicant substantial credit for maintaining contact 
with his creditors, and either paying, establishing payment plans, resolving or bringing 
all of his delinquent debts to current status, except for one debt.       
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant understands what he needs to do to establish and maintain his 
financial responsibility. His efforts at debt resolution have established a “meaningful 
track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident he will resolve the two remaining debts 
on his SOR and maintain his financial responsibility.8    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
8Of course, the Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit 
reports, investigation, and additional interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the 
Government from subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the 
security significance of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative 
security significance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). Violation of a promise 
made in a security context to pay legitimate debts also raises judgment concerns under Guideline E, and 
may support future revocation of a security clearance. An administrative judge does not have “authority to 
grant an interim, conditional, or probationary clearance.” ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 
2012) (citing ISCR Case No. 10-03646 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 28, 2011)). See also ISCR Case No. 04-03907 
at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 18, 2006) (stating, “The Board has no authority to grant [a]pplicant a conditional or 
probationary security clearance to allow her the opportunity to have a security clearance while she works 
on her financial problems.”). This footnote does not imply that this Applicant’s security clearance is 
conditional. 
