 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04799 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 22, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is in debt to 
one creditor, although that debt was alleged twice on the Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
in the approximate amount of $23,737. She has acted responsibly with respect to her 
debt by reaching a settlement with her creditor. She has the means to make her 
monthly payments until this debt is fully resolved. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 31, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 17, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 18, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 6, 2015, scheduling the hearing for April 23, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A 
through D, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. 
The record was left open for receipt of additional documents. On May 4, 2015, Applicant 
presented AE E. Department Counsel had no objection to AE E and it was admitted. 
The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 30, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
his employer since December 2008. Applicant served in the Navy from November 1986 
through July 2007, when she retired. She retired at the rank of chief petty officer. She is 
married and has four biological children and three stepchildren. Three of those children 
are minors. She also provides for a grandchild 15 days out of each month. 
 
 In 2006 Applicant’s minor daughter was diagnosed with cancer. She required a 
year of chemo therapy. Applicant retired from the Navy, after 21 years of service, in 
order to care for her. Applicant did not work for a year and a half, while she cared for 
her daughter. However, her retirement pay did not provide enough for Applicant to live 
on. She began to accumulate debt that she could not afford to repay. She contacted her 
creditors and asked for lower interest rates, but they were not willing to negotiate with 
her. She decided to return to work in December 2008. (Tr. 25-27.) 
 
 In 2009, after obtaining stable employment with her present employer, she hired 
a debt consolidation firm to help her resolve her delinquencies that accumulated while 
she was unemployed and caring for her daughter. The debt consolidation firm was able 
to resolve all but one of her delinquencies. That unresolved debt is the subject of the 
SOR. (Tr. 27-33.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be in debt to one creditor in the 
approximate amounts of $23,727 and $18,999, respectively. Applicant admitted 
allegation 1.a, and denied allegations 1.b. Applicant testified that the $18,999 as alleged 
in 1.b is the original debt owed prior to its sale to a debt collection company. That same 
debt is duplicated, with additional interest, in allegation 1.a. The creditor sought a 
judgement against Applicant, which she provided into evidence, which confirmed 
Applicant’s interpretation of these numbers. I find SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b are for 
the same underlying debt. (AE B; Tr. 29-33.) 
 
 After four years of attempting to resolve the debt alleged in 1.a through the debt 
consolidation firm, Applicant hired a law firm in approximately 2013 to address this debt 
for her. On April 28, 2015, Applicant and the creditor entered into a written settlement 
agreement that served to stay an entry of judgment and give Applicant an opportunity to 
 
3 
 
pay the debt. Applicant agreed to pay the creditor $185 per month until a total 
settlement amount of $6,290 has been paid to the creditor. (AE A; AE B; AE E; Tr. 26-
39.)  
 
 Applicant testified that her household has approximately $2,200 left after their 
monthly bills are resolved. She foresees no difficulties in meeting the terms of the 
repayment plan and intends to make her monthly payments on time. She testified she 
has no other delinquent debts. Her credit reports reflect all other accounts are in good 
standing. (GE 4; Tr. 40-41.) 
 
Applicant’s supervisor wrote a letter of support on Applicant’s behalf. He believes 
Applicant exercises good judgment and has integrity. (AE D.) She also provided letters 
of support from two colleagues that praise her for her trustworthiness and outstanding 
leadership. (AE C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
4 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was alleged to be in debt to a creditor on two delinquencies in the 
approximate amount of $42,736. However, Applicant produced sufficient documentation 
to show that she only owed one debt, totaling $23,737, to this creditor. The evidence 
raises both security concerns with respect to that debt, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 Two Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 fully apply:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
5 
 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are due to her daughter’s illness and her unemployment while 
she cared for her daughter, both circumstances beyond her control. Applicant has acted 
responsibly and in good-faith, by first attempting to resolve the debt herself directly with 
the creditor, then by seeking the help of a professional debt consolidation company. 
When the debt consolidation company failed to help her settle this debt, she continued 
to seek its resolution and hired an attorney to help her do so. It has been a long 
process, but at all times, Applicant has been willing to pay this delinquency. She has 
finally reached a repayment agreement with the creditor and can be trusted to fully 
resolve it according to the terms of the settlement agreement. 
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
respected by her colleagues and supervisor. She performs well at work. She served 
honorably in the Navy for 21 years. No new delinquencies have been incurred. She has 
sufficient income to satisfy her monthly obligations. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
6 
 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. I 
conclude the whole-person concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
