 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-04242 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in China 1955 and immigrated to the United States in 1989. 
He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1999. Applicant’s mother, two siblings, and 
mother-in-law are citizens and residents of China. He sends his mother financial 
support. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the foreign influence 
security concerns. Based upon a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office 
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASD 
C3I), entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide trustworthiness 
determinations for contractor personnel employed in Sensitive Information Systems 
Positions (ADP I/II/III), as defined in Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-
R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation). 
 
On December 15, 2013, Applicant submitted a Public Trust Position Application 
(SF 85P). On October 3, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); the Regulation (supra); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DoD CAF for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 15, 2014 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on 
February 24, 2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 10, 2015.  I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on April 1, 2015. Department Counsel offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and 
offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 9, 2015. The record remained 
open until April 20, 2015, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit other exhibits. On 
April 6, 2015, he emailed Department Counsel additional information. She forwarded 
that email to me and I marked it as AE D, and admitted it without an objection. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
China. She provided 20 supporting documents to show detail and context for those facts 
(HE 1.) Applicant did not object to the request or documents, and I granted Department 
Counsel’s request. (Tr. 15.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.f. His admissions, including those made in a January 29, 2013 Personal 
Subject Interview (PSI), are incorporated herein as findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2.)  
 
Applicant was born in China in 1955. He is 60 years old. He attended high school 
and college there, and earned a bachelor’s degree from a Chinese university. In 1987 
he married his wife, who was a Chinese citizen and resident at the time. He moved to 
the United Stated in 1989 to be with his wife, who was attending graduate school. They 
have two adult children, both of whom were born in the United States. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1999. (AE C.) He began working for his current employer in 
2004. (Tr. 21.) His U.S. passport is current. (AE B.) The last time he visited China was 
in 2008. (Answer.)   
 
Applicant’s wife was born in China in 1956. She graduated from a Chinese 
university in 1984. She came to the United States in 1988 to attend graduate school. 
She works at a U.S. university. She returned to China in 2008 and 2013 to visit her 
family. (Tr. 34.) She is a naturalized U.S. citizen, the date of which is unknown. She is 
aware of this hearing. (Tr. 23; GE 2.)   
 
Applicant’s parents were born and raised in China. His father is deceased. His 
elderly mother is a citizen and resident of China. Applicant has provided about $5,000 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
annually in financial support to his mother for years, although he thinks when he visited 
in 2008 he may have given his brother $20,000 to assist with his mother’s care. (Tr. 41.) 
The last time he sent her financial support was in 2013. (Tr. 37.) He has weekly 
communication with her. (Tr. 27; Answer; GE 2.) His mother visited Applicant in the 
United States in 2000 and 2002. (Tr. 27.) If his brother told him that his mother needed 
more money for her care, he would oblige. (Tr. 43.)  
 
 Applicant’s two siblings were born in China and are Chinese citizens and 
residents. He has weekly contact with his brother, a professor at a Chinese university. 
His brother has visited Applicant in the United States. (Tr. 29-30; GE 2.) His sister is a 
retired teacher. He also maintains regular contact with her. (Tr. 31.)  
 
Applicant’s wife’s parents were born and raised in China. His father-in-law is 
deceased. His mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of China. He has contact with her 
through his wife. He thinks his wife sends her mother financial support. (Tr. 35; GE 2.)  
 
Applicant owns a house in the United States valued at $205,000. He has a 
savings account with $2,000 to $3,000 in it. His 401(k) has approximately $200,000 in it. 
(Tr. 43-45; AE D.) 
 
Applicant provided evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance. His February 2015 Performance Summary noted an ”Above Effective” 
rating. (AE A.) His supervisor stated that Applicant “had a very successful year in 2014.” 
(AE A.)  
 
China 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents concerning China, which are incorporated herein by reference.  
 
China is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over a 
billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. China has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. It has a poor 
record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and engages in 
arbitrary arrests and detentions, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners.  
 
China is one of the most aggressive countries in seeking sensitive and protected 
U.S. technology and economic information. It targets the United States with active 
intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. As a result, it is a growing threat 
to U.S. national security. In China authorities routinely monitor telephone conversations, 
facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and internet communications. 
Authorities open and censor mail. Its security services have entered personal 
residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, and fax machines. All 
major hotels have a sizable internal security presence, and hotel guestrooms are 
sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary materials. There are 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
several recent cases involving actual or attempted espionage and the illegal export of 
information to China. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security) 
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will 
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of 
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the 
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.) 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified or sensitive information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified [or sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to protected information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to foreign influence as 
follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
China is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information, and has a 
significant interest in acquiring defense-related and other technology. While there is no 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
evidence that intelligence operatives from China seek or have sought classified or 
economic information from or through Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not 
prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. Applicant’s relationships with his two 
siblings, mother-in-law, and mother for whom he provides financial support create 
substantial potential for conflict of interest. Those circumstances could place Applicant 
in a position of having to choose between family members residing in China, a country 
that generates a heightened risk of coercion, and the United States. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise potential trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), and 7(b). The 
Government met its burden of production by raising the above disqualifying conditions 
and shifts the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence trustworthiness 
concerns. Those with potential application in mitigating the concerns in this case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not have application under the facts in this case. Applicant’s two 
siblings, mother, and mother-in law, are citizens and residents of China. The family’s 
physical presence in that country creates a heightened potential for exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, as there is strong evidence of China’s 
human rights abuses toward citizens and residents. Thus, Applicant’s family interests 
could be threatened to the point that he would confront a choice between their interests 
and those of the United States should adverse actors learn of Applicant’s work for the 
U.S. Government.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) provides some mitigation. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that he 
“can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” He has 
lived in the United States since 1989 and became a citizen in 1999. His wife is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, and his two children are U.S. citizens. He has successfully 
worked for his employer for over ten years. He has economic ties to the United States, 
including a financial interest in real estate, and a sizable amount of money in a 401(k). 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
While those factors weigh in Applicant’s favor, he maintains strong ties to his Chinese 
family members, as demonstrated by his ongoing support for his elderly mother and 
interaction with his siblings. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not provide mitigation for the trustworthiness concerns raised. 
Applicant maintains regular contact with his mother and two siblings. He has some 
contact with his mother-in-law. All of these people are citizens and residents of China. 
He routinely sends his mother financial support. In 2008 he visited family members in 
China. These family relationships are commendable, but the contacts have been 
sufficiently regular and recent that they cannot be construed as casual or infrequent.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.  The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Some mitigating evidence 
weighs in favor of granting Applicant a public trust position. He is an intelligent, 
articulate, and hardworking person, who has lived in the United States for 26 years. His 
wife and two children are U.S. citizens and residents. He has accumulated over 
$400,000 of assets in the United States.  
 
Four circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole-person analysis. First, 
Applicant had numerous connections to China before he immigrated to the United 
States in 1989. He spent his formative years there and earned a college degree at a 
Chinese university. Second, three of Applicant’s immediate family members are citizens 
and residents of China, as is his mother-in-law. Third, China is a known collector of U.S. 
technological and economic information. Fourth, and more importantly for security 
purposes, the Chinese government is hostile to the United States and actively seeks 
classified and sensitive information. The Chinese government could attempt to use 
Applicant’s family members to obtain protected information and compromise Applicant’s 
responsibilities to the United States.  
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not sufficiently 
mitigated the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of 
trust. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the trustworthiness 
concerns arising under Guideline B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied.      
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
