 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04395 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William S. Aramony, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was arrested, charged, and convicted of driving under the influence of 
alcohol (DUI) for offenses in 1990 and 2013. After the 2013 DUI, he reduced his alcohol 
consumption, attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings, and improved his work 
performance. He consumes alcohol responsibly. He receives support from family and 
friends. Alcohol consumption, criminal conduct, and personal conduct concerns are 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(GE 1) On December 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal conduct) and 
Guideline E (personal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) On February 5, 2015, the SOR 
was amended adding security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol consumption). (HE 
3) The SOR informed Applicant that DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative 
finding it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative 
judge for a determination whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, 
or revoked. (HE 2)  
 
On January 16, 2015, and February 23, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations. (HE 4, 5) Department Counsel requested a hearing. On March 30, 2015, 
Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On April 
3, 2015, Applicant’s case was assigned to another administrative judge. On April 8, 
2015, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for April 29, 2015. (HE 1) On 
April 29, 2015, the case was transferred to me for administrative reasons.  
 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered four 
exhibits, and Applicant offered eight exhibits. (Tr. 16, 37-39; GE 1-4; AE A-H) There 
were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-4 and AE A-H. (Tr. 16, 39) On May 7, 2015, I 
received the transcript. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted he was arrested and charged with DUI on October 12, 2013 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, and 3.a). He admitted he was convicted of DUI in 1990. (SOR ¶ 3.c) 
He denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 3.b that he was impaired by alcohol at work. He 
provided some extenuating and mitigating information. His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who maintains 
security-related documentation for his employer. (Tr. 71-73) He has worked for the 
defense contractor for 11 years. (Tr. 110) Applicant served on active duty in the Navy 
from 1981 to 2001 and honorably retired as a petty officer first class (E-6). (Tr. 53, 109)  
 
 In about 1987, Applicant was referred for alcohol screening. (Tr. 81-82) In 1989, 
he vomited blood while aboard a ship, and he was ordered not to consume alcohol until 
he received a medical examination. (Tr. 81-82) When he returned to shore duty, he 
received a medical examination, and he was advised that his medical problem was 
unrelated to alcohol consumption. (Tr. 83) Applicant’s daughter was born in 1986, and 
he was married in 1990. (Tr. 60, 109) 
  
 
 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or 
locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific 
information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Arrests for DUI and Rehabilitation  
 
 In 1990, Applicant was arrested, charged, and convicted of DUI. (Tr. 59) After the 
1990 DUI he attended a Navy Alcohol and Substance Abuse Program (ASAP) for one 
week. (Tr. 59-60, 84) This program focuses on education about the dangers of 
excessive alcohol consumption. After he married, he reduced his alcohol consumption. 
(Tr. 62-63) He did not receive any other DUIs or alcohol counseling from 1990 to 2013. 
(Tr. 85)  
 
 On October 12, 2013, Applicant went to visit his family in another state, attended 
a homecoming high school football game, consumed too much alcohol, and chose to 
drive. (Tr. 75-78, 85) The police stopped him for driving 65 miles per hour in a 45 mile 
per hour zone. (Tr. 110) His breathalyzer registered .16%. (file) He was arrested for 
DUI. He immediately informed his security officer of the DUI arrest. (Tr. 113) In late 
2014, he pleaded guilty to and was convicted of DUI. (Tr. 88) He received a $769 fine 
and was told he should attend an alcohol class. (Tr. 89, 112) His driver’s license was 
suspended for seven months. (Tr. 113) His driver’s license was reinstated in March 
2015. (Tr. 113) His attorney filed an appeal, and his conviction and all adjudged 
punishments are currently a legal nullity. (Tr. 90-91; AE B)  
 
After his 2013 DUI arrest, he reduced his alcohol consumption. (Tr. 73-74) From 
2011 to 2013, he may drink a beer or two at a restaurant and then drive his vehicle. (Tr. 
78, 96) Before 2015, he went fishing about five or six times a year. (Tr. 98) He drank 
four or five beers over a six-hour-period while he was fishing, and then he drove home. 
(Tr. 98-99) He did not believe his alcohol consumption while fishing caused his BAC to 
exceed the legal limit, and result in DUI(s).  
 
Applicant has only gone fishing once so far in 2015. (Tr. 98-99) He currently 
drinks about three beers a week on weekends. (Tr. 79, 100) He began attending AA 
meetings a month ago in late March 2015, and he currently attends AA meetings three 
times a week. (Tr. 63, 103) He attended AA to assess whether he had an alcohol-
consumption problem, and he concluded he did not. (Tr. 104) Applicant’s family and 
friends support his continued responsible alcohol consumption. 
 
On April 24, 2015, a licensed clinical social worker interviewed Applicant for 
about an hour, evaluated his alcohol consumption, and determined he “does not have 
alcohol issues that present any safety issues nor is he a danger regarding security.”2 
She suggested Applicant continue to attend AA because “briefly receiving alcohol 
education would be of benefit to raise awareness.” She did not diagnose him as abusing 
alcohol or being alcohol dependent. She did not advise him to abstain from alcohol 
consumption. (Tr. 108)    
 
 
 
                                            
2The source for the facts in this paragraph is an April 14, 2015 evaluation by a licensed clinical 
social worker. (Tr. 101-103, 108; AE G) 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Impaired at Work by Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges that in approximately July 2013 and January 2014, Applicant 
was impaired at work by previous alcohol consumption. (SOR ¶ 3.b) Applicant’s security 
manager (S) was called as a Government witness. He is currently Applicant’s 
supervisor. (Tr. 19-20) He received a telephone call from one of Applicant’s colleagues 
around October 2013 and was advised Applicant may be intoxicated at work. (Tr. 20) 
Within an hour S met with Applicant and assessed that Applicant was not intoxicated. 
(Tr. 21) In November or December 2013, he received another report from another of 
Applicant’s colleagues that Applicant was possibly intoxicated. (Tr. 22-24) S met with 
Applicant and made an assessment that he seemed tired or lethargic, but was not under 
the influence of alcohol. (Tr. 24) Applicant’s speech “wasn’t quite as sharp” as expected; 
he did not stumble; and his behavior was not odd or strange. (Tr. 33-34)  
 
S asked for and received consent from Applicant to be tested for alcohol 
consumption. (Tr. 24) S was unable to locate a facility that would test Applicant for 
alcohol consumption. (Tr. 25-26) S did not ask Applicant if he had recently consumed 
alcohol. (Tr. 32) S did not detect the smell of alcohol (Tr. 32) S believed that Applicant’s 
colleagues may have had some professional resentment of Applicant. (Tr. 27)  
 
Applicant denied that he ever consumed alcohol at work or consumed alcohol 
before work. (Tr. 65, 67, 93) He served on several large ships including the New Jersey, 
while this battleship was shelling Lebanon with 16-inch guns after the Beirut Marine 
barracks bombing in Beirut in 1983. (Tr. 54) Sometimes Applicant is unable to sleep at 
night because of ringing in his ears. (Tr. 65) Applicant received a 10 percent disability 
rating from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) for damage to his hearing while on 
active duty. (Tr. 66, 113) Applicant takes medication for high blood pressure and 
cholesterol, and he may have been tired when he was accused of being impaired by 
alcohol. (Tr. 69, 93)  
 
I observe that Applicant is from the deep South; his speech has a heavy regional 
accent; and his verbal statements were delivered in a mumbling manner.   
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor said Applicant’s work performance had dramatically 
improved in 2014 and 2015. (Tr. 30-31, 35-36) He received additional automation 
training and became much more effective at work. (Tr. 30-31) He supported approval of 
Applicant’s continued access to classified information. (Tr. 35-36) 
 
 A colleague (A) who worked closely with Applicant for 11 years and three 
colleagues (B, C, and D), who have known Applicant personally and professionally for 
5, 15, and 14 years, respectively, described him as trustworthy, focused, conscientious, 
and reliable. (Tr. 118-120, 122; AE C, D, H) A has never observed Applicant under the 
influence of alcohol at work. (Tr. 118-120) Their statements and Applicant’s evaluation 
for 2014 support continuation of Applicant’s security clearance. (Tr. 122; AE C, D, F, H)  
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 A Department of Justice GS 15, who supervises a large office and is a Navy 
reserve captain, has known Applicant socially for about six years (Tr.  42-44, 47, 50) He 
has consumed alcohol with Applicant while on fishing trips, in restaurants, and in bars. 
(Tr. 44-48) He has never seen Applicant drink to excess or become intoxicated, and he 
believes Applicant drinks responsibly. (Tr. 44-47) He believes Applicant is a trustworthy, 
responsible person, and he supports Applicant’s continued access to classified 
information. (Tr. 51-52)     
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 22(a) - 22(g) provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(b) and 22(d) through 22(g) do not apply. Applicant did not have any 
alcohol-related incidents at work. The anonymous allegation that he was impaired by 
alcohol at work on two occasions was not substantiated. Applicant credibly denied being 
impaired by alcohol at work. He has never consumed alcohol before going to work or at 
work. He did not violate any court orders, and he did not have a relapse after a 
diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence. He has not been diagnosed with alcohol 
abuse or of being alcohol dependent.   
 
AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply. Applicant engaged in binge-alcohol consumption to 
the extent of impaired judgment on some occasions, including when he was arrested for 
DUI.3 His excessive alcohol consumption resulted in arrests, convictions, and various 
penalties imposed by the courts. Assessment of the applicability of mitigating conditions 
is required.  
 
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-23(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
                                            
3Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive, the generally accepted 
definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The 
definition of binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, 
NIAAA Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/ 
winter2004/NewsletterNumber3.pdf.  
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(c) apply. In 1990, Applicant completed ASAP, a one-week 
alcohol-education program. This brief version of ASAP is not an alcohol-related 
inpatient or outpatient program, and it is not sufficiently rigorous or recent to provide a 
substantial rehabilitative effect. Applicant receives support from family and friends. He 
significantly reduced his alcohol consumption after 2013, and his DUIs occurred “under 
such unusual circumstances,” providing confidence he will not have additional DUIs. 
Applicant is currently attending AA meetings as an aid in the assessment of his alcohol 
consumption and reinforcement of his alcohol reduction to responsible levels. Even 
though he has a lengthy history of alcohol consumption, which resulted in two DUI 
arrests, enough time has elapsed with responsible alcohol consumption to establish his 
alcohol consumption is under control, and his alcohol consumption no longer casts 
doubt on Applicant’s “current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and 
“(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”  
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. Applicant was arrested, charged, and convicted of 
DUIs occurring in 1990 and 2013. The second offense resulted in a conviction, and it is 
on appeal. I find that he committed the 2013 DUI offense based on his BAC results of 
.16% and his guilty plea to that offense.   
  
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant has two misdemeanor-level DUIs separated by 23 years. After the 
second offense, he reduced his alcohol-consumption practices. He has been 
continuously employed for 11 years. In the last two years, he substantially improved his 
work performance. He expressed regret and remorse concerning his alcohol-related 
offenses. After 2013, he responsibly consumed alcohol, limiting his alcohol consumption 
to about three beers a week on weekends. His alcohol consumption while fishing must 
remain at a very low level to remain “responsible” and avoid the risk of another DUI.4 
While it would be more prudent for Applicant to completely refrain from any alcohol 
consumption before driving, the law does not require that he do so. Criminal conduct 
concerns are mitigated.    
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information.  
                                            
4An individual’s rate of metabolism of alcohol is dependent on several variables, including alcohol 
content, volume of alcohol consumed, “gender, weight, metabolism, time period over which the alcohol 
was consumed and the amount of food in the stomach prior to drinking” as well as liver health. See 
GLOBALRPh website, “The Clinition’s Ultimate Reference, BAC Calculator, http://www.globalrph.com/ 
blood alcohol calculator.htm.  
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
All of the conduct alleged in the SOR is covered under Guidelines G and J; 
however, as previously indicated they are insufficient to warrant an adverse 
determination. Applicant’s excessive alcohol consumption shows “questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, . . . unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information.” There is sufficient evidence of rule violations to 
establish AG ¶ 16(c), and consideration of mitigating conditions is required. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case are as follows: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
AG ¶ 17(f) applies to the allegations in SOR ¶ 3.b that Applicant was impaired at 
work by alcohol consumption twice in 2013. These were anonymous allegations, and 
they are unsubstantiated. The only named witnesses, Applicant and his supervisor, 
concurred that he was not impaired by alcohol at work.   
 
AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply. Applicant committed DUIs in 1990 and 2013. The 
DUI offenses were separated by 23 years and are infrequent. He acknowledged that he 
excessively consumed alcohol and showed poor judgment by driving under the 
influence of alcohol. He decreased his alcohol consumption after his 2013 DUI. He 
attended AA meetings to assess and sensitize himself to alcohol consumption issues. 
After 2013, his work performance improved; he has the support of his family and 
friends; these factors have enabled him “to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior,” and 
future DUIs are “unlikely to recur.” Personal conduct concerns are mitigated.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines G, J, and E are incorporated into my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
Although some whole-person evidence supporting revocation of Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information, such evidence is not sufficient to revoke 
his security clearance. Applicant was arrested, charged, and convicted of DUI in 1990 
and 2013. He continues to consume alcohol. Driving while impaired or intoxicated is a 
serious criminal offense in which he endangered himself and others. Excessive alcohol 
consumption and then driving a motor vehicle shows a lack of judgment, rehabilitation, 
and impulse control. “By its very nature, [criminal conduct] calls into question a person's 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” (AG ¶ 30) 
 
The evidence supporting reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial than the evidence supporting revocation. Applicant is a 56-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor, who maintains security-related documentation for the 
contractor. He has worked for the defense contractor for 11 years. Applicant served on 
active duty in the Navy from 1981 to 2001 and honorably retired as a petty officer first 
class. He did not consume alcohol at work. He has attended AA meetings to assess and 
sensitize himself to alcohol-consumption issues. He reduced his alcohol consumption 
and improved his work performance after his 2013 DUI. His family, friends, coworkers, 
and supervisors are very supportive of Applicant’s rehabilitative efforts. They describe 
him as trustworthy, focused, conscientious, and reliable and support continuation of his 
security clearance. He intends to continue to responsibly consume alcohol. Criminal 
conduct, alcohol consumption, and personal conduct concerns are mitigated. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude continuation of Applicant’s 
access to classified information is warranted at this time.    
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline G:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 3.a to 3.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
