 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03069  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant has failed to mitigate the financial 
considerations and personal conduct concerns raised in the SOR. The $30,000 of 
delinquent debt alleged in the SOR remains unresolved. Applicant’s claim that he 
accidentally omitted derogatory financial information from his January 2014 security 
clearance application is not credible. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on December 22, 2014. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant. He 
received the FORM on February 11, 2015. He did not respond. The case was assigned 
to me on April 27, 2015. I admitted the items attached to the FORM as Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1-6,3 without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 48, has worked for a federal contractor since August 2011. He is 
seeking a security clearance for the first time.  The SOR alleges that Applicant owes 
$30,000 on 17 delinquent accounts, the majority of which are for medical expenses. 
Applicant admits responsibility for each of the alleged accounts.4 
 
 In October 2008, Applicant was laid off after 12 years of employment. He 
received a severance package that included three months of continued medical 
coverage. Between 2009 and 2011, Applicant worked sporadically at lesser paying jobs 
that did not provide adequate medical insurance for his family. As a result, Applicant 
began to incur delinquent debt related to medical care for himself and his family. 
Simultaneously, Applicant’s wife, who is a small business owner, began to feel the 
effects of the national economic downturn. Her business lost clients, which resulted in a 
further decrease in Applicant’s household income. As a result of these changes, 
Applicant began to have difficulty meeting his financial obligations.5  
 
 In January 2014, Applicant completed a security clearance application. In 
response to the question about his financial record, Applicant did not disclose any 
derogatory information. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant claims that the omission 
was accidental, explaining that he accidentally submitted the security clearance 
application before he had a chance to input his derogatory financial information. 
Applicant claims that he disclosed the mistake to his human resources (HR) manager 
the next day. Based on his conversations with the HR manager, Applicant believed that 
he would be given an opportunity to correct the form. Applicant claims that he did not 
hear anything else about his application until he was contacted by an investigator for an 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 When the Government submitted its FORM, it did so with an incomplete copy of GE 5. To correct the 
error, Department Counsel sent the complete document to Applicant on May 5, 2015, and afforded 
Applicant seven days to review the document and make any corrections. Department Counsel also gave 
Applicant the opportunity to provide any additional information in response to the FORM. As of May 14, 
2015, Applicant had not responded. Correspondence related to this issue is appended to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE ) I. 
 
4 GE 4, 6. 
 
5 GE 3-4. 
 
3 
 
interview. Before the interview began, Applicant claims that he told the investigator that 
he accidentally submitted an incomplete form before being confronted with information 
about his delinquent accounts.6  
 
 Applicant’s subject interview took place in February 2014. The interview 
summary contains the following information about the omissions on Applicant’s security 
clearance application: 
 
The Subject did not list delinquent account information since he had [not] 
been in contact with account holders or was unaware of information on his 
credit history. The Subject agreed he had some delinquent accounts but 
was unable to recall all the accounts. 
 
The investigator then confronted Applicant with the derogatory accounts found in 
Applicant’s credit report.7  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that as his delinquent debt mounted, 
he and his wife consulted a bankruptcy attorney. However, they decided against 
resolving their debt through bankruptcy. Instead, Applicant plans to sell off assets and 
withdraw funds from his retirement account to pay the debts. Currently, all of the debts 
alleged in the SOR remain unresolved.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
6 GE 3. 
 
7 GE 5.  
 
8 GE 3.  
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”9  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $30,000 in delinquent debt. 
The allegations are supported by the record, establishing the Government’s prima facie 
case.10 Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay his debts as well as a history of 
not doing so.11 Although Applicant’s financial problems may have been caused by 
events beyond his control, it is not enough to mitigate the financial considerations 
concerns. Since obtaining steady employment in 2011, Applicant has not acted 
responsibly to resolve his delinquent debt. While Applicant has stated an intention to 
pay his creditors, he has not made any efforts to do so. The record does not support a 
finding that Applicant has received financial counseling or that his finances are 
otherwise under control. Accordingly, none of the financial mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
An applicant’s lack of candor or dishonesty raises questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and his ability to protect classified information. Of special interest in any 
adjudication is an applicant’s failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the 
security clearance process.12 Such is the case here. The SOR alleges that Applicant 
intentionally failed to disclose derogatory financial information on his January 2014 
security clearance application. Specifically, Applicant failed to disclose information 
about accounts that had been turned over to collection agencies in the last seven years 
or debts that were 120 days past due at the time he completed the security clearance 
                                                          
9  AG ¶ 18. 
 
10 GE 3, 6. 
 
11 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
12 AG ¶ 15. 
 
 
5 
 
application.13 Applicant claims that the omission was accidental; however, the record 
indicates otherwise.  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant detailed an elaborate story about his actions 
after he accidentally submitted his security clearance application without the derogatory 
financial information. He claimed to have reported his mistake to his employer and to 
have informed the investigator of his omissions before being confronted with his 
derogatory financial information. However, he did not provide any evidence to 
corroborate his story.  Furthermore, the statement Applicant provided to the background 
investigatory is contradictory. The inconsistent statements and lack or corroboration 
raise questions about Applicant’s credibility that must be resolved in favor of the 
Government. Accordingly, I find that Applicant intentionally falsified his security 
clearance application.14 I also find that none of the personal conduct mitigating 
conditions apply. Applicant’s omission cannot be considered minor. The omission and 
Applicant’s failure to take responsibility for his actions raise unresolved issues about his 
security worthiness.  
 
Based on the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s ability to properly handle 
and safeguard classified information. The security concerns raised in the SOR remain. 
Applicant failed to establish a record of financial rehabilitation or reform. He also failed 
to mitigate concerns about his trustworthiness and reliability. Following Egan15 and the 
clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national 
security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 GE 4. 
 
14 AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
15 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
