 Exhibit 2 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-03547
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. The security concern stemming from his
illegal drug involvement (using marijuana during 2011–2013) while possessing a
security clearance is not mitigated. Accordingly, this case is decided against  Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on July 11, 2013.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
(DOD),  on August 11, 2014, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it2
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 The findings of fact are based on information in Applicant’s security clearance application, Exhibit 2, which6
is the sole documentary exhibit in this case. 
2
was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him
access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the3
reasons for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline H for drug
involvement. Applicant answered the SOR on September 4, 2014. Neither Applicant nor
Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the
written record.4
On March 23, 2015, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material
information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant material5
(FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on April 2, 2015. Applicant did  not
reply within 30 days from receipt of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May
26, 2015.   
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security
clearance.  He married in 1977 and divorced in 1986. He has lived in cohabitation since6
1995. He has worked as a senior database administrator for the same company since
1994. Before that, he served on active duty in the U.S. Army for about 20 years. He was
an enlisted soldier from July 1971 to April 1974, when he was honorably discharged. He
then had a break in service until July 1977, when he reenlisted and went on to serve to
September 1994, when he was honorably discharged. Presumably, Applicant is eligible
for retired pay based on 20 years of honorable military service. 
Applicant has held a security clearance, in different capacities, for many years. In
1972, he was granted eligibility for a top-secret clearance by the Army. In 1987, he was
granted eligibility for a top-secret clearance by the Army. And in 2004, in his capacity as
an employee of a federal contractor, he was granted eligibility for a secret clearance.  
 Exhibit 2. 7
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a8
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
3
In July 2013, Applicant completed a security clearance  application.  In response7
to the relevant questions, he disclosed a history of illegal drug activity. He disclosed that
in July 1976, during his break in service from the Army, he was arrested for the
misdemeanor offense of possession of marijuana. He stated that the matter was
resolved when he appeared before a magistrate, pleaded no contest, and was fined
$100. 
Applicant also disclosed a recent history of marijuana use. He stated that he
used marijuana from September 2011 to June 2013, about one month before he
completed his current security clearance application. He admitted that he used
marijuana to socialize with friends on an infrequent basis, taking a single hit perhaps
four or five times during the past two years. He further admitted that his marijuana use
took place while he was in possession of a security clearance. He stated that he did not
intend to use marijuana in the future, explaining that his marijuana use occurred while
he was not actively engaged or using a security clearance, and that he had no intention
of jeopardizing the information he was entrusted with. 
Applicant did not provide additional information or details about his illegal drug
involvement. He did not submit documentary information in response to the SOR or the
FORM.   
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As8
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt9
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An10
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  11
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 16
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).17
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.18
 AG ¶ 25(a) and ¶ 25(c). Concerning Guideline H, in an October 24, 2014 memorandum, the Director of19
National Intelligence reaffirmed that the disregard of federal law concerning use, sale, or manufacture of
marijuana is relevant in national security determinations regardless of changes to state laws concerning
marijuana use. 
 AG ¶ 25(g).  20
4
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting12
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An13
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate14
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme15
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.16
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it18
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement (use and possession of marijuana)
is disqualifying under Guideline H.  The evidence shows he engaged in drug abuse by19
using marijuana on a periodic or occasional basis during the years of 2011–2013. And
his marijuana use took place while possessing a security clearance.  Presumably, his20
 AG ¶ 26(a)–(d).21
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).22
5
employer has a drug-free workplace policy, as is the regular course of business for a
company doing business with the Defense Department. His illegal drug involvement
reflects negatively on his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and willingness to follow
laws, rules, and regulations.   
There are four mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline H, although only
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and (b) are relevant to the facts of Applicant’s case.  I considered both,21
and they are not sufficient to mitigate the security concern. The mitigating condition in
AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply because his illegal drug involvement was not so long ago
and was not so infrequent that it is no longer a concern. The mitigating condition in  AG
¶ 26(b) does not apply because he did not present sufficient evidence to demonstrate
an intent not to abuse marijuana in the future. For example, he did not submit evidence
of negative drug tests to confirm that he has abstained from marijuana use since June
2013. And he did not submit a signed statement of intent not to abuse any drugs in the
future with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
Applicant’s last known involvement with marijuana occurred about 23 months ago
in June 2013. But that is not an appropriate period of abstinence in light of his overall
record of using marijuana while possessing a security clearance. Granted, he receives
credit for disclosing his illegal drug involvement during the security clearance process.
By doing so, he did what is expected of a person seeking access to classified
information. Nevertheless, it is not enough to resolve the security concern, because his
marijuana use, as a mature, experienced adult who has held a security clearance for
many years, is inexplicable and reeks of poor judgment.    
Because Applicant chose to have his case decided without a hearing, I am
unable to evaluate his demeanor. Limited to the written record, I am unable to assess
Applicant’s sincerity, candor, or truthfulness. He also chose not to respond to the FORM
with relevant and material facts about his circumstances, which may have helped to
rebut, extenuate, mitigate, or explain the security concern. 
Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement justifies current doubt about his
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In
reaching this conclusion, I considered the whole-person concept.  I also weighed the22
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. Accordingly, I conclude he did not meet his
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information.   
6
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
