 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01052 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial problems were 
not caused by irresponsible, reckless, or negligent behavior. Although he still owes a 
significant amount of delinquent debt, he is making a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on February 10, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
without objection. After the hearing, Applicant submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were also admitted without objection.3 I received the transcript (Tr.) on 
February 18, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 38, has worked for his employer, a federal contactor, since 1999. He 
has held a security clearance, without incident, since 1997. On his August 2013 security 
clearance application, Applicant disclosed derogatory financial information, including 
delinquent accounts, wage garnishments, and a 2011 home foreclosure. The ensuing 
investigation established that Applicant owes approximately $95,000 on 13 delinquent 
accounts. Two of those accounts, totaling $59,000 are for the deficiency balance on his 
foreclosed home. Applicant admits each debt alleged in the SOR.4 
 
 Applicant married in 2002. He and his wife have two children, ages 12 and 9. In 
2005, the couple purchased their first home – a single family home that sat on less than 
2.5 acres of land for approximately $170,000. Before 2008, Applicant testified that he 
and his wife were able meet all of their financial obligations, even if margins were 
sometimes tight. After she completed school in 2006, Applicant’s wife began working. 
They enjoyed a combined income of approximately $100,000. The couple’s expenses 
increased with their increase in income. Then, in 2008, without giving notice to her 
employer or Applicant, Applicant’s wife quit her job. As a result, their household income 
decreased by approximately 25%. According to Applicant and his wife, their financial 
problems began shortly thereafter.5  
 
Both testified that Applicant tried, but he could not meet their financial obligations 
on his income alone. Applicant believed that returning to school was the only way he 
could increase his earning potential. Using the tuition benefit offered through his job, 
Applicant began taking classes. His decision to do so did not impact the family’s 
finances. He earned his master’s degree in 2011. Dissatisfied with her previously 
chosen course of study, Applicant’s wife also decided to return to school full-time in the 
spring 2009. Although she financed most of her education with student loans, Applicant 
paid some of her school expenses from the reduced household budget. Applicant was 
unable to keep up with all of the household bills, including the mortgage on their home. 
Applicant sought help from his mortgage company to no avail. Four of the thirteen 
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter, dated October 15, 2014, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 The e-mails regarding the admissibility of the applicant’s exhibits are included in the record as HE II.  
 
4 Tr. 19-20;  GE 1-3. 
 
5 Tr. 14-17, 22, 38-38, 44-45; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
alleged accounts fell delinquent between 2009 and 2010. Applicant’s financial problems 
worsened in 2010, when he and his wife separated. As a result of the separation, both 
Applicant and his wife left the marital home and established separate residences. The 
bank foreclosed on the home in February 2011, leaving a deficiency balance of $35,000 
and $24,000 on the first and second mortgages, respectively.6  
 
In 2011, Applicant’s finances continued to deteriorate as he experienced the first 
of two garnishments of his wages. First, Applicant’s former homeowners’ association 
began garnishing 20% of Applicant’s bi-weekly pay to satisfy $6,000 in delinquent dues 
as well as the expenses related to their recovery. When that garnishment was 
completed, another creditor, a credit card company, began garnishing Applicant’s pay 
for the $4,500 debt alleged in SOR ¶1.i. Applicant was able to negotiate a garnishment 
rate of 15% with the creditor. As his wages were garnished, Applicant continued to incur 
delinquent debt. Nine of the accounts alleged in the SOR fell into collection status in 
between 2011 and 2013.  After the garnishments ended in 2013, Applicant negotiated a 
payment plan of $250 per month to resolve the $9,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
Applicant has also resolved the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f ($93).7 
 
Applicant is working toward rehabilitating his finances.  Because he cannot afford 
an attorney, he has no plan to file for divorce in the foreseeable future. Although he and 
his wife share custody of the children - with the children dividing their time equally 
between the two parents, Applicant voluntarily pays his estranged wife $1,800 each 
month in child support. This is an agreement between Applicant and his wife. Applicant 
is not under a court-mandated child support order. Applicant has sought financial 
counseling. He has consulted with a financial planner on an annual basis since 2013. In 
addition to helping Applicant plan for future expenses, such as his children’s college 
tuition (Applicant saves $500 monthly for this expense), the planner also helps Applicant 
manage his budget. Applicant monitors his spending using a financial management 
website. With regards to his outstanding delinquent debt, Applicant plans to repay the 
debts alleged in the SOR one at a time, starting with the larger debts.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
6 Tr. 20, 22-24, 35-36, 44-49; GE 2-3. 
 
7 Tr. 24-27, 38-40, 43. 
 
8 Tr. 20-21, 30,33, 40-43.  
 
4 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”9 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
  
                                                          
9  AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
Applicant admits that he owes approximately $95,000 on the 13 delinquent 
accounts alleged in the SOR.  His admissions as well as the credit reports in the record 
establish the government’s prima facie case. Applicant has demonstrated an inability to 
pay his bills and a history of financial problems resulting in unresolved delinquent 
debts.10 However, Applicant has submitted sufficient information to mitigate the security 
concerns raised by his finances.  
 
The largest of those nine debts is the combined $59,000 deficiency balance on 
the marital home. However, under the anti-deficiency statue in the state where Applicant 
purchased the home, neither the holder of the first nor second mortgage securing the 
home can recover any difference in the amount obtained by the sale and the amount of 
the indebtedness and any interest, costs, and expenses. The anti-deificency statute 
applies to foreclosed, single-family homes sitting on less than 2.5 acres of land.11 
Accordingly, the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.m are uncollectible. However, a 
finding that these debts are legally uncollectible does not end the inquiry into Applicant’s 
security worthiness; the facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in 
incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner must also be examined.12 
 
Applicant did not incur debt under circumstances that reflect negatively on his 
security worthiness. Applicant’s financial problems, including the foreclosure of his 
home, are related to his marital problems. After his wife unexpectedly quit her job in 
2008 and the couple’s subsequent separation in 2010, Applicant was left to resolve 
debts incurred during the marriage on his own.  Of the 13 accounts alleged in the SOR, 
9 were opened during the marriage. All thirteen accounts fell delinquent between 2010 
and 2013, the years after Applicant and his wife separated and the years his wages 
were being garnished. Given the constraints caused by wage garnishments on his 
income between 2011 and 2013, Applicant has acted responsibly to resolve his 
delinquent debt. He has made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debt by 
entering into a payment arrangement to resolve his largest outstanding debt for $9,000 
(SOR ¶ 1.c). He has also resolved the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i. He has 
articulated a plan to resolve his remaining delinquent accounts. Applicant has sought 
financial counseling and he actively monitors his spending. Applicant has not incurred 
any delinquent debt since 2013.13  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about his suitability for access to 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Although it is true, that at the current rate, it will take 
Applicant years to resolve his delinquent debt. However, the Appeal Board has held 
that, “an applicant is not required to be debt-free or to develop a plan for paying off all 
debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act 
                                                          
10 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
11 The relevant anti-deficiency statute is attached to the record as HE III. 
 
12See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
  
13 AG ¶¶ 20 (b) – (d). 
 
 
6 
 
responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, 
accompanied by concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent 
to effectuate the plan.14 Applicant has done so. While it cannot be denied Appellant still 
owes a great deal of money, this fact that does not ultimately resolve the question of an 
individual’s security worthiness. An evaluation of Applicant’s circumstances show that, 
in the 18 years he has held a security clearance, he has not engaged in any behavior 
that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or an unwillingness to follow rules and 
regulations. Accordingly, his request for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
14 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009). 
