 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05450 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF adjudicators could not make the 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. On December 23, 2014, Applicant 
answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of 
 
2 
 
 
a hearing. On March 20, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) that contained documents marked as Items 1 through 5. On March 30, 
2015, a copy of the FORM was mailed to Applicant, giving him 30 days from its receipt 
to submit objections or provide additional information. He timely submitted a Response 
to the FORM that has been marked as Item 6. No objections were made to Items 1-6. 
The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old painter who has been working for a defense contractor 
since March 2014. He earned a general educational development (GED) certificate in 
2011. He has been serving in the Army National Guard since February 2011. He 
married in 2005 and divorced in 2013. He has two children, ages 5 and 9. In his 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) of March 21, 2014, 
Applicant indicated that he had a security clearance denied, revoked, or suspended in 
March 2013 due to failure to cooperate and financial problems. No prior security 
clearance decision or citation to such a decision was presented in the FORM.1 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had ten delinquent debts totaling about $28,696 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.j). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each allegation. His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant’s e-QIP reflected that he was unemployed from September 2009 to 
October 2011 and from July 2013 to March 2014. In October 2011, he left his job 
because he had a disagreement with a coworker and chose to leave.3 
 
 Credit reports reflected that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($6,816) involved an 
involuntary repossession of a vehicle. The judgment ($839) in SOR ¶ 1.e was filed in 
September 2009. The dates of last activity on the alleged debts range from November 
2007 to March 2014.4  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant acknowledged that he neglected to pay his 
debts, stated he always planned on paying them, and indicated he would soon start 
paying some of them. He also indicated that his first priority had been caring for his two 
children. In his Response to the FORM, Applicant provided documentation showing that 
he had been making payments on the $13,306 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i since June 
2012. While he apparently missed some payments, he has generally been making 
consistent monthly payments of about $340 on that debt. As of April 1, 2015, the 
                                                          
1 Item 3.  
 
2 Items 1 and 2. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
4 Items 4 and 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
balance of that debt has been reduced from $14,846 to $3,701. He provided no 
documentation showing payments toward, or settlement agreements for, the other 
alleged debts. Because no budgetary information was provided, the amount of his 
monthly income, expenses, debt payments, and discretionary income are unknown.5 
 
 In July 2012, Applicant left a job for an 11-month military deployment to 
Afghanistan. He served there as a member of the military police.6 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
                                                          
5 Items 2 and 6. 
6 Item 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Because Applicant accumulated debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
for an extended period, the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 are 
applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
  
 
 
5 
 
 
  Four financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Security clearance adjudications are not debt-collection procedures, but 
proceedings to evaluate an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. ISCR 
Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as a matter 
of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be 
paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 Applicant experienced periods of unemployment. One period of unemployment 
followed a military deployment to Afghanistan. This latter period of unemployment was a 
condition beyond his control that contributed to his financial problems. Since June 2012, 
Applicant has been making regular monthly payments of about $340 on the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.i, his largest debt. Over that period, he reduced the balance of that debt from 
$14,846 to $3,701. He continued making those payments while deployed to 
Afghanistan. He has established a meaningful track record of payments and debt 
reduction. The payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i have reduced his total outstanding 
debt by more than one-third. He stated that he intends to pay the remaining debts. 
While little is known about his overall financial situation, he has shown that he takes his 
debts seriously and is attempting to resolve them. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. AG ¶¶ 
20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply in varying degrees.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
 
6 
 
 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
a determination.7 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record, including his military service, and concluded the favorable 
information outweighed the security concerns at issue. Applicant met his burden of 
persuasion and mitigated the security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts as to his eligibility for a security clearance.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
    Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:      For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
7 The administrative judge should consider the adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
