 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01529 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Somalia and immigrated to the United States in 1996. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. Applicant has two cousins, who are citizens 
and residents of Somalia. For eight years he sent financial support to them. Two of his 
children are citizens of Somalia, residing with him. His nephew, who is an 
undocumented person from Somalia, resides with him. Applicant failed to present 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 6, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after 
September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DoD could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him.  
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 21, 2014, (Answer) and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on February 24, 2015, and issued a 
Notice of Hearing on March 10, 2015, scheduling the hearing for April 2, 2015. The 
hearing convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified. He offered one exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 10, 2015. The record remained open 
until April 21, 2015, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional documents. On 
April 20, 2015, he submitted two additional exhibits that I marked as AE B and AE C, 
and admitted without objection. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
1. Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Somalia. She provided four supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts (HE 1.) Applicant did not object to the request or documents, and I granted 
Department Counsel’s request. (Tr. 11.)  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004), and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
2. Based on Applicant’s testimony during the hearing, Department Counsel 
moved to amend the SOR to add two additional allegations. They are as follows: 
 
(1) SOR ¶ 1.d. Your son and daughter are citizens of Somalia, residing with you 
in the United States.  
 
(2) SOR ¶ 1.e. Your wife’s nephew is an undocumented person, who is residing 
with you in the United States.  
 
The above motion was granted. (Tr. 48-55.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.c. His admissions, including those made in a July 3, 2013 Counterintelligence 
Focused Security Screening Questionnaire (CFSSC), and in a July 25, 2013 Personal 
Subject Interview (PSI), are incorporated herein as findings of fact. (Answer; GE 4.)  
 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant was born in Somalia in 1964. He is 51 years old. After graduating from 
high school, he served in the Somalian National Guard from 1987 to 1988, as required 
by law. In 1996 Applicant immigrated to the United States as a refugee. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. He is self-employed in his barbershop. In May 2015 he 
graduated from college with a bachelor’s degree. (Tr. 15.) 
 
Applicant has been married three times. His first two wives were citizens and 
residents of Somalia. They now live in Kenya. He married each of them in the early 
1990’s, while living in Somalia and subsequently divorced them. He has a child from 
each marriage. His son and daughter are citizens of Somalia, residing with him in the 
United States. He sponsored them for permanent residence status in the United States. 
His daughter became a permanent U.S. resident in 2010, and his son became one in 
2011. (Tr. 23-24.) Both mothers of these children consented to the children’s move to 
the United States. He visited them when they were living in Kenya in 2008 and 2009. 
(Tr. 26; GE 2, GE 4; AE B, AE C.) 
 
In 1998 Applicant married his third wife. She was born in Somalia and became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2007. They have six children, all of whom are citizens and 
residents of the United States. His wife works in nursing. (GE 2.)  
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Somalia. His father is deceased. His mother is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen since 2002. She resides here.  Applicant has seven siblings, all 
of whom were born in Somalia, and are naturalized U.S. citizens residing here. He has 
infrequent communication with them. (Tr. 59-60; GE 2, GE 4.)  
 
Applicant’s wife’s nephew has resided with Applicant since 2010. He was born in 
Somalia. His mother lives in Kenya and his father’s whereabouts are unknown. He 
entered the United States illegally and was held by the U.S. authorities under a 
deportation order until Applicant intervened, and agreed to allow the nephew to reside 
with him. The nephew’s one-year work permit expired in April 2013. Neither Applicant 
nor his wife is sponsoring him for citizenship. Applicant admitted that he has an 
undocumented person living with him, whom he supports. (Tr. 28-29, 33, 39, 52; GE 2; 
AE C.)    
 
In 2005 Applicant started sending money to two cousins, who are citizens and 
residents of Somalia. They told him they were struggling financially because of their 
large families. He sent his male cousin about $150 a month, and his female cousin 
something less. (Tr. 34-35.) Between 2005 and July 2013, Applicant sent approximately 
$20,000 to the cousins. (GE 4.) He telephoned them monthly to learn if they received 
the money he sent. (GE 2.) In May 2013 Applicant visited those cousins in Somalia, 
staying with them for almost a month. (Tr. 30-31.)  
 
Applicant’s grandfather owned property in Somalia with an estimated value of 
$35,000. According to Applicant, in 2006 he learned from his male cousin that he 
inherited that property from his grandfather, who died in 1994. (Tr. 40-41.) While visiting 
his cousins in May 2013, he asked to see his grandfather’s will to confirm that he had 
inherited the property. They never produced any document verifying that he has an 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
ownership interest in the property. (Tr. 39, 43, 57, 59.) In his July 2, 2013 e-QIP, 
Applicant stated that he intended to build on the property. In his July 3, 2013 CFSSC, 
he said that he intended to sell the property. (GE 1, GE 4.)  
 
During his testimony, Applicant explained the inconsistency between his e-QIP 
statement and his statement in the CFSSC regarding what he intended to do with the 
property. He said he wanted to either build on it or sell it. (Tr. 43.) He said about six 
months after returning home from the May 2013 visit, he spoke to one of the cousins 
and realized that there are no papers documenting his interest in the property. (Tr. 68-
69.) He thinks his male cousin “schemed” to have him believe he owned the property, 
so that he would continue sending them money. (Tr. 57-58.)  
 
Applicant told an investigator on July 25, 2013, that he would no longer send his 
female cousin money because he learned during the May 2013 visit that she was 
married and did not tell him. (GE 2.)  He would continue sending money to his male 
cousin. (GE 2.) While testifying, he said he also stopped sending his male cousin 
money after the May 2013 visit. He did not recall telling the investigator that he intended 
to continue sending money to his male cousin. The last time he sent any funds to either 
cousin was in 2013. (Tr. 38.) He said he no longer has contact with his cousins because 
he feels betrayed by them. (Tr. 70.) 
 
Applicant owns two houses in the United States, one of which is paid. (Tr. 46.) In 
his CFSSC, he stated that his real estate had a value of $231,500. (GE 4.) He does not 
have any savings accounts, but has a 401(k) with about $6,000 to $7,000 in it. (Tr. 48.) 
He has owned his barber business since 2009. (Tr. 21-22.)   
 
Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance or career, or the level of responsibility his duties entail. He submitted no 
objective character references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or 
reliability.  
 
Somalia 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents concerning Somalia, which are incorporated herein by reference.  
 
Of particular significance are Somalia’s history of political unrest, and the 
presence of al-Shabbah, a terrorist organization, which continues to assert power and 
intimidation within the country and the bordering country of Kenya. Safety and security 
are key issues because this terrorist organization targets United States interests in 
Somalia and in Kenya by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, assaults, and 
hostage taking. At this time, the risk of terrorist activities remains extremely high. The 
country’s human rights record remains poor and violence is rampant. According to 
recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks 
and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are 
ongoing. Few sections of Somalia are safe or immune from violence, and the 
government has difficulty enforcing the rule of law.  
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, or is a 
known terrorist haven. The relationship of Somalia with the United States, and the 
prominence of organized terrorism there, place a significant burden of persuasion on 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with family members living in Somalia, or 
holding Somalian citizenship and residing in the United States do not pose a security 
risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist family members with ties to 
Somalia.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Somalia 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not prudent to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and Somalia has an enormous problem with 
terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with two cousins living in Somalia, to whom he 
provided financial support for eight years, and with his two children, who are Somalian 
citizens residing with him but whose mothers continue to live as Somalian refugees in 
Kenya, create substantial potential for conflict of interest. These relationships are 
sufficiently close in nature to raise a security concern about his desire to assist those 
family members by providing sensitive or classified information. This potential conflict is 
exacerbated by his nephew’s undocumented status and residency with him because it 
demonstrates Applicant’s willingness to violate U.S. law in order to assist even a non-
immediate family member. The evidence is sufficient to raise a potential security 
concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d). 
 
Applicant may have an ownership interest of $35,000 in a piece of real estate 
located in Somalia. The evidence is sufficient to raise a potential security concern under 
AG ¶ 7(e).   
 
AG ¶ 8 lists four conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Those with potential application in mitigating the security concerns in this 
case are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property  
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not have application under the facts in this case. Applicant’s two 
cousins are citizens and residents of Somalia. The family’s physical presence in that 
country creates a heightened potential for exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion, as there is strong evidence of suicide bombings, and human 
rights abuses toward citizens and residents. Thus, Applicant’s family interests could be 
threatened to the point that he would confront a choice between their interests and 
those of the United States should adverse forces learn of Applicant’s work for the U.S. 
Government. His two eldest children are Somalian citizens whose mothers are 
Somalian refugees living in Kenya. His nephew, who was born in Somalia, is residing 
with him illegally. His relationship with these family members, especially his nephew, is 
ongoing. Their ties to Somalia create further opportunity for Applicant to be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of his children and nephew, and the 
interests of the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) provides some mitigation. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that he 
“can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” He has 
lived in the United States since 1996 and became a citizen in 2008. His wife is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, and his six younger children are U.S. citizens. His mother and 
siblings are naturalized U.S. citizens, residing here.  He has some economic ties to the 
United States, including a financial interest in two pieces of real estate. He has a small 
amount of money in a 401(k). He has been attending a U.S. university and recently 
earned a bachelor’s degree. He owns a business here. While those factors weigh in 
Applicant’s favor, he still has strong ties to his Somalian family members, and the two 
elder children who reside with him. He has spent over $20,000 supporting his cousins. 
He is harboring his undocumented nephew in the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not provide mitigation for the security concerns raised. From 
2005 to 2013, Applicant maintained monthly contact with his cousins, who are citizens 
and residents of Somalia. During those eight years, he sent them about $20,000. In 
2013 he visited them. Those contacts have been sufficiently frequent that they cannot 
be construed as casual. Although he stated that he has not contacted them since May 
2013, that assertion is not sufficient to overcome a long history of connection and 
support. Further, he has daily contact with his nephew and Somalian children, as they 
reside with him. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has partial application. Applicant believed that from 2006 until 2013 he 
had a $35,000 interest in a piece of real estate in Somalia. He claimed that, after his 
visit in 2013, he realized that he does not have any document verifying his interest in 
that property. Given the amount of that alleged interest, in comparison to the 
approximate $240,000 or more of assets he has in the United States, the possible 
ownership of property in Somalia is unlikely to create a conflict or be used effectively to 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
influence, manipulate, or pressure him. It does not, however, diminish the security risks 
associated with his Somalian cousins, children, and nephew. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.  The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Some mitigating evidence 
weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. He is an intelligent, articulate, 
and hardworking person, who has lived in the United States for 19 years. He has owned 
a business since 2009. He has been attending a local college and earned a degree. He 
lives with nine members of his immediate family, seven of whom are U.S. citizens. He 
has accumulated at least $240,000 of assets in the United States.  
 
Five circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole-person analysis.  First, 
there is a significant risk of terrorism and human rights abuses in Somalia. More 
importantly for security purposes, terrorists there are hostile to the United States, 
engage in violence against its citizens and residents, and actively seek classified 
information. Terrorists and friendly governments could attempt to use Applicant’s family 
members to obtain protected information and compromise Applicant’s responsibilities to 
the United States.  
 
Second, Applicant had numerous connections to Somalia before he immigrated 
to the United States in 1996. He spent his formative years there and attended high 
school there. Third, two cousins for whom he has provided at least $20,000 of financial 
support over eight years, are citizens and residents of Somalia. He maintained regular 
contact with them during those years. Two of his children remain Somalian citizens, 
while residing here. Fourth, Applicant’s conflicting statements about his intentions for 
the property he might have inherited and confusion over what he told an investigator 
about continuing financial support for his cousins raise additional concerns about his 
 
  10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
truthfulness. Fifth and most troublesome, is the fact that his nephew, who entered this 
country illegally, has been living with him as an undocumented alien.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant has not sufficiently 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c:       For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
