 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-04252 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 23, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 20, 2014, and requested that her 
case be decided on the administrative record. On February 18, 2015, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM was forwarded to 
Applicant on February 24, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on April 15, 2015.  On 
 
2 
April 17, 2015, Applicant responded to the FORM and submitted additional matters. Her 
response to the FORM is marked and admitted as Item 8. In a memorandum dated  
April 22, 2015, Department Counsel indicated no objection to Applicant’s Response to 
the FORM. (Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked as Hearing Exhibit A (HE 
A)). The file was forwarded to the DOHA Hearing Office on April 30, 2014. The case 
was assigned to me on May 1, 2015.  
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Item 7 of the FORM is a portion of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from the 
background investigation of Applicant. The five-page document is a summary of an 
interview of Applicant on April 26, 2013, in conjunction with her background 
investigation. DoDD 5220.6, enclosure 2, ¶ E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may be received 
with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the Federal 
Rules of Evidence.” (see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 2014). Item 7 
is not authenticated.  
 
Although Applicant, who is representing herself, has not raised the issue via an 
objection, I am raising it sua sponte. While it is clear that Department Counsel is acting 
in good faith, having highlighted the issue in a footnote in the FORM. (See 
Government’s FORM, at 2, footnote 1) Applicant’s failure to mention this issue in a 
response to the FORM is not a knowing waiver of the rule.  Waiver means “the 
voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage, the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of 
the existing right and the intention of forgoing it. Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. 
Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009).  
 
Applicant was not expressly informed of the requirement in ¶ E3.1.20 of the 
Directive requiring that an ROI be received into evidence with an authenticating witness. 
I cannot conclude she expressly waived this rule. She did not mention Item 7 in her 
response to the FORM. She may not have read the footnote advising her to review Item 
7 for accuracy. I cannot conclude that Applicant’s failure to address the accuracy of Item 
7 in her Response to the FORM was a knowing waiver of the rules outlined in the 
Directive, enclosure 2, ¶ E3.1.20. Item 7 is not admissible and will not be considered in 
this Decision.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since April 2000. She submitted an application for a public trust 
position on January 30, 2013. She is married and has two adult daughters. (Item 3) 
  
 A subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant has nine 
delinquent debts with an approximate total balance of $130,894. The debts include: a 
charged-off second mortgage account in the amount of $86,584, delinquent since 
March 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 5 at 1; Item 6 at 4); a $17,637 charged-off account, 
delinquent since January 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 2; Item 6 at 4); a $6,448 charged-
 
3 
off account, delinquent since December 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 5 at 2; Item 6 at 5); a 
$6,185 collection account, delinquent since January 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 5 at 2; Item 
6 at 5); and a $5,106 collection account, delinquent since April 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 5 
at 2; Item 6 at 10). 
 
 Additional delinquent accounts include: a $1,685 charged-off credit card account, 
delinquent since October 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 4 at 2; Item 5 at 1); a $6,838 
outstanding judgment filed against Applicant in October 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 4 at 1; 
Item 5 at 4; Item 6 at 4); a $229 collection account, delinquent since August 2010 (SOR 
¶ 1.h: Item 6 at 10); and a $182 collection account, delinquent since September 2011. 
(SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 6 at 11).  
 
  In response to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the alleged debts. She and her 
husband started a small printing paper and supplies business in 2002. In July 2004, 
their largest customer went out of business and filed for bankruptcy. As a result, the 
business lost $300,000. Their largest customer never repaid the debts owed to them. 
Applicant and her husband used their personal credit cards and their second mortgage 
to fund the business. They kept the business open for three years. In October 2007, 
they closed the business. They made payments on their outstanding debts until January 
2008.  As a result of the housing crisis, Applicant’s home was valued at less than the 
amount of the first and second mortgages. The home went to foreclosure and was sold 
for the value of the first mortgage. The second mortgage remains outstanding.  (Item 2 
at 3) 
 
 Applicant has worked for her employer for 15 years. She always exceeded the 
expectations of her managers and is considered a valued asset to the company. She 
loves her job and states it is an honor to serve the men, women, and their families who 
served our nation. (Item 2 at 4; Item 8)  
 
 In her response to the FORM, Applicant states that her credit defaults occurred 
during the 2008 financial crisis, which was the worst financial crisis since the Great 
Depression. She provided comments from her performance evaluations over the past 
12 years to show that she is a valued employee. They all rate her as “exceeding 
expectations.” Comments also include that Applicant can “be counted on to get the job 
done.” She “consistently strives for excellence and fosters the same drive in all others 
on the team.” She has shown “team leadership, mentoring ability, professionalism, drive 
and initiative.” (Item 8). She is a valued employee who is held in high esteem by her 
supervisors.  
   
 As of April 17, 2015, Applicant admits that she has not taken steps toward 
resolving the debt. After reading the Government’s FORM, she agrees it is something 
that she should do. She would like additional time so that she can begin contacting 
creditors regarding steps to resolve the debt. She would like to take any steps needed 
in order to obtain her security clearance. Her job is important to her and she is proud of 
her job. (Item 8)  
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It 
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important 
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding sensitive information.  
 
Here the evidence supports a conclusion that the Applicant has a history of 
financial problems or difficulties. The guideline notes several conditions that could raise 
trustworthiness concerns under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay her 
financial obligations. The debts total approximately $130,894.  Most of the debts have 
been delinquent since 2008. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant’s financial problems were the result of a failed printing business which 
closed in 2008. However, Applicant has taken no initiative with regards to resolving the 
delinquent debts. During this time, she has been consistently employed with her current 
employer.  AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are 
ongoing. None of the delinquent debts are resolved. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply because 
although Applicant’s financial problems were the result of a business downturn, I cannot 
conclude she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant took no steps to 
resolve the financial delinquencies over a period of six years, even the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.h and 1.i which were for the minimal amounts of $229 and $182 respectively.  AG ¶ 
20(c) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are unlikely to be resolved 
in the near future. Finally, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because Applicant has not made a 
good-faith effort to resolve her delinquent debts.  
   
  The concerns under financial considerations are not mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
7 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable employment history, her candor in admitting 
her financial problems, and the failure of her and her husband’s printing business. While  
the financial problems were caused by circumstances beyond her control, Applicant did 
not develop a plan to resolve her delinquent debts. Most of the debts have been 
delinquent since 2008.  An applicant is not required to establish that he or she has paid 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that applicant establish a plan to 
resolve the financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan.  
Applicant failed to establish a plan to resolve her financial problems and pay her 
delinquent debts.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant’s application for a trustworthiness position should be denied.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   Against  Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Erin C. Hogan 
Administrative Judge 
