 
1 
 
 
																																																														
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04429 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 25, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F. This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information and referred her case to an administrative judge so that a determination 
could be made to grant, deny, or revoke her security clearance. In an undated 
 
2 
 
 
document, Applicant answered the SOR. On January 8, 2015, she supplemented her 
answer and requested a hearing. This case was assigned to me on February 3, 2015. 
On February 10, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for February 25, 2015. The hearing was held 
as scheduled. Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement for a hearing in ¶ E3.1.8 
of the Directive.1 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, while Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through N. 
Applicant’s objection to GE 3, a credit report, was overruled. All of the other exhibits 
were admitted into evidence without objection. Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 is a prehearing 
guidance letter that was sent to Applicant; HE 2 is Department Counsel’s list of exhibits. 
The record of the proceeding was left open to March 11, 2015, to provide Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional documents, but she did not submit anything further. The 
transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on March 9, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 43, is an assistant manager of a cleaning crew. She has been working 
for a defense contractor since January 2013. She was born in the Republic of the 
Philippines. Her father was a U.S. service member and her mother a citizen of the 
Philippines. She never knew her father and does not know if he is still living. In 1986, 
she came to the United States at age 16 and became a U.S. citizen in 1990. All of her 
immediate relatives continue to live in the Philippines. She received her general 
educational development (GED) certificate in 1993. She married in 1986 and divorced in 
1990. She has four children, ages 5, 10, 12, and 21. This is the first time that she is 
seeking a security clearance.2 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had nine delinquent debts totaling about $34,534 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.i). In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. 
Her admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.3 
 
Applicant attributed her financial problems to periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. In December 2011, Applicant was fired from a supermarket because 
she was suspected of stealing a packet of cheese. She stated that she paid for the 
cheese and kept it in a refrigerator in a break room. When confronted about the cheese, 
she was unable to produce the receipt. She was unable to collect unemployment 
because the employer claimed she quit. From January 2012 to September 2012, she 
worked part time in a fast-food restaurant. From February 2012 to February 2013, she 
worked as a clerk in a gas station, earning minimum wage before obtaining her current 
                                                          
1 Tr. 10-11.   
2 Tr. 5-6, 35-39; GE 1.   
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
3 
 
 
job. She fell behind on her bills during these periods of unemployment and 
underemployment.4 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a-1.d – delinquent medical accounts totaling $1,372. In 2012 and 2013, 
Applicant suffered migraine headaches on about four occasions that caused her to seek 
medical treatment at a hospital. She did not have health insurance at that time. In 
February 2013, the hospital designated her indigent and canceled her existing medical 
debts. She provided a letter from her hospital indicating that “[a]ny existing accounts 
you have with our facilities have been adjusted accordingly.” This cancellation applies to 
these alleged debts.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – collection account for $235. This medical account had a date of last 
activity of December 2007. Applicant was unsure about the status of this debt. This debt 
may fall under the hospital’s debt cancellation discussed above. However, Applicant did 
not provide sufficient evidence to conclude this debt is resolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – delinquent medical account for $175. This debt was for a blood test. 
It had a date of last activity of August 2013. Applicant paid this debt in January 2015.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – collection account for $9,894. This was a personal loan that had a 
date of last activity of April 2007. Applicant had insurance that would cover the 
payments on this loan in the event she lost her job. She was unable to collect on the 
insurance because the supermarket at which she was working claimed she quit, but she 
contends that she was fired. In February 2015, Applicant settled this debt with a 
payment of $2,150.8 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – charged-off account for $22,484. This was an automobile loan with 
a date of last activity of October 2008. After losing a job, she was unable to make the 
car payments. She voluntarily returned the car to the creditor. At that time, she claimed 
the balance of the auto loan was about $11,000. She called the collection agency in an 
attempt to settle this debt and was informed that the account was closed. This account 
does not appear on her most recent credit report.9 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 51-52, 68-84.  
5 Tr. 40-48; GE 3; AE A-D, J. Applicant made a payment of $40 on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a in 
December 2014. She attempted to make another payment and was told that she was not required to pay 
anything because of the earlier indigent designation. See Tr. 43-44. 
6 Tr. 48-50; GE 3; AE A-D, J. 
7 Tr. 50-51; GE 3; AE E, F.  
8 Tr. 51-54; GE 4; AE M. 
9 Tr. 54-56, 74-75; GE 3, 4.  
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – collection account for $374. This was cell phone account that was 
placed for collection in March 2013. It had a date of last activity of June 2009. She 
testified that she told the creditor to cancel the account because she could not afford the 
payments. She stopped using the cell phone, but the creditor kept billing her. In 
February 2015, she settled this debt for $262.10 
 
Applicant received financial advice from an accountant about two weeks before 
the hearing. Applicant took out loans for $9,000 and $12,000 to pay the alleged debts 
and other financial obligations. In March 2015, she will start repaying the $12,000 loan 
by making monthly payments of $374. Her monthly take-home pay is about $2,200. She 
resides with a boyfriend and shares expenses with him. Her boyfriend is a truck driver 
whose income is irregular. At the time of the hearing, she had about $1,000 in her 
checking account and $20 in a savings account. She estimated her net monthly 
remainder had been about $500, but it was unclear whether the monthly payment on 
the $9,000 loan was deducted in making that calculation. She testified that she 
destroyed all of her credit cards.11 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
                                                          
10 Tr. 56-59; GE 4; AE N. 
11 Tr. 53-54, 59-75, 79-83.  
 
5 
 
 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19. Two are 
potentially applicable in this case:   
 
6 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to 
satisfy for an extended period. The evidence established the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are not the result of frivolous or irresponsible spending. She 
suffered from migraine headaches and encountered periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. Those events were conditions beyond her control that contributed to 
her financial problems. She made a good-faith effort to repay her creditor based on her 
limited means. She has paid three of the alleged debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.i). Four 
debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d), possibly five (SOR ¶ 1.e), were forgiven. She contacted the 
collection agency holding the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h in an attempt to resolve it and was told 
it was closed. She provided sufficient evidence to conclude that the alleged debts, with 
the exception of the small debt in SOR ¶ 1.e, have been resolved. Her delinquent debts 
do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
Applicant may continue to struggle financially, but she can be expected to act 
responsibly in handing her financial matters. All of the above mitigating conditions apply 
in varying degrees.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 In the adjudication process, an administrative judge must carefully weigh a 
number of variables known as the whole-person concept. Available information about 
the applicant as well as the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) should be considered in reaching 
 
7 
 
 
a determination.12 In this case, I gave due consideration to the information about 
Applicant in the record and concluded the favorable information, including the mitigating 
evidence, outweighs the security concerns at issue. Applicant met her burden of 
persuasion and mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to her eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance.  
Formal Findings 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i: For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
12 The nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a) are:  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
