 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04664 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
  
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 19, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 27, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 4, 2015, scheduling the hearing for March 30, 2015. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in 
 
2 
 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted documents that were marked 
AE D through F and admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on April 6, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2011. He served in the U.S. military from 1985 until he 
retired in 2007. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he has held for many 
years. He earned a bachelor’s degree this year. He is married with three children, ages 
24, 21, and 19.1 
 
 Applicant retired from the military as an E-7. He receives his retirement pay and 
10% disability pay from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). He worked for the 
military as a civilian employee after he retired until October 2008. Even with his 
retirement pay, he was not earning as much as when he was in the military. He 
obtained a job that “really paid well” with a defense contractor in November 2008, at a 
salary that was “much more than [he] was making.” The contract changed hands to 
Applicant’s current employer in 2011, but Applicant’s job remained the same. 
Applicant’s wife has been unable to find suitable employment since his retirement in 
2007.2 
 
 Applicant’s last duty station before he retired was overseas. At the height of the 
housing boom, he agreed to buy a house at his present location without seeing it. When 
he saw it, he was disappointed but continued with the purchase because he already 
made school arrangements for his children and the realtor told him that he could resell 
the house in two years for a profit. Applicant bought the house for about $291,000, 
which was completely financed through a mortgage loan.3 
 
 Shortly thereafter, the real estate market crashed and the house was worth far 
less than what was owed on the mortgage loan. Applicant was struggling financially 
because he was paying for his three children in high school or college, and his wife was 
not working.4 
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts and that Applicant’s mortgage loan was 
$14,290 past due. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are duplicate accounts. The 
three non-duplicate debts total about $28,800.  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18-19, 47-48, 55, 66; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 19, 23-24, 57, 59; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-22. 
 
4 Tr. at 25-31, 53-55, 58-59; GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 In about October 2012, Applicant retained a law firm to assist him in disposing of 
his home and the mortgage loan. His attorney advised him to stop paying the mortgage 
loan, which he did, and the attorney would attempt to negotiate a short sale of the 
property. The March 2013 credit report lists the loan as in foreclosure, $14,290 past 
due, and a $297,036 balance. The attorney was unable to negotiate a short sale, and 
the home was lost to foreclosure. It sold in August 2013 for $166,000. There is no 
indication that the deficiency is being pursued by the mortgage holder. Applicant 
remained in the home throughout the process. After the sale, the new owner agreed to 
rent the property to Applicant. He still lives in the property and pays much less in rent 
than he did on the mortgage loan.5 
 
 Applicant admits he owes the $25,319 charged-off credit card debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. The March 2013 credit report lists the account as charged off for $29,219 in 
July 2011. It reports the date of last action on the account as August 2012 with a 
$25,319 balance.6  
 
 Applicant stated that he entered into a $300 per month payment agreement with 
the creditor in December 2009, and paid $300 each month for the next nine months. 
Applicant was unable to make the September, October, and November 2010 payments. 
Contacting the creditor was difficult. When he finally was connected to someone who 
would talk to him about the debt in December 2010, he was told the debt was charged 
off and transferred to a collection company. Applicant contacted the collection company, 
but he was offended by their aggressive tactics. Applicant contacted the original creditor 
to attempt to work with them on the account, but the creditor told him that he would 
have to deal with the collection company. Applicant was frustrated with the response, 
and he stopped attempting to resolve the debt.7 
 
 After the hearing, Applicant submitted an April 23, 2015 settlement agreement 
with the collection company handling the debt. The company agreed to settle the 
$25,319 debt for $8,861, which Applicant indicated would be paid through eight monthly 
payments of $1,107.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a delinquent debt to a bank for $1,826. Applicant admits the 
account is his, but he denies that the account has a balance. He stated that he opened 
the credit card account, but he never used the card. He believes he may have been the 
victim of identity theft.9 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 30, 37-44, 48-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE B, C. 
 
6 Tr. at 30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 30-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
8 AE D, E. 
 
9 Tr. at 60, 64-65; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant denies owing the $1,713 debt to a collection company on behalf of a 
bank, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He denies ever having an account with the bank.10 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d are both listed on the March 2013 and 
May 2014 credit reports.11 Applicant was asked about the debts during his background 
interview in April 2013. He stated that he intended to pull his credit report and make 
payment arrangements if the debts were determined to be valid, or dispute the debts if 
they were not valid. Applicant sent dispute letters about the accounts to the credit 
reporting agencies on April 6, 2015.12 
 
 Applicant indicated that his finances are stable. He received financial counseling 
when he was in the military, and he has a budget and a plan to address his finances, 
which he learned from a nationally-known financial expert. His children are all still in 
college, and he is paying a large part of their education costs. His oldest child is set to 
graduate, and Applicant has recently graduated. His wife is still not working. He was on 
a payment plan for his 2012 federal taxes, which he completed. He is currently on a 
payment plan for his 2013 federal taxes. He believes that he owes about $800.13 He 
stated that he expected that he would be able to pay his 2014 taxes by the April 15 
deadline.14 
 
 Applicant submitted letters attesting to his honor, loyalty, dedication, work ethic, 
trustworthiness, leadership, and reliability. He is recommended for a security 
clearance.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 62; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
11 “Credit reports are generally sufficient to establish the Government’s prima facie case of Guideline F 
security concerns.” See ISCR Case No. 10-03668 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2012). 
 
12 Tr. at 60-65; GE 2-4, AE F. 
 
13 Applicant’s delinquent taxes were not alleged in the SOR, and they will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. They may be considered in the application of mitigating conditions and when conducting the 
whole-person analysis.  
14 Tr. at 50-52, 56-60, 66-67; AE A. 
 
15 AE A.  
 
5 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
6 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay his financial obligations. The above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,360) is a duplicate of the $1,713 debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.d. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same 
guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s favor. See 
ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). SOR 
¶ 1.e is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant did not earn as much when he retired in 2007 as when he was in the 
military, but he has worked for federal contractors since 2008 in jobs that “really paid 
well.” His wife has been unable to find suitable employment since Applicant’s retirement 
in 2007, which is beyond Applicant’s control. The greatest source of Applicant’s financial 
problems is the high cost of education for his three children.  
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant’s home was lost to foreclosure while he lived rent-free until it sold. 
There is no indication that the deficiency is being pursued by the mortgage holder. He 
did nothing for several years about the $25,319 debt because he was frustrated that the 
creditor charged it off and transferred it to an aggressive collection company. After the 
hearing, the collection company agreed to settle the debt for $8,861, which Applicant 
indicated would be paid through eight monthly payments of $1,107. The Appeal Board 
has held that a “promise to take remedial action in the future, however credible and 
sincere, is not evidence of actual rehabilitation.” See ISCR Case No. 08-05379 at 2 
(App. Bd. Nov. 24, 2009) (quoting ISCR Case No. 96-0544 at 5 (App. Bd. May 12, 
1997)). He denies owing two debts. He was asked about the debts during his 
background interview in April 2013, but he did not submit dispute letters to the credit 
reporting agencies until after the hearing. Applicant states his finances have improved, 
but he had to pay his 2012 federal income taxes through a payment plan, and he is still 
paying his 2013 income taxes through a payment plan. 
 
 I am unable to find that Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances or 
that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. His finances are not yet under control. 
His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are 
unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially 
applicable. The first section of AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable; the second section is not, 
except as it relates to the mortgage loan. AG ¶ 20(e) is not yet completely applicable 
because the investigation of Applicant’s disputed debts has not been completed. I find 
that financial concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and honorable military 
service. However, Applicant has a history of financial problems. It is too soon to 
conclude that he will resolve those problems within a reasonable period. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
