 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 14-05201 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
In May 2009, and October 2011, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving 
while under the influence of alcohol (DUI). He was on probation when arrested for the 
October 2011 DUI. He continues to consume alcohol to intoxication. Alcohol 
consumption concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 25, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86).  
(GE 1) On November 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
   
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol consumption). 
(HE 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge 
to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On December 17, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On March 9, 
2015, Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On March 19, 2015, DOHA 
assigned the case to me. On April 13, 2015, DOHA issued a notice of the hearing, 
setting the hearing for May 14, 2015. (HE 1) The hearing was held as scheduled. 
Department Counsel offered four exhibits into evidence, and Applicant offered five 
exhibits into evidence. (Tr. 14-19; GE 1-4; AE A-E) There were no objections, and I 
admitted all proffered exhibits into evidence. (Tr. 15, 17, 19; GE 1-4; AE A-E) On May 
22, 2015, I received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
Applicant also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions 
are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who has provided 
security services for his employer since May 2009. (Tr. 6, 38; GE 1) In 2003, Applicant 
graduated from high school, and in 2013, he received a certificate of completion in 
administrative justice. (Tr. 7, 22; AE D) He has never served in the military. (Tr. 7) He 
has never been married, and he does not have any children. (Tr. 7) There is no 
evidence of security violations, use of illegal drugs, or criminal offenses aside from his 
DUIs.   
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 In May 2009, at about 6:00 pm, the police arrested Applicant for DUI. (Tr. 25-26) 
His blood alcohol content (BAC) was .29 percent. (Tr. 26) He was scheduled to work at 
10 pm (four hours after he was arrested). (Tr. 26-27) Applicant said he was “not sure” 
whether he would have still been under the influence of alcohol when he reported to 
work as a security guard. (Tr. 26, 28) At the time of his arrest, he did not feel like he was 
still under the influence of alcohol. (Tr. 28) Applicant was enrolled in the first offender 
program. (Tr. 28) He paid his attorney $2,000 and his fine was $1,800. The first offender 
program cost about $1,500 to $2,000. (Tr. 29) He was on unsupervised probation for 
three years. (Tr. 29-30) His probation did not prohibit alcohol consumption; however, it 
entailed zero tolerance for DUI. (Tr. 30) He was required to watch videos about the 
impact of DUI. (Tr. 33)      
 
In October 2011, while still on probation from his previous DUI, Applicant was 
driving in stop-and-go traffic, and he rear ended another vehicle. (Tr. 31) Applicant’s 
BAC was .10 percent, which exceeded the DUI threshold of .08 percent. (Tr. 32) He 
                                            
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
received a fine, was required to pay restitution, and was placed on probation for three 
more years. (Tr. 33; GE 4) His probation ended in February 2015. (Tr. 33) He received 
small group in-person instruction on the impact of DUI. (Tr. 34) He was not told he was 
an abuser of alcohol. (Tr. 35) It was suggested that he reduce his alcohol consumption. 
(Tr. 35) Probation did not include prohibition of alcohol consumption. (Tr. 35) 
 
Applicant has never attended Alcoholics Anonymous or alcohol counseling or 
treatment. (Tr. 35) He became intoxicated after consuming 64 ounces of beer the week 
before his hearing. (Tr. 35-36) He drinks about this amount of beer once or twice a 
week. (Tr. 36-37) His second DUI did not affect the amount of his alcohol consumption; 
however, it did cause him to ensure he did not drive after consuming alcohol. (Tr. 39)  
 
 Applicant has not driven after consuming alcohol since his arrest in 2011. (Tr. 37) 
Applicant has not had any traffic infractions since his 2011 DUI. (Tr. 23; GE 4) He did 
not believe his alcohol consumption affected his personal relationships or work. (Tr. 38, 
41)  
 
Character evidence 
 
 Applicant is highly organized in his establishment of schedules for his 
subordinates, who work in the security area. (Tr. 16; AE A)  
 
Applicant assisted in the apprehension and detention of an intoxicated fake 
screener at an airport, who was directing women into a private booth for pat downs. (Tr. 
20-21; AE B) They held the fake screener until the local police arrived to arrest him. (AE 
B)  
 
Applicant has been certified as a high school level coach for three years. (Tr. 21) 
He mentors 50-60 children. (Tr. 22)   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
 Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security or 
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 22(a) - 22(g) 
provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(b), 22(d) through 22(g) do not apply. Applicant did not have any 
alcohol-related incidents at work, did not violate any court orders, and did not have a 
relapse after a diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence. He did not suffer a relapse 
after being diagnosed as suffering from alcohol abuse or dependence.  
 
Applicant engaged in binge-alcohol consumption to the extent of impaired 
judgment.2 His excessive alcohol consumption resulted in arrests, convictions, and 
various penalties imposed by the courts for DUIs in May 2009, and October 2011. AG ¶ 
22(a) and 22(c) apply.  
                                            
2Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Directive, the generally accepted 
definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The 
definition of binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, 
NIAAA Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/ 
winter2004/NewsletterNumber3.pdf.  
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-23(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has not attended an alcohol 
rehabilitation or counseling program. He is not currently attending alcohol counseling, 
treatment, or AA meetings. He continues to consume alcohol to intoxication. He has not 
established a pattern of responsible alcohol use. He has not provided “a favorable 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker 
who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.” 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show 
many different permutations. The DOHA Appeal Board has determined in cases of 
substantial alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless 
there was a fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption. See ISCR 
Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).  For 
example, in ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the Appeal Board 
reversed the administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “That Applicant 
continued to drink even after his second alcohol related arrest vitiates the Judge’s 
application of MC 3.”   
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board 
reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB 
had several alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most recent DUI was in 
2000, six years before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his 
alcohol consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol 
(not to intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued 
alcohol consumption was not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary 
and capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) 
(involving case with most recent alcohol-related incident three years before hearing, and 
reversing administrative judge’s grant of a clearance). 
 
After careful consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol 
consumption, I have doubts about Applicant’s continued alcohol consumption to 
intoxication and lack of alcohol-related counseling and treatment. His BAC in 2009 of 
.29 percent is more than three times the legal limit of .08 percent. His .29 percent BAC 
was four hours before he was scheduled to report for his security-related employment. 
His 2011 DUI was during his probation from his 2009 DUI. Alcohol consumption 
concerns are not mitigated.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting continuation of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant is 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who 
has provided security services for his employer since May 2009. In 2003, Applicant 
graduated from high school, and in 2013, he received a certificate of completion in 
administrative justice. There is no evidence of security violations, use of illegal drugs, or 
criminal offenses aside from his DUIs. Applicant is highly organized in his establishment 
of schedules for his subordinates, who work in the security area. He assisted in the 
apprehension and detention of an intoxicated fake screener at an airport, who was 
directing women into a private booth for pat downs. He has been certified as a high 
school level coach for three years, and he mentors 50-60 children.    
 
The evidence supporting denial of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial than 
the evidence supporting approval of his security clearance. Applicant has two serious 
offenses—his two convictions for DUI in 2009 and 2011. DUI is a serious criminal 
offense in which he endangered himself and others. Excessive alcohol consumption 
followed by driving a motor vehicle shows a lack of judgment, rehabilitation, and impulse 
control. There is no medical diagnosis, evaluation, or prognosis of his alcohol 
consumption; he continues to consume alcohol to intoxication; and he is not attending 
any ongoing alcohol-related counseling or treatment. “Excessive alcohol consumption 
often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, 
and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.” (AG ¶ 21) 
Alcohol consumption concerns are not mitigated.  
    
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Alcohol consumption security 
concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  Against Applicant 
  
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
