 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-03541 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 25, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
On October 10, 2014, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR, and she 
elected to have her case decided on the written record. On February 19, 2015, 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant on March 18, 2015, and it was received on March 24, 
 
2 
2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant submitted additional information. There 
were no objections to any of the documents offered and the Government and 
Applicant’s exhibits are admitted. The case was assigned to me on May 15, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.i, 1.k-1.l, and 1.n. She denied 
the allegations in ¶¶ 1.j. and 1.m. Her admissions are incorporated into the findings of 
fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. She is a high school graduate. She married in 1989 
and divorced in 2006. She has two daughters, ages 25 and 21.  
 
 Applicant and her husband filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004 and had their 
debts discharged in January 2005. They purchased a home in 2003. She became sick 
and was not contributing to the family income. They could no longer afford the home. 
After making approximately 12 monthly payments on the mortgage they stopped. The 
mortgage was included in the bankruptcy discharge along with other debts.  
 
 Applicant attributes her more recent financial problems to unemployment and 
being in an abusive relationship with her fiancé. She indicated she did not want to lose 
her house, car, or have a negative impact on her credit so she remained with him. She 
stated her fiancé did not want her to work. She did not work from June 2012 to August 
2013. She indicated he used her credit cards and her money and it was “beyond her 
control” to say “no.” She was aware he was using the credit cards. In her interview with 
a government investigator in February 2014, she admitted she made purchases using 
the credit cards. She indicated that on June 19, 2013, her fiancé was arrested for 
domestic violence. She stated she had paid her bills on time until October 2013. She 
also indicated that they had some type of business together that was terminated in May 
2013 “two weeks before he left.”1 
 
 Applicant disclosed in her electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) that she was employed from June 2011 to June 2012. She noted the reason 
she left this employment was because “Salary was low. Not consistent with hours every 
week. Had me working every weekend. Wanted to pursue other options of 
employment.”2 Applicant further lists she was unemployed from June 2012 to 
September 2013.3 She began working part-time at a retail store in September 2013. 
She began working full-time in a temporary position with an agency in February 2014. 
                                                          
1 Item 1; Answer to FORM; Response to FORM. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 Item 2. 
 
 
3 
She began working at her current position full-time in a permanent positon in June 
2014.4 
 
 Applicant disclosed that she took vacation cruises as follows: February 2013 for 
seven days; September 2012 for five days; and August 2011 for seven days.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m alleges a past-due mortgage ($7,516) with a total balance of 
$131,831. Applicant admitted she fell behind paying her mortgage due to 
unemployment. She indicated she remained in contact with the mortgage lender and 
applied for mortgage assistance, but was denied and the house was being foreclosed. 
She indicated she attempted to modify her mortgage loan, but because she was only 
working part-time she was unable. She appealed the decision. She obtained a full-time 
permanent position in June 2014 and her loan modification was approved in July 2014. 
She provided copies of the mortgage loan modification and proof she has been making 
monthly payments.6 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($315) is for a jewelry store credit card. Applicant paid the 
debt in March 2014 and provided documented proof the debt is resolved.7 
 
 The SOR alleges an additional 11 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$9,318. In her Response to the FORM, Applicant indicated that she has attempted to 
pay some of her creditors and resolve her debts. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($2,374), 1.c 
($399,) and 1.k ($882) are medical debts incurred in March 2012 when Applicant had to 
go to the emergency room by ambulance. She made a $50 payment in January 2015 
and provided proof. She intended to contact the creditors when her situation improved. 
She indicated her health insurance at the time was not very good. She did not provide 
additional documents to support resolution or settlement of any other alleged debts. It is 
likely the past-due balances on the alleged debts have increased.8  
 
 No information was provided regarding Applicant’s current income, expenses, 
and proof of actions she has taken to resolve the existing past-due and delinquent 
debts. She indicated she has three active credit cards that are current. Applicant 
indicated that she is working with an attorney to consolidate her debt. No other 
information was provided regarding the consolidation of her debts or any payment plans 
that have been developed. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Item 1; Response to FORM. 
 
5 Item 3; Response to FORM. 
 
6 Answer to SOR; Response to FORM with attachments. 
 
7 Item 1. 
 
8 Response to FORM. 
 
4 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for  
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant and her husband filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2004 and their debts 
were discharged in 2005. Applicant has 11 debts that total approximately $9,318 that 
she is unable or unwilling to satisfy. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant has numerous debts that are not 
resolved. Applicant attributes her financial problems to being unemployed and being in 
an abusive relationship. She indicated that her fiancé used her credit cards. These 
conditions were somewhat beyond her control. To fully apply AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant 
must have acted responsibly. Applicant has medical bills that were not covered by her 
insurance for medical services received in March 2012. She indicated that she took 
cruises in September 2012 and February 2013. She did not explain how she could 
afford to pay for a cruise and not pay her medical bills. She indicated her fiancé 
misused her credit cards. In her interview with a government investigator she admitted 
that she also used the credit cards for her purchases. On her e-QIP she indicated she 
voluntarily left her job in June 2012. She later indicated that her fiancé did not want her 
to work, so she was unemployed. Applicant’s fiancé was arrested in June 2013. 
Presumably he was no longer living with her after that date. She has been employed 
full-time since February 2014. She has resolved her past-due mortgage through a loan 
modification. She paid one credit card debt and made a $50 payment for a medical 
debt. She has not provided proof of other actions she has taken to resolve her 
remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant indicated she is receiving counseling from an attorney regarding debt 
consolidation. No additional information was provided regarding actions she has taken 
to settle or resolve her debts. Some of the debts alleged have small balances. Applicant 
has not provided sufficient information to conclude there are clear indications her 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.m. Applicant did not dispute any debts. AG ¶ 
20(e) is not raised.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. She and her husband had their debts discharged in 
bankruptcy in 2005. Later she was in an abusive relationship and voluntarily stopped 
working. She was able to modify her mortgage loan and is current on her payments. 
She resolved one credit card debt. She incurred medical debts, but did not provide an 
explanation as to how she was able to take a cruise, but was unable to pay her medical 
bills. She has been working full-time since February 2014 and with her current employer 
since June 2014. The status of her current finances is unknown. Without additional 
explanations, information, and documents, it is too early to conclude that Applicant’s 
finances are under control. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline F, financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.k:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.l:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.m:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
