1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 14-00354
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s wife returned to the workforce in 2012. Applicant obtained part-time work
in 2013. Their extra earnings have made more money available to pay or settle 10 of the
12 delinquent accounts listed in the Statement of Reasons (SOR). Eligibility for access to
classified information is granted. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP), Government’s Exhibit (GE) 1, on September 12, 2013. On March 7,
2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a SOR detailing security concerns under
the financial considerations guideline (Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to
 Though Applicant testified that his reduction in hours occurred in 2006, I find the information in his e-QIP to1
be more accurate primarily because the dates have a closer correspondence to when the accounts became
delinquent. See GE 2 and 3.
2
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,
1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
implemented by the DOD in September 1, 2006. 
Applicant’s answer to the SOR was notarized on April 30, 2014. The Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 27, 2015, for a
hearing on February 12, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. The Government’s
three exhibits (GE) and Applicant’s 12 exhibits (AE) A-L were admitted into evidence
without objection. The record remained open until February 20, 2015, to allow Applicant an
opportunity to provide additional documentation. He provided documentation (AE M) on
February 19, 2015. The record in this case closed when the hearing transcript (Tr.) was
received on February 23, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted all the delinquent accounts in the SOR, which alleges three
judgments and nine delinquent accounts. The delinquent accounts represent credit cards,
a homeowner’s association (HOA) debt, medical accounts and a delinquent secondary
mortgage, which is the largest overdue debt. The total amount of delinquent debt is
approximately $89,634. He accumulated the debt between 2008 and January 2013. He
blamed his financial problems on reduced hours at work, which caused him to use his credit
cards to their limits to remain current on his secondary mortgage. When he fell behind on
mortgage payments, his house was foreclosed and sold. Because his wife is working again
and he has a second job, he is slowly making progress in paying the delinquent accounts.
Applicant is 35 years old. He has been married since March 2002, and he has three
children, two daughters 14 and 11 years old, and a son 9 years old. Applicant has been
working as a security guard since 2003. He was granted a security clearance in 2005. 
Applicant’s e-QIP shows that he has been consistently employed as a security guard
since 2003. He could normally rely on 20 to 25 hours of overtime. Between August 2008
and April 2010, his employer instituted a reduction in security personnel, eliminated his
overtime, and cut his regular hours from 40 to 36.  His wife was not working at the time,1
and he was unable to locate part-time employment until 2013. (GE 1 at 13; Tr. 27, 37-39)
3
Present Status of Accounts listed in the SOR
The accounts will be addressed in the order that they appear in the SOR. Applicant’s
exhibits have been re-labeled in alphabetical order. There is no AE A or AE H. On March
26, 2014, Applicant settled the judgment at SOR 1.a with a payment of $3,500. (AE C)
Applicant was advised on June 30, 2014, that the HOA debt was paid in full on June 30,
2014. (AE B) The judgment owed to the creditor at SOR 1.c remains outstanding. Applicant
was told by the creditor in November 2014 that they were going to review his account. He
has not contacted them since then. GE 2 reflects that Applicant owes $1,831 to the creditor
at SOR 1.c.
Applicant still owes the secondary mortgage identified at SOR 1.d. In July 2010, the
mortgagor agreed to accept $500 on June 28, 2010, as the initial payment, with
subsequent payments of  $300 on the 28  day of every month until the account was paid.th
The bank ledgers show a payment of $500 made on June 29, 2010, and two payments
totaling of $1,500 were made on July 28 and July 29, 2010. Applicant’s earnings were
insufficient to maintain the payment plan and he discontinued payments. (AE M; Tr. 39-41)
On March 26, 2014, Applicant was notified by the collection agency for SOR 1.e that
the account was resolved for $3,500. (AE D) On February 17, 2014, Applicant was notified
by letter that the account identified at SOR 1.f was settled in full on February 15, 2014. (AE
E) The same collection agency notified Applicant that the account identified at SOR 1.g was
settled on March 3, 2014. (AE F) Documentation reflects that the SOR 1.h account was
paid in full on March 6, 2014. (AE G) The account listed at SOR 1.i was settled on October
30, 2013. (AE I)
On February 25, 2014, Applicant was advised by letter that the account identified
at SOR 1.j was paid in full on February 24, 2014. (AE J) The SOR account at SOR 1.k was
satisfied on November 14, 2013. (AE K) On November 1, 2013, Applicant received a letter
from the collection agency indicating that the SOR 1.l account was paid. (AE L)
Applicant was able to save some money and address the delinquent accounts after
he obtained part-time employment in 2013. He currently has a retirement account and
contributes $40 to $50 from his paycheck every pay period. Though he has not received
formal financial counseling, he recalled watching a financial counseling program about debt
consolidation that recommended saving money and paying the smaller debts first. Applicant
has stopped using credit. Instead, he saves his money and only makes cash purchases or
makes no purchases at all. (Tr. 44-46)
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant's suitability for a security clearance, the administrative
judge must consider the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions of the AG. These
conditions should be evaluated in the context of nine general factors known as the whole-
person concept to bring together all available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision regarding security clearance
eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to the potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14., the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15., the applicant is
responsible for presenting "witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . ." An applicant
has the ultimate burden of persuasion of establishing that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him a security clearance. 
Analysis
Financial Considerations 
The security concern for financial considerations is set forth in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern
as it may lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that cannot
be explained by known sources of income is also a security concern. It may
indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
The applicable disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 are: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
5
The evidence supports application of AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). From 2008 to 2013,
Applicant accumulated three judgments and nine past-due accounts totaling more than
$89,600 in delinquent debt that he was unable to repay. The March 2014 SOR shows that
the judgments and accounts had not been paid. The record contains no evidence of
irresponsible spending, or of alcohol-related or gambling-related debts. 
Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially pertinent: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person's control and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts. 
AG ¶ 20(a) has partial application based on the documented efforts Applicant took
before receiving the SOR to resolve several of the delinquent debts. Those efforts earn
Applicant some consideration under the mitigating condition.  
In 2008, the United States was in the throes of a profound recession. Applicant’s
employer responded to the economic event by trimming its workforce, eliminating overtime,
and reducing regular work hours for employees. His wife was not working at the time, and
Applicant could not find a second job. Unfortunately, Applicant turned to his credit cards to
replace debt with more debt. In a relatively short period of time, he could no longer use his
credit cards because they had reached their credit limits. Unable to pay his HOA and his
mortgage, the HOA filed a judgment and his house was foreclosed and sold. He collected
10 additional debts. The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) applies. The second prong of AG ¶ 20(b)
merits significant application based on Applicant’s responsible and mature efforts to resolve
10 of the 12 delinquent debts. 
The July 2010 documentation confirming three payments to the mortgagor indicates
that Applicant made a good-faith effort but was unable to repay the account identified at
SOR 1.d. His verified actions regarding 10 of the 12 overdue accounts convince me that
6
he will continue to seek a successful resolution for the delinquent debts at SOR 1.c and 1d.
AG ¶ 20(d) has substantial application. 
Whole-Person Concept 
I have examined the evidence under the disqualifying and mitigating conditions of
the financial guideline. I have also weighed the circumstances within the context of nine
variables known as the whole-person concept. In evaluating the relevance of an individual's
conduct, the administrative judge should consider the following factors:
AG ¶ 2(a) (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress;
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be a commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of
the guidelines and the whole-person concept.
Applicant has been in the security profession for more than 11 years. He is married
with two young daughters and one young son. His financial problems stem from matters
beyond his control. In 2008, the country was experiencing a recession that shared some
of the same characteristics of the Great Depression. Applicant’s employer responded to the
recession by cutting expenditures. Applicant’s reduced earnings were not enough to pay
his mortgage or his bills. He fell behind and eventually lost his house.
In 2012, Applicant’s wife returned to the workforce. In 2013, he found a second job.
As his exhibits show, later in 2013, he began to pay the delinquent debts long before he
received the SOR in March 2014. In about 18 months, he has made responsible
improvements in his financial condition. Considering the evidence under the specific
conditions and the factors of the whole-person concept, I conclude that Applicant has
successfully mitigated the security concerns associated with  the financial considerations
guideline. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
7
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
