 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 14-02664 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 In September 2013 Applicant was convicted of two felonies, which occurred 
when he shot his son during a physical altercation. He pled guilty to the charges. He 
remains on supervised probation until 2017. His family and community are aware of his 
personal conduct, reducing his vulnerability to exploitation. Criminal conduct security 
concerns are not mitigated. Personal conduct security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 In September 2013 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). 
On July 24, 2014, Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline J, (Criminal Conduct) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On August 14, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing. On November 24, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned Applicant’s case to me. On March 10, 2015, DOHA issued a hearing notice, 
setting the case for March 31, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits (GE), and Applicant offered five 
exhibits (AE) into evidence. (GE 1-2; AE A-E.) All were admitted. Three witnesses 
testified for Applicant. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 8, 2015. The 
record remained open until April 20, 2015, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional information. Applicant timely submitted three documents that I marked as AE 
F through H and admitted into the record without objection from Department Counsel. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations contained in Paragraph 1.a of the SOR, and 
denied the allegations contained in Paragraph 2.a of the SOR. His admissions are 
accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He and his wife have been married for 10 years. They 
have a seven-year-old child. He has four children from a previous relationship, ages 14, 
20, 25, and 26.  He attended three years of college. He has worked for his current 
employer for 12 years, with a two-year gap from approximately 2011 to 2013. He has a 
minister’s license and participates in church ministries. He has also worked as a 
chaplain with a local police department. (Tr. 16-22; AE A, B, C.) He is active in many 
community volunteer organizations. (Answer.)  
 
 On May 21, 2013, Applicant became embroiled in a confrontation with his then 
19-year-old son at Applicant’s mother’s house. Applicant was concerned about his son’s 
girlfriend, who was living at the house without permission from Applicant’s mother. The 
son and girlfriend had stolen his mother’s van and engaged in other criminal activity. At 
one point, the son started wrestling with Applicant on the floor. As the fight ensued, 
Applicant said he told his son to stop attacking him. When that did not occur, Applicant 
pulled his gun and warned his son that he would shoot if he continued to attack him.1 
The fight did not stop and Applicant shot his son in the leg. The son went to the hospital 
where he had surgery to remove a bullet. (Tr. 26-29.) Applicant was later arrested. (GE 
2.) 
 
 Applicant was charged with (1) assault with intent to do bodily harm less than 
murder, a felony; (2) assault with a dangerous weapon, a felony; (3) discharging a 
firearm in a building, a felony, and; (4) felony firearms possession. In September 2013 
he pled guilty to assault with a dangerous weapon and discharge of a firearm in a 
                                                 
1 Applicant had a concealed carry permit for the gun. (Tr. 27.) He wore it because he worked with the 
police department and received death threats. (Tr. 26.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
building, both felonies. He was sentenced to six months jail on work release, beginning 
in January 2014, and three years of supervised probation. He was ordered to complete 
a 13-week course on anger management, which he successfully completed in July 
2014, as documented by his probation officer.2 (Answer; AE G.) As a result of the felony 
conviction, he can no longer carry a gun. (Tr. 32.) His probation will terminate in 
January 2017. (Tr. 33.) 
 
 Applicant’s son no longer lives with his grandmother, but instead attends college 
in another state where he permanently resides. (Tr. 41.) Applicant provides some 
financial support for him. (Tr. 33.) After pleading guilty to the charges, he and his son 
began to reconcile. (Tr. 37.) In March 2015 his son wrote a letter in support of his father. 
The son admitted that on May 21, 2013, he was “under the influence of illegal drugs, 
which contributed to [his] saying and doing things [he] wouldn’t say or do.” (AE E.) He 
apologized for his immature behavior. He loves and fully supports his father. (AE E.) 
 
 Three witnesses testified on behalf of Applicant. His supervisor of five years 
stated that Applicant’s performance evaluations are very good. He said that Applicant is 
a shop supervisor, responsible for overseeing other employees. The employer became 
aware of Applicant’s arrest soon after it occurred, and continued to employ him. He has 
never witnessed Applicant lose his temper or deal with subordinates inappropriately. He 
supports Applicant’s request for a security clearance. (Tr. 45-48.) Applicant submitted 
performance evaluations for 2013 and 2014, both of which were favorable. (AE H.) The 
president of the company for which he works stated that Applicant is a reliable and 
dependable employee. (AE D.) 
 
 Applicant’s pastor testified. He has known him for 13 or 14 years, and mentored 
him over the past ten years. He sees him every week at a church ministry. Applicant 
told him of the incident on the same day it happened. He has had conversations with 
Applicant’s son subsequently about the incident. Since the occurrence, he believes 
Applicant has become calmer. He was unaware of any previous physical altercations 
between Applicant and his son, or anyone else. He has confidence in Applicant and 
appointed him to the position of president of a board of their church. (Tr. 48-59.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife testified. She has observed a change in the tone of Applicant’s 
relationship with his son since the incident. The son has been apologetic for the role he 
played in his father’s conviction. Applicant displays more wisdom in dealing with his son 
and others. (Tr. 59-65.) 
 
 Applicant exhibited visible remorse over his misconduct, and understood he 
could have handled the situation more appropriately. (Tr. 30-31.) He admitted that he 
should have been a better father to his son, less stern, and listened more often. (Tr. 39.) 
He has learned the importance of his family and life in general as a consequence of this 
                                                 
2 Applicant said that the probation office does not provide letters of good standing for people. However, 
his probation officer would be willing to verbally address any questions about the status of his probation. 
He supplied her name and phone number. (AE F and AE G at 2.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
situation. (Tr. 32.) From the time of his arrest to the date of his plea, Applicant was not 
permitted to have contact with his son. That period of separation caused him deep pain 
and reflection. (Tr. 37.) In his Answer, he said that he “took the plea because as a 
responsible man, I chose to be accountable for my actions.” (Answer.) He stated that 
his “actions were the results [sic] of being prideful more than my life being in danger.” 
(Answer.) During his testimony, he added that he did not want to pursue a trial in which 
his mother or son would be called to testify, adding further injury to the family. (Tr. 40-
41.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
In September 2013 Applicant pled guilty to two felonies. He remains on probation 
until January 2017. The evidence raises both disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Two years have elapsed since Applicant’s arrest. The circumstances surrounding 
the incident were sufficiently unusual, in that they involved his son with whom he had 
not previously engaged in any physical altercations. At this time a similar situation is 
less likely to occur because his son lives out of state, and Applicant no longer 
possesses a gun. However, that incident was sufficiently serious that the court placed 
him on three years of probation. While issues about his trustworthiness or judgment are 
 
 
6 
 
 
diminishing, based on the testimony of his wife, supervisor and pastor, who have 
regularly observed him since then, there is insufficient evidence to establish full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a). 
 
Applicant presented evidence of rehabilitation. He consistently expressed 
remorse over his conduct and admitted that he failed to handle the situation with his son 
appropriately as a father. He and his son reconciled soon after Applicant pled guilty. 
They both acknowledged individual responsibility for the situation. Their relationship has 
improved over the last two years. Applicant’s supervisor attested to Applicant’s work 
performance and strongly supports his request for a clearance. Applicant continues to 
work in church ministries and community organizations, and was appointed president of 
the church’s board. He successfully completed a lengthy anger management program. 
AG ¶ 32(b) has partial application, and not full application, because he remains on 
criminal probation and his recent good behavior occurred under court supervision. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; 
 
This case involves a situation in which Applicant shot his son. That incident 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation because it is the type of personal conduct which, if 
known, may affect Applicant’s personal, professional, and community standing. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualification.  
 
AG ¶ 17 includes a condition that could mitigate the security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the personal conduct allegation 
under AG ¶ 17(e). Applicant’s employer, pastor, and wife are thoroughly aware of the 
conduct and subsequent criminal conviction. Their knowledge of the situation and 
observation of Applicant’s behavior since the occurrence significantly reduces or 
eliminates Applicant’s vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. This case involves a family 
tragedy that occurred two years ago, when Applicant lost control of himself during an 
altercation with his son, who later admitted he had taken illegal drugs at the time. As a 
consequence, Applicant was convicted of two felonies. Several factors weigh in favor of 
granting Applicant a security clearance. He completed a 13-week course on anger 
management, reconciled with his son who now lives in another state, and has the strong 
support of his employer, pastor, wife, and son. He forthrightly admits that his failure as a 
parent contributed to the situation and assumes responsibility for his actions. The 
likelihood that a similar event would recur is becoming unlikely. However, one fact 
weighs heavily against granting him eligibility to hold a clearance at this time. He 
remains on supervised probation for another two years, having in January 2015 
completed the first year of a three-year term. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with concerns as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate 
 
 
8 
 
 
the security concerns arising from criminal conduct, but did mitigate the security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:               Against Applicant 
   
         Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:               For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
    
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
