 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
                                                              
           
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00340 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges three charged-off accounts 
totaling $25,491 and four accounts past due in the amount of $1,599. Her debts were 
caused by circumstances beyond her control. On March 11, 2015, her nonpriority, 
unsecured debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. She 
received a fresh financial start, and she does not have any new delinquent debt. 
Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 13, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) On April 18, 2014, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
a security clearance for Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge 
to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On August 1, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived her 
right to a hearing. (Item 1) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated March 23, 2015, was provided to her on April 8, 2015.1 On April 16, 2015, 
Applicant responded to the FORM and provided additional mitigating evidence. On May 
1, 2015, Department Counsel did not object to my consideration of the additional 
evidence. On May 7, 2015, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility for the SOR debts. 
(Item 1) She also provided extenuating and mitigating information. (Item 1) Her 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old structural designer, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since September 2003.3 She completed an apprentice program in 2009. She 
did not disclose any degrees. She never served in the military. In 2004, she married, 
and her child was born in 2006. There is no evidence of disciplinary problems with her 
employer, illegal drug use, criminal offenses, or alcohol abuse. 
   
Financial Considerations 
 
In 2002, Applicant purchased a one-bedroom home with total living space of 590 
square feet.4 In 2006, Applicant and her spouse had a child and purchased a larger 
residence for $255,000 with a first and second mortgage. Their first house was rented 
by bad tenants, who did substantial damage to it; Applicant and her spouse used credit 
cards to make mortgage payments; and they were eventually unable to continue making 
payments on their first home’s two mortgages. Applicant has a real estate agent that is 
assisting with the short sale of her first home, even though her attorney said her 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated March 30, 2015, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated April 8, 2015. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she 
had 30 days after her receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s 
September 13, 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86). (Item 2) 
  
4The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s April 16, 2015 FORM Response.  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
responsibility for the mortgages on her first home was discharged by her bankruptcy. 
Applicant and her spouse’s second house is now worth about $160,000. 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in the following exhibits: her 
September 13, 2013 SF 86; her September 20, 2013, February 4, 2014, and March 19, 
2015 credit reports; her bankruptcy documents from Public Access to Court Electronic 
Records (PACER); her SOR response; and her FORM response. (Items 1-6)  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges three charged-off accounts totaling $25,491 and four 
past-due accounts in the amount of $1,599 as follows: ¶ 1.a is a credit card account 
past due in the amount of $122 with a balance of $1,671; ¶ 1.b is a credit card account 
past due in the amount of $196 with a balance of $3,899; ¶ 1.c is a charged-off bank 
account in the amount of $13,160; ¶ 1.d is a past-due home equity loan past due in the 
amount of $320 with a total balance of $95,088 on Applicant’s first house; ¶ 1.e is a 
charged-off bank debt in the amount of $7,928; ¶ 1.f is a charged-off bank debt in the 
amount of $4,403; and ¶ 1.g is a past-due home mortgage loan past due in the amount 
of $961 with a total balance of $89,326 on Applicant’s first house. (Item 1)  
 
On December 11, 2014, Applicant and her spouse filed for relief from their debts 
under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code.5 Their summary of schedules showed: A-real 
property assets of $239,000; B-personal property assets of $183,894; D-secured claims 
of $442,789; E-unsecured priority claims of $0; and F-unsecured nonpriority claims of 
$31,518. On March 11, 2015, her nonpriority, unsecured debts were discharged under 
Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. 
 
Applicant’s March 19, 2015 credit report indicates zero past due for all accounts. 
(Item 5) There is no evidence of any post-bankruptcy legally enforceable delinquent 
accounts or that the creditors in the SOR are seeking payment of any deficiency. She 
received credit counseling as part of her bankruptcy process.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
                                            
5The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s bankruptcy documentation. (Item 
6) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt 
is documented in her credit reports, SF 86, bankruptcy filing, SOR response, and FORM 
response. Her SOR alleges three charged-off accounts totaling $25,491 and four 
accounts in the past-due amount of $1,599. The Government established the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
  
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;6 and 
                                            
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving her debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
through 20(c). Her financial problems were affected by circumstances largely beyond 
her control. Applicant and her husband needed a larger home; they purchased a 
residence; and they rented their old home. The tenants damaged their old home, and 
the real estate market substantially declined. The fair market value of their two 
properties was substantially less than their mortgages. Their two properties were 
“underwater.”  
 
  Applicant’s delinquent debts “occurred under such circumstances that [are] 
unlikely to recur and [do] not cast doubt on [her] current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” The 2008-2009 real estate crash was the most precipitous nationwide 
decline in real estate in decades. It is unlikely to recur. Moreover, Applicant has learned 
from her experience with tenants. She received financial counseling; there are clear 
indications that the problem is resolved; and her finances are under control.  
  
 AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) are not applicable. She did not dispute her responsibility 
for any SOR debts.      
 
In sum, Applicant fell behind on her debts primarily because of the real estate 
crash and problems with her tenant. On March 11, 2015, her delinquent debts were 
discharged utilizing Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. She has taken reasonable 
actions to rehabilitate her finances by obtaining a bankruptcy-discharge of her debts. 
She does not have debts that are currently delinquent. Her efforts are sufficient to 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                                                                                                                            
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old structural designer, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since September 2003. She completed an apprentice program in 2009. 
There is no evidence of disciplinary problems with her employer, illegal drug use, 
criminal offenses, or alcohol abuse. She is sufficiently mature to understand and comply 
with her security responsibilities. There is every indication that she is loyal to the United 
States and her employer. The real estate crash in 2008 and 2009 and her tenant’s 
failure to comply with their responsibilities caused her financial woes. On March 11, 
2015, her debts were discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code, and she 
received a fresh financial start. Her March 19, 2015 credit report indicates zero past due 
for all accounts. There is no evidence of any post-bankruptcy legally enforceable 
delinquent accounts or that the creditors in the SOR are seeking payment of any 
deficiency. She received credit counseling as part of her bankruptcy process. Applicant 
understands what she needs to do to establish and maintain her financial responsibility. 
I am confident she will maintain her financial responsibility.    
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
