Item 2.1
Item 1.2
1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-04192
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred about $21,000 in delinquent debts over the past seven years,
and failed to document resolution of any of them. Resulting security concerns were not
mitigated. Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 25, 2013.  On1
September 25, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility
(DoD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  The action was taken under2
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
Item 1. 3
Department Counsel submitted five Items in support of the SOR allegations.  Item 3 is inadmissible. It will4
not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant
conducted on April 1, 2013, by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management;  but it was never 
adopted by Applicant as his own statement, or otherwise certified by him to be accurate. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness.
Item 2.5
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.e, and 1.g.6
SOR ¶ 1.f.7
2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines that came into effect in the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted an undated written response to the SOR, and requested that
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.3
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on February 18, 2015. A
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was provided to Applicant, and4
he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on March 6, 2015. He submitted no additional material in response to the FORM, made
no objection to consideration of any contents of the FORM, and did not request
additional time to respond. I received the case assignment on April 27, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 36 years old, and has worked for a defense contractor since
February 2013. He has never married, and is the custodial parent of his nine-year-old
daughter. He earned a GED certificate in 1996, has no military service, and has never
held a security clearance.  5
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all but one of the allegations6
concerning his delinquent judgement debts, accounts that have been charged off or
placed for collection, and dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He denied the remaining
allegation,  claiming that he had no knowledge of that $546 balance. Applicant’s7
admissions are incorporated into the following findings of fact.
The six SOR-listed delinquent debts, totaling $20,953, appear on one or both
record credit reports. Two are judgments entered against Applicant in 2008 ($326) and
2011 ($9,071) that remain unpaid. Two delinquent accounts, for cellular telephone
service ($1,857) and a utility bill ($566), were placed for collection in 2012 and 2014.
Items 1, 4, and 5.8
Items 1 and 2.9
Items 1, 4, and 5.10
3
The $8,587 outstanding balance due after an automobile repossession was charged off
in 2013, and a different utility supplier charged off the $546 debt that Applicant failed to
pay in October 2008. Applicant offered no evidence that these debts were not his, or
that he had otherwise taken any steps to resolve any of them.8
Applicant reported two brief periods of part-time employment while between full-
time jobs in 2011 and 2012, but mainly attributed his financial difficulties to being a
single father with no financial support from his daughter’s mother.  The record does not9
address whether Applicant obtained financial counseling. He offered no evidence
showing a budget, from which his ability to resolve these delinquencies or avoid
additional debt problems could be predicted with any confidence. He filed for Chapter
13 bankruptcy relief on June 1, 2007, but that case was dismissed and closed on March
1, 2008. Applicant offered no further evidence concerning the debts involved in this
bankruptcy, or any payments he may have made pursuant to the plan.   10
The record lacks evidence concerning the quality of Applicant’s professional
performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. No character
witnesses provided statements describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or
reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or character in person
since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
4
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:      
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security
concerns under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.
5
Applicant owes about $21,000 in unresolved delinquent debts that he incurred
over the past seven years, following his unsuccessful attempt to resolve earlier debts
through Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2007. He provided no evidence of any effort to repay
or otherwise resolve any of them. His ongoing pattern and history of inability or
unwillingness to pay lawful debts raises security concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), and
shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns. 
The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant has incurred substantial delinquent debts, totaling almost $21,000,
which continue to date. He offered no evidence from which to establish a track record of
debt resolution. He failed to demonstrate that conditions beyond his control contributed
to his financial problems, or that he acted responsibly under such circumstances. MC
20(e) requires documented proof to substantiate the basis of a dispute concerning an
alleged debt, and Applicant failed to provide such evidence. Accordingly, the record is
insufficient to establish mitigation under any of the foregoing provisions.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
6
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an accountable
adult, who is responsible for his voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the security
concerns expressed in the SOR. His SOR-listed delinquent debts arose over the past
seven years and remain unresolved despite his employment during the period involved.
He offered insufficient evidence of financial counseling, rehabilitation, better judgment,
or responsible conduct in other areas of his life to offset resulting security concerns. The
potential for pressure, coercion, and duress from his financial situation remains
undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
