 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 14-02784
)
)
Applicant for Position of Trust )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant irresponsibly accrued significant past-due and delinquent credit card
and other debt between 2004 and 2012. Although she now is more attentive to her
personal finances, her actions to resolve her debts are too recent to mitigate the
trustworthiness concerns about her finances. Applicant did not establish that her
financial problems are under control and will not recur. Applicant’s request for eligibility
to occupy a position of trust is denied.
Statement of the Case
On January 25, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for her1
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive).2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were3
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
 The Government’s Exhibit List is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) 1. 4
 Department Counsel’s email forwarding Ax. E - L and waiving objections to their admission is included as5
Hx. 2.
2
investigation, adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD) were unable to
determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant
Applicant’s request for a position of trust.  2
On July 18, 2014, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which, if proven, raise trustworthiness concerns addressed through the
adjudicative guideline (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely3
responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to
another administrative judge on October 14, 2014. A hearing was scheduled for
November 20, 2014; however, on November 4, 2014, the hearing was continued for
good cause shown. On March 3, 2015, the case was transferred to me and I convened
a hearing on March 25, 2015. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4.  Applicant testified4
and presented Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. I held the record open after the hearing to
receive additional relevant information. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on
April 3, 2015. The record closed on April 7, 2015, when I received Applicant’s timely
post-hearing submissions, included in the record as Ax. B - K. All exhibits were admitted
without objection.5
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $18,983 for 28
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.bb). Applicant denied, with explanations, the
debts at SOR 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, 1.q, 1.u - 1.w, and 1.y - 1.bb. She admitted, with
explanations, the remaining allegations. In addition to the facts established by
Applicant’s admissions, and based on all available information, I make the following
findings of fact. 
Applicant is 27 years old and is employed by a defense contractor in a position
that requires eligibility for a position of trust. Her employer supports management of the
health care system used by members of the military, and Applicant must be found
suitable to be entrusted with related personally identifiable information (PII). Applicant
graduated from high school in 2004 and was enrolled in college or technical training
until May 2009, and from June 2010 until December 2011. She did not earn a degree.
(Gx. 1)
3
Applicant first started working at her current job site as a temporary agency
employee in July 2012. She was hired as a regular employee in March 2013. After she
graduated from high school, Applicant was generally unemployed until May 2008 while
she was in college studying early childhood education. Thereafter, she was steadily
employed except for a four-month period in late 2009 after she was laid off from an
assistant teacher position for not having enough qualifying college credits. (Gx. 1)
Applicant has been married since December 2010; however, she and her
husband have been separated since December 2012. Applicant has three children,
ages five, one, and six months. The older two children are the product of her marriage.
Applicant receives no child support from either father, but does receive $150 in monthly
state benefits. Applicant currently lives with her mother, and has lived with her off-and-
on for about eight years. Applicant pays her mother $400 for rent each month, and
another $100 for various other expenses. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 40, 48 - 49, 56)
When Applicant submitted her EQIP, she disclosed the debts alleged at SOR 1.r,
1.t - 1.v, and 1.bb. Credit reports obtained by the Government documented those debts,
as well as the remaining SOR allegations. Starting in 2004, when Applicant was an 18-
year-old college student, she opened several credit card accounts in response to
unsolicited offers she received in the mail. She used the credit cards, as well as a series
of student loans, to support herself through about 2008, when she started working in
addition to attending school. However, she had already begun to fall behind on her
credit card payments and they became delinquent. Applicant and her husband also
incurred delinquent debts from 2010 until 2012, when they separated. Her husband
characterized their use of credit as “careless,” but also claimed, as she has, that some
of the debts in Applicant’s credit reports are the result of fraudulent charges against her
accounts. Applicant did not provide information that corroborates such claims. In
response to the SOR, Applicant also disputed the validity of some of the alleged debts.
For example, Applicant claimed that the AT&T and Dish Network debts at SOR 1.d - 1.f
should not have been charged to her. However, she did not support her disputes with
additional information. (Gx. 1 - 4; Ax. H; Tr. 33, 36 - 38, 39, 41)
Applicant averred that the debts at SOR 1.h, 1.i, and 1.o were resolved when she
won a civil suit by default. A recent credit report shows these accounts as paid. These
allegations are resolved for Applicant. The debt at SOR 1.f appears to be a duplicate of
SOR 1.d. Accordingly, SOR 1.f is resolved for Applicant. (Answer; Gx. 2; Tr. 34 - 35)
Applicant stated at her hearing that she owes about $50,000 in federally-
subsidized student loans. They are in deferment; however, they will come due in July
2015. Applicant anticipates she will be able to repay them as part of an income-based
agreement with the lender. (Gx. 3 - 4; Tr. 53 - 54)
In March 2013, Applicant was interviewed about her delinquent and past-due
debts. She acknowledged most of the debts were her responsibility, but claimed that
she no longer lives beyond her means. She also claimed she would begin resolving her
indebtedness and obtain credit counseling or other professional help to do so. In March
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 6
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 7
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 8
 Directive. 6.3.9
4
2015, Applicant enlisted the services of a law firm specializing in resolving and “cleaning
up” credit report inaccuracies. She is paying them $55 each month for their services.
The same week as her hearing, Applicant also contracted with a credit counseling firm
to whom she will pay $36 each month to build an account from which to pay negotiated
settlements. (Ax. F; Ax. G; Tr. 30, 39 - 40, 44 - 45)
Applicant earns about $1,500 in monthly take-home pay. According to a post-
hearing personal financial statement (PFS), after expenses, which do not include
payments made to any debts or to the two credit counseling firms she is using,
Applicant has less than $50 remaining. Applicant listed child care as one of her monthly
expenses, but she also presented information showing she receives a state voucher to
pay for, or defray the costs of, her child care. (Ax. B; Ax. E; Tr. 55 - 56)
Applicant is regarded in the workplace as a “great fit” for the work to which she is
assigned. Her performance evaluations are satisfactory, and she is viewed as
productive and reliable. (Ax. I; Ax. J)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In6
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also7
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.8
The Directive requires that each decision be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,9
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
5
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of eligibility for a position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the
Government.
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed
at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). As to the latter condition, available
information suggests this is a case of inability rather than unwillingness to pay her
debts. However, Applicant did not seek credit counseling or other assistance until the
same month as her hearing, despite the fact the hearing was delayed for four months.
This shows an unwillingness to address her financial problems in any meaningful way.
The following AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions are available to Applicant if based on
sufficient information:
6
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial problems are recent and
multiple. The debts remain largely unpaid. Although three debts were likely resolved
through civil court actions, and one is a duplicate allegation, there is no record of other
payment or other resolution. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply because Applicant’s debts are
almost exclusively the result of her own irresponsible use of credit. Applicant has
admitted as much.
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant has retained the services of two credit
counseling firms to “clean up” her credit history; however, she did so only within the
month before her hearing, despite telling an investigative agent two years earlier that
she intended to seek professional financial help. Applicant’s procrastination in this
regard is noteworthy also because she did not seek counseling either after she received
the SOR, requested the hearing, or requested a delay in her hearing in November 2014.
For many of these same reasons, AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. Applicant did not
establish that she actually repaid any of the debts, and her delay in taking any action
precludes application of this mitigating condition.
Finally, Applicant claims that some of the debts were the result of erroneous
charges or fraudulent use of her accounts. Some of her claims are plausible, but none
are supported by any documentary evidence.
Applicant did not show that she has made any payments for her credit counseling
services. She also did not show how she would make those payments, or her future
student loan payments. It is encouraging that she now seems to understand the need to
7
resolve her financial problems; however, on balance she did not mitigate the
trustworthiness concerns raised by her long history of unpaid debts.
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Specifically, I note Applicant’s sincerity in
wanting to change her financial circumstances, and her positive record of performance
at work. However, without more information that shows actual progress in resolving her
past-due debts, this positive information is not sufficient to overcome the doubts about
her trustworthiness that have been raised by the Government’s information. Because
protection of the nation’s sensitive information is the primary focus in these
adjudications, any remaining doubts must be resolved against the individual.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e, 
1.g, 1.j - 1.n, 1.p - 1.bb: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.o: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for ADP
eligibility is denied.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
