1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04492 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an application for a security clearance (e-QIP) on June 18, 
2014. On October 31, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 24, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on February 27, 2015. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on March 23, 
2015.  Applicant received the FORM on March 26, 2015. He had 30 days to submit a 
response to the FORM. He did not submit matters in response to the FORM. On May 
12, 2015, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and was assigned to me on 
May 13, 2015. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
2 
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Item 6 of the FORM is a portion of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from the 
background investigation of Applicant. The three-page document is a summary of an 
interview of Applicant on July 16, 2014, in conjunction with his background investigation. 
DoDD 5220.6, enclosure 2, ¶ E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may be received with an 
authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of 
Evidence.” (see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 2014).  
 
Although Applicant, who is representing himself, has not raised the issue via an 
objection, I am raising it sua sponte because Item 6 is not properly authenticated. 
Applicant’s failure to mention this issue in a response to the FORM is not a knowing 
waiver of the rule because he more than likely was unaware of the rule.  Waiver means 
“the voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage, the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of 
the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. 
Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009).  
 
Applicant was not expressly informed of the requirement in ¶ E3.1.20 of the 
Directive that an ROI may be received with an authenticating witness. I cannot conclude 
he expressly waived this rule. He did not respond to the FORM. In accordance with the 
Directive, enclosure 2, ¶ E3.1.20,  Item 6 is not admissible and will not be considered in 
this Decision.   
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to all of the allegations in the SOR. 
(Item 3)  
 
Applicant is a 22-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor. This 
is his first time applying for a security clearance. He received his bachelor’s degree in 
May 2015. He is single and has no children. (Item 5)   
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement 
 
In response to Section 23: Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity on his e-QIP 
application, Applicant listed that he used marijuana from November 2008 to April 2014. 
He indicated that he used moderately or frequently for about a year in 2008 (about once 
or twice a week). He stopped using in 2009 about two months before graduating from 
high school. His most recent use was at a friend’s graduation party in April 2014. (Item 5 
at 21)  
  
In his response to the SOR, dated November 24, 2014, Applicant admits the 
allegations in the SOR. He states that his actions when younger no longer reflect his 
values or opinion of acceptable behavior for himself. His marijuana use in April 2014 
was a single lapse of good judgment. He has no intention of using marijuana again. He 
no longer has contact with his friends with whom he used marijuana. If in April 2014, he 
3 
 
was aware that he would be employed in a position that may require a security 
clearance, he would have exercised better judgment. He is aware that marijuana use is 
a violation of Federal law. He has no interest in willingly disregarding laws or regulation 
in the future. He understands the use of mind-altering drugs could lead to situations that 
compromise National Security. If granted a security clearance, he would take it seriously 
and would not willingly perform any action that may lead to compromise of classified 
information. (Item 3 at 2)   
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
4 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:       
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:  
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG & 25(a) (any drug abuse); and 
 
AG & 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia). 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from November 2008 to April 
2010, and then used one more time in April 2014. He used marijuana on a recreational 
basis. AG & 25(a) applies. AG & 25(c) also applies because Applicant occasionally 
possessed marijuana.  
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
5 
 
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment); and  
  
AG & 26(b) (a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation).  
   
 AG ¶ 26(a) applies because more than one year has passed since Applicant’s 
last illegal use of marijuana. His use in April 2014 was in Applicant’s words “a single 
lapse in judgment.” He previously stopped using marijuana four years earlier in 2010.  
Most of Applicant’s illegal drug use occurred when he was in high school or college.   
Upon graduation from college, he is focused on his career. He was forthcoming when 
disclosing his illegal drug use on his security clearance application and apologizes for 
his behavior. Applicant appears to understand the security concern involving illegal drug 
use. It is unlikely that he will jeopardize his future by returning to illegal drug use.   
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) applies because Applicant has not used illegal drugs for over a year. 
He no longer associates with his friends who use marijuana and has no intent to contact 
them in the future. His illegal drug use occurred during high school and college. He has 
matured and is focused on his future. While he did not provide a signed statement of 
intent to refrain from illegal marijuana use with the understanding that his security 
clearance will be automatically revoked for any violation, he did mention that he has no 
intention of demonstrating poor judgment in this manner again in his response to the 
SOR. His response to the SOR reveals that he understands the security concerns 
raised by illegal drug use. Applicant met his burden to mitigate the security concerns 
raised under Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In addition to Applicant’s illegal drug 
use, I considered he fully disclosed his illegal drug use on his security clearance 
application. More than one year has passed since his last use of marijuana. He had not 
used marijuana for four years prior to that time. Applicant understands the 
consequences that additional illegal drug use may have on his future.  He met his 
burden to overcome the security concerns raised by his illegal drug use when he was a 
high school and college student.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
        
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
