 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03778 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny him 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s decision to 
strategically default on mortgage and home equity line of credit loans on his home 
occurred under unusual circumstances caused by an issue with the home’s title, which 
are not likely to recur. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to an 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security 
clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing 
convened on February 11, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 
and Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant timely 
submitted AEs B through K, which I admitted without objection.3 I received the transcript 
(Tr.) on February 23, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 54, is the co-founder and chief operating officer (COO) of a technology 
firm that works on contracts for the federal government. He is designated a key 
management personnel. Applicant has held a security clearance since approximately 
1990. On his most recent security clearance application, submitted in October 2013, 
Applicant disclosed that he was attempting a short sale of his primary residence. The 
resulting investigation revealed that Applicant was more than 180 days past due on a 
mortgage loan (SOR ¶1.a) and a home equity line of credit (HELOC) (SOR ¶ 1.b). The 
SOR also alleges two additional debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.c – 1.d) totaling $472. Applicant 
denies owing these two debts.4 
 
 Applicant purchased his home in 2003 for $307,000, financed with a traditional 
30-year fixed-rate mortgage. He refinanced in 2006 and opened a HELOC with 
$160,000 available in credit. Between 2006 and 2008, Applicant withdrew $157,000 
from the HELOC, using it as an income source. Using the available credit on the 
HELOC caused Applicant to become upside down on the house. In 2012, Applicant 
decided to refinance the home again to secure a lower interest rate on his mortgage 
loan.5 The refinance would have saved him approximately $1,000 each month. The 
mortgage lender approved Applicant’s refinance application in December 2012. Before 
closing, the mortgage company learned that during the 2006 refinance, the HELOC 
lender did not sign or file a subordination agreement. Applicant was not responsible for 
the error. As a result, the HELOC lender was the primary lien holder on the property. 
The mortgage lender refused to close the refinanced loan until the subordination issue 
was resolved.6 
 
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter, dated October 29, 2014, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 The correspondence related to the Applicant’s post-hearing submissions is appended to the record as 
HE II. 
 
4 Tr. 16-19; GE 1-3; AE C. 
 
5 Applicant sought to refinance his home under a federal program that allowed qualified borrowers to 
refinance even if they owed more on the home than its market value. 
 
6 Tr. 19-20, 25-26, 31-33; AE B.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant filed a claim with his title insurance company. However, the claim did 
not provide any relief as title insurance is meant to protect the lenders not the borrower. 
In February 2013, Applicant consulted a real estate attorney. The attorney advised 
Applicant to stop paying the mortgage loan and the HELOC in hopes of spurring the two 
lenders into resolving the subordination issue. Applicant stopped paying the mortgage 
loan that month. He tried to work with the lenders to resolve the subordination issue 
from February to May 2013. Applicant soon found himself fed up. He did not believe that 
he should be stuck with a higher interest rate loan because of a clerical issue that he 
had no control over repairing. Between May and December 2013, Applicant twice tried 
to short sale the home. On both occasions, the lenders rejected the sales contract 
because of the unresolved subordination issue. After again seeking the advice of a real 
estate attorney and a family member who was an experienced real estate agent, 
Applicant decided to strategically default on the home. In doing so, he availed himself of 
the protection offered by his state’s antideficiency statute.7  
 
In January 2014, the mortgage lender sued the HELOC lender to correct the 
subordination issue, also naming Applicant and his wife as defendants. Applicant hired 
an attorney to represent him in the case. However, the two banks settled the dispute in 
August 2014. Applicant was not made privy to the details of the settlement. The 
mortgage lender foreclosed on the home and it was sold. Applicant is not sure of the 
sales price. He testified that he received IRS Form 1099s from the lenders regarding the 
property, but the record does not indicate whether the forms were for the acquisition of 
the debt or cancellation of any deficiency balance. One month after the foreclosure, 
Applicant was pre-qualified for a new mortgage loan. Now unencumbered by the title 
issue, Applicant considered re-purchasing the house. However, his attorney advised 
him against doing so as it might cause Applicant to lose any protection, if any, afforded 
by the state’s antideficiency statute.8 
 
At hearing, Applicant testified that his decision to strategically default on his 
mortgage was not one born of financial hardship. Even though he was upside down on 
the home at the time of the refinance, he liked his home and did not have a desire to 
move. Applicant earns approximately $200,000 in annual income and has a household 
income of approximately $225,000. His net worth is approximately $1.6 million.  
Applicant recognizes that he could have paid off the $157,000 HELOC balance entirely 
negating the subordination issue. However, to do so would have required him to sell 
shares of the company he co-founded or liquidate his retirement savings. He did not 
believe that either option was in the best interest of his long-term financial health as 
each option came with significant financial penalties.9 
 
 
 
                          
                                                          
7 Tr. 20-21, 35-41; AE B, E-J. 
 
8 Tr. 22-24, 27, 42-43.  
 
9 Tr. 24, 29-31, 40-41, 43-45; AE K.  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”10 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information within the defense industry.  
 
The SOR alleges Applicant is indebted to four creditors for approximately 
$57,700. Applicant denies the two collection accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c ($397) and 
1.d ($75) as being erroneous entries on his credit report. Although he has not done 
anything to resolve or dispute them, the amount owed on the two accounts is nominal 
and does not reflect negatively on his current security worthiness. The SOR also alleges 
that at the time of its issuance, Applicant was over 180 days past due on his mortgage 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) and HELOC (SOR ¶ 1.b) loans in the amount of $57,200. The SOR does 
not allege that Applicant is responsible for a deficiency balance on either loan, and it is 
not clear from the record if any deficiency balances exists. As a result, the analysis of 
the financial considerations disqualifying and mitigating conditions will focus on the 
security significance of Applicant’s decision to strategically default on his mortgage and 
HELOC loans. 
  
Applicant’s admission that he decided to strategically default on his mortgage 
shows an unwillingness to pay his creditors11 and establishes the Government’s prima 
facie case.  However, the record contains sufficient evidence to mitigate the underlying 
security concerns. This is not a typical strategic default case.12 In this case, a strategic 
default provided Applicant with a reasonable method of extricating himself from a 
dispute between two large banks. The fact that this decision resulted in significant 
financial benefit to Applicant, specifically the forgiveness of his HELOC loan, does not 
make his decision more nefarious or indicative of irresponsible financial practices. 
Applicant’s situation is similar to those who seek relief from excessive debt through 
bankruptcy protection. In those cases, the Appeal Board has long held that bankruptcy 
is a legal and legitimate way for an applicant to handle financial problems. Although the 
debt is forgiven, the Appeal Board requires that the administrative judge examine the 
possible security implications of an applicant’s history of indebtedness and the financial 
problems that led him to file bankruptcy. This evaluation of an applicant’s circumstances 
recognizes that a discharge or forgiveness of debt alone, does not establish that an 
applicant has demonstrated financial reform or that his financial problems are unlikely to 
recur.  
                                                          
10  AG ¶ 18. 
 
11 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
12 See e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-10627 (Jan. 20, 2012). 
 
6 
 
Here, the record supports a conclusion the Applicant strategically defaulted on 
the loans securing his home as a last resort. Applicant obtained the mortgage loan on 
his primary residence and the HELOC, with every intention to comply with the terms of 
the loans. He did so, without issue, for many years. Applicant’s decision to strategically 
default on the home was not caused by his inability to meet his obligations on either 
loan, rather the unusual circumstance of being caught in a dispute between his two 
lenders that he neither created nor had any ability to resolve. However, the financial 
consequences of the dispute to Applicant, while not unaffordable, were significant, 
costly, and not to be taken lightly. Even though Applicant held sufficient illiquid assets to 
pay off the $157,000 HELOC balance, liquidating them to satisfy the debt would have 
provided a short-term solution to one problem while potentially creating financial 
problems in the future. While an applicant is expected to honor his legal obligations, he 
is not expected to absorb the collateral damage of a corporate dispute to maintain his 
eligibility to access classified information. 
 
Ultimately, the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s decision to strategically 
default on a mortgage and HELOC were unusual and unlikely to recur. These particular 
circumstances do not reflect negatively on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment.  Applicant does not have a history of financial problems. His finances 
are otherwise under control. Furthermore, he has held a security clearance for 25 years, 
without incident. Because Applicant currently holds a security clearance, I have also 
considered the adjudication factors listed at AG ¶ 2(e)(1-3), in addition to the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions. Applicant disclosed derogatory information 
regarding the status of his home on his security clearance application. During this 
adjudication he has truthfully and completely answered questions about his finances, 
motives, and decision-making process. Applicant approached the resolution of his 
financial problems in a measured fashion by seeking advice from real estate and legal 
professionals.13  
 
Accordingly, I have no doubts or reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). The purpose of a security 
clearance case is not aimed at collecting debts. Rather the purpose is to make “an 
examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination 
that the personal is an acceptable security risk.”14 Applicant found himself in a difficult 
position, the resolution of which had significant consequences; in the end, he chose the 
one with the least potential for long-term financial harm. He did not act impulsively or 
with disregard of his legal obligations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13  See AG ¶¶ 20 (a). 
 
14 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
