                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  14-02746           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
_____________
 Decision
  ______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding her financial considerations.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of Case
On August 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 14, 2014, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on February 5, 2015, and was scheduled for hearing on
March 24, 2015. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of two exhibits (GEs 1-
2). Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and one exhibit. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on April 3, 2015.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) failed to file her federal tax returns for
tax years 2007 through 2012; (b) is indebted to the Internal revenue Service (IRS) in the
approximate amount of $7,000 for unpaid tax for tax years 2007 through 2012; and (c)
failed to file her state tax returns for tax years 2007 through 2012.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied each of the allegations. She claimed
she has been working with a tax firm to clear ups her tax issues. She claimed she
received assurances from her tax firm that all of her federal and state tax forms have
been filed for tax years 2007 through 2012. She also claimed that any owed federal and
state taxes for these years have been paid.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 57-year-old employee for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married her first spouse in November 1977 and divorced him December
1978. (GE 1) She remarried in July 1979 and divorced her husband in December 1999.
She has two adult children from her second marriage. (GE 1) Applicant claimed no post-
high school educational credits. She enlisted in the Navy in December 1978 and served
over 20 years of active duty. (GE 1) She received her honorable discharge in May 1999.
(GE 1)  
Applicant’s finances
Applicant failed to file federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2007
through 2012. (GE 1) She attributed her filing failures to the lack of professional advice on
how to prepare tax returns and the lack of money to engage a tax preparer. (Tr. 22-23,
35-36) She believes the tax filing firm she engaged filed all of her back federal and state
returns in April 2014, but could provide no assurances or documentation to validate her
beliefs. (Tr. 23-24) Without documentation of the filing of her federal and state returns for
the years in issue, no reasonable inferences can be drawn about which returns were filed
and when they were filed.
Applicant retained her tax firm in 2013. (Tr. 32-40) Shortly thereafter, the IRS filed
a tax lien to cover $7,000 in back federal taxes owed for the tax years of 2007 through
2012. (GE 2; Tr. 26) During the same year the IRS filed its tax lien against Applicant’s
3
interests, it initiated garnishment proceedings against Applicant. While acknowledging
she owed approximately $7,000 in back federal taxes for the tax years in issue, she
claimed the IRS levied on her bank account over a nine to 12 month period in 2013 and
collected between $1,875 and $2,000 a month in 2013 and the first few months of 2014.
(GE 2; Tr. 27-28) She believes the alleged $7,000 owed to the IRS for the previous tax
years covered (i.e., 2007 through 2012) has been repaid through sustained garnishment
of her bank account at the rate of $900 per pay period. (Tr. 28-29) Applicant’s claims and
beliefs cannot be verified without access to her bank account. She provided no updates
of tax filings from her tax preparer or copies of any of her returns and schedules.
Although, she previously received two refund checks from the IRS, which totaled
$12,000, she continues to receive letters from the IRS, claiming she owes back taxes.
(Tr. 31-32)
Applicant currently has her tax firm’s subcontractor working on the filing of her
2014 federal and state tax returns. (Tr. 32-33) Her tax firm was also responsible for
facilitating the filing of her 2013 returns. However, she cannot verify whether either her
2013 return or 2014 return was filed. (Tr. 34, 40) 
In her prepared personal financial statement, Applicant reported net monthly
income of $4,196 and additional net spousal income of $3,119. (GE 2) She listed monthly
expenses of $2,890 and monthly debt payments of $2,457. This leaves her with a net
monthly remainder of $1,968. (GE 2)
    
Endorsements
Applicant’s operations center manager values Applicant’s integrity and diligence.
(AE A) He expressed familiarity with Applicant’s tax issues and credited her with having
the highest possible regard for the nation and its core principles. (AE A) 
                      
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to
be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
4
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
5
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of failure to file federal and
state tax returns for tax years 2007 through 2012 and her incurring of delinquent federal
tax debts approximating $7,000, all or some of which has been levied by the IRS
through its initiated garnishment proceedings. Applicant’s actions warrant the
application of three of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the AGs: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability
or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations;” and DC ¶19(g) , “failure to file Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.” 
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s tax filing and collection problems were mostly attributable to her lack
of professional advice on how to prepare tax returns and her inability to find a tax
preparer and her lack of resources to engage a tax preparer to file her returns.
Applicant’s past financial problems merit partial application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.” 
6
Because Applicant has not developed any verifiable evidence of her filing back
federal and state returns for tax years 2007 through 2012 and satisfying the IRS’s
$7,000  tax lien through garnishment initiatives, full application of MC ¶ 20(b) is not
available to her. Absent any documented evidence of filing of her back returns and
satisfying the IRS’s tax lien, Applicant may not take advantage of MC ¶ 20(d), “the
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
debts.” Prospects for her obtaining the necessary tax filing and payment documentation
in the foreseeable are uncertain and difficult to gauge.
Without more tangible resources and initiatives to work with, Applicant cannot
demonstrate the level of financial progress required to meet the criteria established by
the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify her poor financial
condition with responsible efforts considering her circumstances. See ISCR Case No.
08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). Applicant’s lack of any repayment actions of
her own with the resources available to her prevent her from meeting the Appeal
Board’s requirements for demonstrating financial stability. ISCR Case No. 07-06482
(App. Bd. May 21 2008); see ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12,
2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).   
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant failed to document any positive steps
she has taken with her tax filing firm to file the federal and state tax returns owed for tax
years 2007 through 2012, or satisfaction of the IRS’s $ $7,0000 tax lien, either through
garnishment or other means. While she is well regarded by her supervisor and has
demonstrated reliability and trustworthiness in her work, she has failed to demonstrate
progress in addressing her listed tax filing obligations and tax debt accruals consistent
with meeting overall requirements for holding a security clearance. Whole-person
assessment, while helpful to Applicant, is not enough to overcome her lack of a filing
and payment track history over the past six years.  
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s tax filing and
payment delinquencies, her actions to date in addressing her finances are insufficient to
meet mitigation requirements imposed by the guideline governing her finances.
Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c of Guideline F.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.c:                       Against Applicant
7
Conclusio  n  s                            
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
