 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-01476 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 13, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 On July 7, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested that his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on March 3, 2015. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on March 3, 2015. 
Applicant received the FORM on March 9, 2015. He had 30 days to submit a response 
to the FORM. He timely submitted a Response to the FORM, which is admitted as Item 
4. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
Department Counsel’s response to Applicant’s Response to the FORM is admitted as 
Item 5. On April 23, 2015, the FORM was forwarded to the hearing office and was 
assigned to me on April 24, 2015.    
 
2 
 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits to SOR allegations 1.a – 1.e. (Item 1) 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to obtain a security clearance.  Applicant has been employed with the company 
since August 2013. Prior to his current employment, he worked for various contractors 
since April 2001. He has a high school diploma. From June 1982 to June 1985, he 
served on active duty in the U.S. Navy. He received an Honorable Discharge. He is 
married and has a 27-year-old stepdaughter. He has held security clearances in the 
past while on active duty in the U.S. Navy and in 2003 while working for a defense 
contractor. (Item 3)   
 
Applicant completed an electronic questionnaires for investigations processing 
(e-QIP) on October 31, 2013. (Item 3) In response to section 26 of the e-QIP, Applicant 
listed four debts: a $2,505 charged off account related to a car loan (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 3, 
45 of 49); a $246 account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 3, 44 of 49); a $147 
cable television account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 3 at 46-47 of 49); and a 
$1,900 loan to repair a car (Item 3 at 46 of 49).  Applicant’s background investigation 
revealed the above accounts and two additional delinquent accounts: a $12,750 student 
loan that was past due (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 2 at 2); and a $2,756 account placed for 
collection. (SOR ¶ 1.b Note: This is account is not listed in the credit report provided in 
the record evidence. However, Applicant admits to the debt in his response to the 
SOR.)   
 
In his response to the SOR, dated July 7, 2014, Applicant admits to all of the 
debts. He was unaware of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, but recently received a letter 
from the creditor. He intends to pay off all of the debts alleged on the SOR. (Item 1 at 
2). 
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant states that he paid off two debts. He paid 
off the $147 cable television debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. The credit report, dated 
February 13, 2015, indicates that this debt was paid. (Item 2 at 2) The other debt was 
not alleged in the SOR. It was a $471.30 car repair account. Applicant did not provide 
receipts for this debt. Applicant is paying off debts a little at a time. He has had several 
challenges over the last five years. He was laid off from three jobs. His wife is in poor 
health and has not been able to work for three years. He is doing all he can to pay off 
his debts. (Item 4)  
 
A credit report dated February 13, 2015, lists two additional delinquent accounts 
that were not alleged in the SOR. The first is a $229 unpaid storage company account. 
The second is a $2,916 unpaid account.  Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be 
considered to assess an applicant’s credibility; to decide whether a particular 
 
3 
 
 
adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or 
changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful 
rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-person analysis. (ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 
(App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). I have considered the evidence regarding these two 
additional delinquent accounts that were not alleged in the SOR for these limited 
purposes.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
4 
 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition AG &19(a) (an inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant incurred numerous delinquent debts 
that he has been unable or unwilling to pay over the past five years. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several mitigating conditions potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Applicant’s financial problems remain because most of his debts are unresolved.  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies because Applicant was laid 
off three times over the past five years. In addition, his wife is in poor health and has 
been unable to work over the past three years. Applicant encountered circumstances 
beyond his control which caused some financial problems. However, I cannot conclude 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances because I am not aware of the full 
status of his financial situation. There is no evidence in the case files regarding 
Applicant’s monthly income, monthly expenses, and current debt obligations. I am 
unable to determine the extent of Applicant’s financial problems to conclude whether he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.    
 
5 
 
 
     AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling. Most of 
Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. For this reason, I cannot conclude there are clear 
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved and/or are under 
control.     
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to debt alleged in SOR & 1.e. While 
Applicant resolved one account. The remaining delinquent accounts remain unresolved 
at the close of the record. Applicant failed to demonstrate that he is making a good-faith 
effort to resolve the remaining delinquent accounts. 
 
He has not mitigated the concerns raised under financial considerations.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s active-duty 
service with the U.S. Navy and his Honorable Discharge. I considered his favorable 
employment history with defense contractors. I considered there were circumstances 
beyond his control which contributed to Applicant’s financial problems, including being 
laid off three times over a period of five years, and his wife’s inability to work based on 
her poor health condition.  
 
The concern under financial considerations is not only about individuals who are 
prone to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Another concern is that failure to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
 
6 
 
 
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations which raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. In other words, if individuals have trouble managing their finances, this can 
raise doubts about their ability to handle and protect classified information. Applicant’s 
history of financial problems raises doubts about his ability to handle and protect 
classified information. Although Applicant intends to resolve his debts, it is premature at 
this time to conclude that his financial situation has stabilized. Mindful of my duty to 
resolve cases where there is doubt in favor of national security, I find Applicant failed to 
mitigate the concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   Against  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant  
 
      Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         
     _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
