 Exhibit 1 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-03444
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has a history of financial problems
or difficulties dating back to at least 2010, when she and her husband sought relief via a
Chapter 13 bankruptcy case, which was dismissed in 2011 without confirmation of a
payment plan. Excluding two minor medical collection accounts of no importance, she is
now facing about $22,599 in five unpaid collection accounts, and there has been no
payment activity on those debts since about 2010. She did not meet her burden to
present sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate the financial considerations security
concern. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF86 Format) on March 15, 2013.  After reviewing the application and1
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Exhibit 1; Tr. 66. 4
 Exhibit 1; Tr. 62–66.5
 Exhibit 1. 6
2
information gathered during a background investigation, the DOD,  on October 8, 2014,2
sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action3
under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations. She
answered the SOR on November 4, 2014, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on December 15, 2014. The hearing was held as
scheduled on January 27, 2015. Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1–6, and they
were admitted. Applicant offered no exhibits, but the record was kept open until
February 10, 2015, to allow her to present documentary matters. Those matters were
timely received, and they are admitted as Exhibits A–E. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was
received on February 5, 2015. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 36-year-old software configuration management specialist. She is
seeking to obtain a security clearance for the first time. She has worked for her current
employer since February 2013. She has been continuously employed in a full-time
capacity since January 2009.  Before that, she had a six-month period of unemployment4
due to a job layoff during 2008, and she was on paid maternity leave for about four
months in 2007 due to the birth of her twin sons.  And before that, she had full-time5
employment going back to at least January 2001.6
Applicant married in 2003, had twin sons in 2007, separated in 2012, and
anticipates a divorce in 2015. She is currently living with a boyfriend. She and her
husband share custody of their sons without either parent paying child support. 
The SOR alleges and there is substantial evidence to show that Applicant has a
history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of five unpaid collection accounts
 Exhibits 2–6. 7
 Answer to SOR. 8
3
for about $22,599. That total excludes two medical collection accounts for $226 and $64
in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f, because they are so minor that they are of no importance here.
The five unpaid collection accounts are established by Applicant’s admissions and
multiple credit reports.  She did not present any documentation showing the five7
collection accounts were paid, settled, in repayment, disputed, cancelled, forgiven, or
otherwise resolved. 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations concerning the 2010–2011 Chapter 13
bankruptcy case and the five unpaid collection accounts, and she provided the following
explanation:
I do recognize that my current credit situation is not ideal. I admit that I
have let old debts remain unresolved for too long, and I am working now
to correct the situation. I have met with a credit repair specialist, and we
will actively work to clean up the old debts and pay them off as quickly as
possible.
Approximately eight years ago, shortly after my twins were born, I lost my
job. We subsequently got behind on our mortgage and several bills. In an
effort to “save” our home, my husband and I were advised to stop paying
the credit card bills and try to file bankruptcy. Our bankruptcy was
dismissed, as the value of the mortgage was too high. At this point, all of
our bills were delinquent. We tried a few other avenues, but eventually lost
our home [to foreclosure in 2012].
In the subsequent years, we also started the divorce process. I intended to
file bankruptcy on my own, once the divorce was done, to clear up the old
debts. It was my attempt to keep the divorce as amicable as possible and
to not hit his finances. I am still waiting for him to finish filing the divorce
papers.
I do not live beyond my means. I do not make poor financial judgment. I
have learned dearly from poor choices in the past, and have let “being
nice” get in the way of taking care of the old problems. I have now taken
action and will resolve these old debts in the soonest and clearest way
possible. It was a bad time. It is completely in my past.
I adore the work that I get to do for [my employer]. I love being part of the
mission. I want to spend my career learning and growing within the
department. Please be assured that I am resolving the old issues, and
please allow me to continue the work that I love.8
 Tr. 26–28. 9
 Tr. 31–35. 10
 Tr. 43–50. 11
 Tr. 37. 12
 Exhibit A. 13
 Tr. 41, 57–58. 14
 Tr. 58–59. 15
 Exhibits B–E. 16
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to17
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
4
At the hearing, Applicant confirmed the basic outline of the above explanation.9
She stated that she and her husband, who were then earning about $170,000 annually,
bought a home for $1.2 million by making a $300,000 down payment and financing the
balance on a negative-amortization loan with the idea that they could refinance the loan
in a few years, but that did not happen due to the downturn in the economy and real
estate market.  She further stated that the five unpaid collection accounts remain10
unresolved, and she would like to resolve them without resort to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy
case.  She stated that there has been no payment activity or contact with the creditors11
since 2010.  She hired a credit repair specialist in November 2014, and that process12
has resulted in addressing several inaccurate and duplicate entries on her credit report,
and her credit score has improved by 24 points.  13
Also at the hearing, Applicant stated that she has about $10,000 in a savings
account, $1,800 in a checking account, and $20,000 in a 401(k) account.  She stated14
she has a positive net remainder of about $500 to $600 per month, and that she does
not feel pressed in meeting recurring monthly expenses.  15
After the hearing, Applicant presented four letters of recommendation from
people who attest to her reliability, trustworthiness, and loyalty as both a friend and an
employee.16
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As17
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
 484 U.S. at 531.18
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 19
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 20
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.24
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 25
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).26
5
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt18
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An19
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  20
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting21
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An22
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate23
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  24
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s25
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.26
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. The
Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those
persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.27
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 28
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant29
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  30
 AG ¶ 19(a).  31
 AG ¶ 19(c). 32
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).33
6
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it27
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant28
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 29
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  30
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly compromise
classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It encompasses
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important qualities. A
person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or
negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. Taken together, the evidence indicates inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning31 32
of Guideline F. 
 In mitigation, I have considered six mitigating conditions under Guideline F,  and33
I have especially considered the following as most pertinent:
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 34
7
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or death, divorce, or
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved and is under control; and
AG ¶ 20(d) the [person] initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties stemming from a
combination of circumstances largely beyond her control. Those circumstances were
job loss and unemployment, the downturn in the economy, and marital difficulties that
resulted in separation in 2012 and the pending divorce. She acted somewhat
responsibly under the circumstances by continuing to work and earn a living, by
attempting to save their home (which proved futile because she and her husband were
financially overextended), and, more recently, by obtaining the services of a credit repair
specialist. Nevertheless, since 2010, Applicant has largely ignored five unpaid collection
accounts totaling more than $22,000, she has financial assets available to make
payments, and she does not have a realistic plan in place to resolve those debts. 
Of course, the purpose of this case is not aimed at collecting debts.  Rather, the34
purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness
consistent with the guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases, the
Appeal Board has established the following standard:
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 35
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).36
8
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan
be the ones listed in the SOR.35
Here, the evidence does not support a conclusion that Applicant has established a plan
and taken steps to implement that plan sufficient to mitigate the concern. Actions speak
louder than words, and Applicant has taken few actions to resolve the five unpaid
collection accounts. 
Given those circumstances, Applicant’s history of financial problems creates
doubt about her reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole
and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I36
conclude that she did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified
information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.e–1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.g–1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility is
denied. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
