 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04754 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On January 27, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 30, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 3, 
2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 30, 2015. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-1 through K-10, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open until May 7, 2015, 
to allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did. They were marked as 
AE L and M, and were admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 11, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, and 
1.k. He denied the remaining allegations with explanations. I have incorporated his 
admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He married in 1983 and divorced in 1997. He has 
children ages 27 and 23 from the marriage. He remarried in 1997 and has a 17-year-old 
child who lives at home. He holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees. He has not served 
in the military. He has worked for his current employer since September 2013.2 
 
Applicant was gainfully employed in the technology sector during the first half of 
his career. In early September 2001, Applicant’s employer offered him a choice of 
relocating with the company to a different state, or accepting a severance package to 
leave the company. At the time, Applicant’s children from his first marriage were young, 
and he did not want to move away from them. He was confident he could find new 
employment, and he accepted the severance package. Four days later, on September 
11, 2001, terrorists attacked the United States. The technology industry suffered and 
began closing remote offices where Applicant lived. He had difficulty finding 
employment. His choice was again to relocate with more limited options. He decided he 
needed to change his skills so he would be more marketable. He was able to find some 
work, but he was severely underemployed from 2001 to 2005, earning significantly less 
income than he previously had. Changing his skill set allowed him to stay in the area so 
he would not be far from his children. His wife was employed as a nurse and was able 
to supplement some of the income loss.3  
 
In 2004, Applicant’s wife developed a medical condition that was treatable, but 
impacted her ability to work full time. At this time, Applicant relocated his family to State 
B so he could maintain employment. In 2006, he sold his home in State A and 
purchased a new home in State B. Unfortunately, around the same time, his wife’s 
medical condition deteriorated, and she was unable to maintain steady employment. 
                                                          
1 Hearing exhibit I is Department Counsel and Applicant’s email memoranda regarding the additional 
exhibits. 
 
2 Tr. 23-27, 32. 
 
3 Tr. 27-36. 
 
3 
 
 
The loss of her income severely impacted their finances. He was employed from May 
2005 until he was laid off in August 2008. He was unemployed until December 2008.4  
 
Due to Applicant’s wife’s medical condition, they decided to move back to State 
A. He accepted a job in December 2008 in State A. They leased their home in State B, 
but the rent was not sufficient to cover the mortgage payment. Although he was steadily 
employed, the new job was at a reduced income. His wife’s medical condition required 
she receive treatment from providers outside of their insurance coverage, and they 
assumed significant out-of-pocket medical expenses. Applicant was paying his bills, but 
his debts began accumulating.5  
 
In September 2010, Applicant voluntarily left his job to accept employment with 
another company where he earned more money. He was able to work from home, 
which also reduced his expenses. He was laid off in September 2012. Applicant’s 
financial problems were becoming unmanageable. He took withdrawals from his 
Individual Retirement Account and his 401(k) retirement account to cover his monthly 
expenses. He paid the taxes and penalties on the withdrawals. In late 2012, he made 
the decision he needed financial help. He contacted a reputable credit consolidation 
company (CCC) and began paying his delinquent debts. Applicant worked as a part-
time instructor for a college during his periods of unemployment, but was 
underemployed. He continued his job search and found employment in September 
2013. He has since refinanced his home in State B and is able to cover the mortgage 
with the rental income.6  
 
Applicant used credit cards during his periods of unemployment or 
underemployment to meet his family’s living expenses and medical needs. He has been 
resolving his delinquent debts since September 2012 through the CCC. He makes an 
automatic payment through his bank account each month to the CCC. Once there are 
significant funds to offer a creditor a settlement, the CCC will reach out to the creditor 
and negotiate a payment or settlement. Applicant maintains regular contact with the 
CCC or is contacted by them when they have reached a settlement.7  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($29,849) is included in the CCC payment agreement. 
The creditor agreed to settle the debt in August 2014 for $11,940. Applicant made 
monthly payments to satisfy the settlement payment. The remaining balance at the time 
of the hearing was $1,785. The debt will be completely settled with a final payment in 
May 2015.8  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 29-33, 36-37. 39. 84. 
 
5 Tr. 27, 38-42, 84-85. 
 
6 Tr. 40-44, 80-81, 99-100; AE G-6. 
 
7 Tr. 42-43, 46-52, 55-56, 92-94; AE C-2, E-4, F-5, H-7, I-8. 
 
8 Tr. 45-48; 55-57; AE A-1, C-2, D-3. 
 
4 
 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($13,046) is a credit card debt. The CCC is in periodic 
negotiations with the creditor to settle the debt.9  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($10,006) and ¶ 1.g ($10,000) are the same account. It is 
a credit card debt. The CCC is in active negotiations to settle the debt and has made an 
offer to the creditor.10  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($4,854) was reduced to a judgment that was settled and 
paid in November 2014. Applicant provided a copy of the release of judgment.11   
 
A settlement agreement of $7,306 was reached for the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 
1.e ($14,773). Applicant is making monthly settlement payments through the CCC. The 
settlement will be completely paid in January 2016.12  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($22,019) was charged-off in April 2014. Applicant 
received an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1099-C, cancellation of debt. It was 
filed with his federal income tax returns. It is resolved.13 
 
The debts in SOR ¶ 1.h ($7,866) and ¶ 1.i ($3, 238) are credit card debts. Both 
are included in the CCC plan and active negotiations are ongoing to reach a 
settlement.14  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($4,900) is a credit card debt. A settlement was reached in 
October 2014, and Applicant has been making monthly payments through the CCC 
plan. The remaining balance is $2,238. It is expected to be completely settled and paid 
in September 2015.15 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($2,000) is for past-due rent owed to Applicant’s landlord. 
Applicant fell behind when he was unemployed. He discussed the past-due debt with 
his landlord who agreed to use Applicant’s security deposit to cover the amount owed. 
Applicant self-reported this debt on his security clearance application as it is not part of 
his credit report.16  
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 54, 58-62; AE C-2. 
 
10 Tr. 54, 62-65, 72, 90-91; GE 3, 4; AE C-2. 
 
11 Tr. 53, 65-67; AE C-2; Answer to SOR. 
 
12 Tr. 53, 67-68; AE C-2, D-3. 
 
13 Tr. 54, 68-72; AE C-2, D-3, L, M. 
 
14 Tr. 54, 73; AE C-2. 
 
15 Tr. 54, 73-74; AE D-3. 
 
16 Tr. 55, 75-78; GE 1. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant provided a copy of the CCC report showing ten accounts are part of the 
plan. He also provided a copy of his contract with the CCC that he signed in September 
2012. Some accounts are settled and resolved and some are pending settlement as 
active negotiations are ongoing.17 
 
Applicant’s current annual income is $80,000. His wife continues to incur 
significant out-of-pocket costs for medical expenses. Applicant estimated his annual 
out-of-pocket medical expenses to be between $3,000 and $5,000. Applicant works 
part-time as a college instructor to earn more so he can continue to resolve his 
delinquent debts. His wife is unable to work. He has a budget on a computer 
spreadsheet to track all of his expenses and payments. The only delinquent debts he 
has are those that are included in the CCC plan. As the balance of his monthly deposits 
increase in the CCC account, it then negotiates with the creditors, thereby 
systematically resolving his delinquent debts. Through the plan, five debts have been 
canceled, settled and paid, or being paid. Applicant understands he may receive an IRS 
Form 1099-C for some debts and his duty to file it with his tax returns. He has done his 
own financial counseling by following a reputable author’s advice and reading financial 
websites. Presently, he has one credit card with a $500 limit. Its present balance is 
approximately $200. His wife does not have any credit cards.18   
 
Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) provided a character letter. He has 
known Applicant since 2008 and is aware that Applicant has worked in several high-
level support contracts for the government. He is unaware of any security violations. He 
considers Applicant an upstanding citizen and member of the community. Applicant has 
received accolades for his professionalism. The FSO trusts Applicant with sensitive, 
personal and security-related information and has never had any reason to doubt or 
question him.19 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
                                                          
17 AE C-2, D-3, E-4, F-5. 
 
18 Tr. 82-87, 92-99, 101-105. 
 
19 AE K-10. 
 
6 
 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had ten delinquent debts that he was unable to pay for several years. I 
find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant had several periods of unemployment and underemployment. His 
wife’s medical condition prevented her from working, which impacted the family 
finances. They incurred significant out-of-pocket medical expenses. These conditions 
were beyond Applicant’s control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must 
have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Before receiving the SOR, Applicant 
sought financial assistance with the CCC. He has been making automatic payments to 
CCC who then negotiates settlement plans. Through a systematic payment plan he has 
settled some of the delinquent debts and is in active negotiations to resolve the 
remaining debts. Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies.   
 
Applicant has educated himself regarding his finances through reading financial 
websites and books. He has initiated a good-faith effort to resolve his debts through his 
payment plan with the CCC. He has a budget. He has discussed his past-due rent with 
his landlord who will use his security deposit to cover the debt. He has a stable job and 
is living within his means. Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved and under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d) apply.   
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He experienced financial problems when he was 
unemployed and underemployed. During this same period, his wife had medical 
problems and could no longer work. The loss of her income and the out-of-pocket 
medical expenses also significantly impacted the family’s finances. Realizing his debts 
were becoming unmanageable, Applicant sought financial assistance through the CCC 
in 2012. He has been systematically and responsibly resolving his delinquent debts. 
Applicant has met his burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
