 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03562 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 24, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. This action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 
1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. Applicant answered the SOR on October 14, 
2014; November 28, 2014; December 22, 2014; and January 16, 2015; and indicated 
 
2 
 
 
that he did not wish to have a hearing. In Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, Department Counsel 
requested a hearing on January 16, 2015. The case was assigned to me on February 2, 
2015. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 10, 2015, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on February 25, 2015. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and submitted 
exhibits (AE) A through J. The record of the proceeding was left open until March 11, 
2015, to provide Applicant the opportunity to submit additional matters. Applicant timely 
submitted AE L through R. All proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 9, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 54, has been working for various defense contractors in the same 
position since February 2003. He graduated from high school in 1979. He served on 
active duty in the U.S. Navy from 1981 to 2001, attained the grade of petty officer first 
class (E-6), and retired honorably. He married in 1988 and separated from his wife in 
2001. He has no children. He has held a security clearance without incident since 
1983.1 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file his federal 
income tax returns for 2006 through 2010 in a timely manner (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he did 
not file a federal income tax return for 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.b); that he was delinquent on 
paying his federal income taxes for 2006 through 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.c); and that he had 
five other delinquent debts totaling $15,769 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.h). Under Guideline E, the 
SOR alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified his responses to two questions in his 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated February 6, 2013. 
(SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c and 2.a and 2.b. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact.2  
 
Federal tax allegations. As noted above, Applicant separated from his wife in 
2001. As spousal support, she receives his military retirement pay. He provides her no 
other support. For tax year 2001 to 2005, he filed his federal income tax returns as 
“married filing separately.” He stated that he failed to file his 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 
and 2010 federal income tax returns in a timely manner because he did not have his 
wife’s Social Security number to file as “married filing jointly.” He thought that he would 
obtain a larger refund if he filed in that latter status. He attempted to obtain her Social 
Security number from the military pay office, but they would not provide that information 
to him. He also stated that he had no contact information for his wife so he could not 
obtain the information from her. He testified that he did not know if his wife had been 
working or filing her tax returns separately. He filed the 2006-2010 federal income tax 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5-7, 34-35, 54, 61-64; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; HE 2 (a supplement to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR). 
 
 
3 
 
 
returns as “married filing jointly” in November 2012 after receiving a letter from the IRS. 
He stated that the IRS again contacted him shortly after the filing and made him amend 
his filing status on the tax returns to “married filing separately.”3 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he was indebted to the federal 
government for delinquent taxes in the approximate amounts of $5,171 for 2006; $5,451 
for 2007; $5,122 for 2008; $5,801 for 2009; and $5,516 for 2010. In July 2014, he 
entered into an agreement with the IRS to pay $600 per month toward his delinquent 
taxes for 2006 through 2011. The amount of delinquent taxes owed for 2011 is 
unknown. The agreement provided that the payment would be automatically withdrawn 
from his checking account starting in August 2014. He testified that the agreement was 
later expanded to include his delinquent taxes for 2012. He provided documentation 
proving that he has been making the $600 monthly payment since August 2014.4 
 
Applicant did not consult with a tax professional for advice on filing his federal 
income tax returns. He first testified that he filed his 2011 and 2012 federal income tax 
returns in the middle of 2013, but later testified that he filed the 2011 federal income tax 
return in November 2012. He delayed filing those returns because he was still hoping to 
obtain his wife’s Social Security number so that he could file them as “married filing 
jointly.” He also testified that he owed the IRS $1,152 in past-due taxes for 2013 and 
that amount has not yet been included in his agreement with the IRS. In October 2014, 
his employer received a notice from the IRS directing that Applicant’s withholding 
exemptions be changed to “Single, 0.” He testified that, prior to that change, he was 
claiming one exemption. The change to his withholding exemptions became effective at 
the end of October 2014.5  
 
 Other delinquent debt allegations. Applicant contends that the debts listed in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.h are not his debts. In June 2011, the Navy notified him that his 
Personally Identifiable Information (PII) was potentially compromised, although there 
was no evidence to suggest his PII was misused. He also pointed out that one of his 
credit reports contained another individual’s Social Security number. Other credit 
reports identified him with a middle initial that does not belong to him or listed a post 
office box for him that he never had. He stated that he called a credit reporting bureau in 
February 2015 to dispute those debts. His latest credit report dated February 10, 2015, 
does not list any of the debts alleged in the SOR. I find in favor of Applicant on the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.h.6 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. 55-56, 61-70; GE 1, 2.  
 
4 Tr. 50-53, 61-67; GE 2; AE A, K-R; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; HE 2. 
 
5 Tr. 48-50, 52-55; GE 2; AE J. 
 
6 Tr. 34-42, 57-61; GE 2; AE B, C, F, G, I. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Falsification allegations. In his e-QIP, Applicant answered “No” to the question 
that asked whether he failed to file or pay federal, state or other taxes as required by 
law in the last seven years. He also answered “No” to the questions that asked whether, 
in the last seven years, he had defaulted on any type of loan; had bills or debts turned 
over to a collection agency; had any account or credit card suspended, charged off, 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; and had any other debt over 120 days delinquent; 
or whether he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt.7 
  
 At the hearing, Applicant admitted that he deliberately falsified his e-QIP when he 
did not disclose that he had failed to file and pay his federal income taxes as required 
by law. He knew that answer was false when he signed the e-QIP. He indicated that he 
was trying to resolve his tax filing at that time so he answered “No” to that question. He 
indicated that he correctly answered the e-QIP questions concerning the other alleged 
delinquent debts because he does not believe those debts were his responsibility.8  
   
 Applicant earns about $51,000 per year in his current job. He testified that he 
currently had no credit cards or any delinquent debts other than the past-due taxes.9 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
                                                          
7 GE 1, 2.  
 
8 Tr. 67-70. 
 
9 Tr. 55-57; GE 2.  
 
 
5 
 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required . . . . 
 
 Applicant failed to file his 2006 through 2011 federal income taxes in a timely 
manner as required by law and failed to pay his federal income taxes in a timely 
manner. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delay in filing his federal income tax returns for 2006-2011 casts 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. During the period in 
question, he had not been communicating with his wife for years and did not know 
whether she was working or filing her income tax returns separately. Any attempt to file 
a joint federal income tax return without first coordinating with her was an irresponsible 
course of action. His failure to file his federal income tax returns in a timely manner was 
not due to a condition beyond his control. He could have continued to file his federal 
 
7 
 
 
income tax returns as “married filing separately” as he had done from 2001 to 2005. AG 
¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do not apply.  
 
Applicant filed his 2006-2011 federal income tax returns in November 2012. He 
owed over $26,000 in past-due taxes for those years. In July 2012, he entered into an 
agreement with the IRS to pay his back taxes. Since then, he has been paying $600 per 
month toward the back taxes. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.c. AG ¶ 20(c) partially 
applies.  
 
Applicant provided sufficient evidence to establish that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-
1.h are not his responsibility. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to those debts. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
Applicant deliberately omitted required information from his e-QIP when he failed 
to disclose that he did not file or pay federal income taxes as required by law. AG ¶ 
16(a) applies to SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
Applicant did not deliberately falsify his e-QIP when he failed to disclose the 
delinquent debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.h. He reasonably believed that those debts 
were not his responsibility. I find in favor of Applicant on the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.b. 
 
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant’s e-QIP falsification as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a was recent and significant. 
In falsifying his e-QIP, he seriously undermined the security clearance adjudication 
process. I find that none of the mitigating conditions apply to his falsification.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
9 
 
 
My comments under Guidelines F and E are incorporated in this whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. Applicant retired from the Navy after serving 
honorably on active duty for 20 years. He has held a security clearance for many years 
without incident. Nevertheless, he failed to show that he acted responsibly when he 
failed to file and pay his federal income taxes in a timely manner or when he 
intentionally falsified a response in his e-QIP. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.c-1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
    Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
    Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
