 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-04507 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Dale Gutwein, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 6, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86). On 
October 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective on September 1, 2006 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On November 14, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR. On January 8, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On January 21, 2015, 
DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On January 23, 2015, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for 
February 13, 2015. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, 
called one witness, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through P, which were 
received into evidence without objection. On February 24, 2015, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c with explanations; 
and denied ¶¶ 1.b, and 1.d through 1.l with explanations. After a thorough review of 
the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old surveillance team member and ground controller, 
who has been employed by a defense contractor since February 2013. He currently 
holds an interim secret security clearance. Applicant seeks a permanent secret 
security clearance, which is a requirement of his continued employment. (GE 1; Tr. 
17-19)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in 1985. He has been attending college 
intermittently since 1989 and expects to graduate with a bachelor of science degree in 
homeland security in May 2015. Applicant has earned several work-related 
certificates. (GE 1; Tr. 13, 19-22) 
 
Applicant was previously married three times – 1986 to 1989, 1990 to 1994, 
and 1998 to 2002. Those marriages ended by divorce. Applicant has a 27-year-old 
son, who is independent, and a 10-year-old daughter, who lives with him. He also had 
a 3-year-old son born during his third marriage, who passed away. On September 11, 
2008, Applicant and the mother of his 10-year-old daughter entered into a stipulation 
by which Applicant was granted custody of their daughter. (GE 1; AE B; Tr. 23-25) 
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1986 to 1990, and was 
honorably discharged as a corporal (pay grade E-4). He remained in the Marine Corps 
Inactive Ready Reserve (IRR) from 1990 to 1992 and was honorably discharged as a 
sergeant (pay grade E-5). Applicant held two military occupation specialties while in 
 
3 
 
 
the Marine Corps -- 5811 (military police) and 3051 (logistics specialist).  (GE 1; AE I; 
Tr. 25-27) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR contains 12 separate allegations consisting of 2005 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, a 2004 state tax lien, one charged-off account, and nine collection 
accounts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.l)  
 
The following summarizes the status of each SOR allegation or debt:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in 2005 and discharged in 2006. At the 
time Applicant filed for bankruptcy, he was president and chief executive officer of an 
information technology business. In May 1998, his deceased son previously 
discussed, was born with a central nervous system disorder with a six-month life 
expectancy. The challenges his son posed were financially and personally significant. 
Two years after his son was born, Applicant’s wife filed for divorce and left with her 
daughter leaving Applicant to care for their disabled and terminally ill son.  As a result 
of time commitments and the financial strain of caring for his son, Applicant was 
unable to devote the required time and attention to his business. His business failed 
and Applicant explored various options to recover, but after seeking professional 
advice and evaluating his options, he closed his company in 2002 and filed for 
bankruptcy in 2005. (SOR answer; GE 1, Tr. 35-44, 53) 
 
Applicant’s post-bankruptcy financial problems stem from a failed sustainable 
energy solutions company that he and his partner formed. The company was viable 
until Applicant’s partner retained the services of private finding organization for the 
purpose of raising business capital. However, the individual with whom Applicant’s 
partner had retained to raise capital took their company’s money “somewhere in the 
neighborhood of a couple hundred thousand dollars” and moved to a foreign country. 
As a result, Applicant and his partner were forced to dissolve their company. In the 
process, Applicant lost his life savings. (Tr. 46-49)  Additionally, Applicant incurred 
medical debts as a result of a lapse in company insurance coverage for nonpayment 
of premiums. Around the time his company was being dissolved, he also incurred 
expenses to move to the state where his mother was terminally ill. (SOR answer; Tr. 
50) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b – Out-of-state tax lien filed against Applicant in 2004 for $10,763.    
In 2003, Applicant filed paperwork in anticipation of conducting business out of state; 
however, he never did conduct business in that state. Applicant neglected to file 
required reports with the state and the state sought estimated fees and filed a lien 
against Applicant for non-payment of those fees. Applicant stated that the state in 
question acknowledged that he does not owe any money, but will not release the lien. 
Applicant’s attorney has counseled him to file an appeal with the state’s 
unemployment commission to have the lien released. ACCOUNT BEING DISPUTED. 
(SOR answer; AE A; Tr. 58-63)  
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – Credit card collection account for $6,720. This account was 
opened in April 2005 and should have been included in Applicant’s October 2005 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Department Counsel stipulated that this debt should have been 
included in Applicant’s bankruptcy and discharged; however, it appears on his April 
2014 credit report. ACCOUNT RESOLVED.  (SOR answer; GE 3; Tr. 44-45)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d – Charged-off credit card account for $966. By letter dated February 
12, 2015, Applicant entered into an agreement to make $50 monthly payments until 
debt is paid off. ACCOUNT BEING RESOLVED.  (SOR answer; AE E; Tr. 51-52, 54)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e – collection account for $1,020; 1.f - collection account for $396; 
1.g - collection account for $354; 1.h – collection account for $326; 1.j – collection 
account $202; and 1.k – collection account for $183. Applicant enrolled these 
accounts in a debt consolidation service. By letter dated February 10, 2015, the debt 
consolidation service stated that all of these debts were settled and paid. ACCOUNTS 
RESOLVED. (SOR answer; AE F; Tr. 55-58) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i – Collection account for sanitation service for $229. By letter dated 
February 9, 2015, this account has been paid in full. ACCOUNT RESOLVED. (SOR 
answer; AE G; Tr. 54-55) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l – Collection account for broadband service for $179. The creditor 
incorrectly claimed Applicant did not return his equipment when he closed his account. 
Applicant successfully disputed this debt.  By letter dated November 12, 2014, the 
creditor acknowledged their error, notified the credit bureaus, and apologized for any 
inconvenience their error may have caused. ACCOUNT DISPUTED AND 
RESOLVED. (SOR answer; AE H; Tr. 55) 
 
Applicant has not sought financial counseling. Apart from these debts, 
Applicant is current on all of his other obligations. (Tr. 64-67) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s personal representative testified on his behalf stating that he has 
known Applicant for approximately two years. He stated that he and Applicant are 
friends, their families vacation together, and that Applicant is trustworthy to the point 
that he “would trust him with his credit cards or anything else.” (Tr. 68-69) 
 
 As a parent, Applicant is very involved with his 10-year-old daughter. Her latest 
5th grade report card indicates that she is a “B” student and per her teacher’s comment 
is an overall “great girl.” (AE C) Applicant submitted five character reference letters 
from his college – two letters from the college president, one letter from the financial 
aid assistant, one letter from the campus executive officer, one letter from an advisor 
from the office of student life, and one letter from the director of development. These 
letters convey the collective message that Applicant is highly regarded as a student, 
both academically and in non-academic activities. Applicant contributes significantly to 
 
5 
 
 
student organizations, the college’s veteran’s organization, and college foundation. 
(AE J – AE M) 
 
 Applicant also submitted three work-related character reference letters from his 
team leader, lead ground controller, and chief executive officer. These letters discuss 
the contribution Applicant is making to the company and emphasize his 
trustworthiness. (AE N) Lastly, Applicant submitted a character letter from a long-time 
friend who spoke of his character, commitment to his family, and how he excelled 
during adversity. (AE P) Applicant is also an active and accomplished diver. (AE O)  
 
                                                   Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. Applicant’s 2005 bankruptcy is of limited security significance because it is 
not recent, and it represents his efforts to resolve his debts and obtain a fresh financial 
start. 
 
Full application of AG ¶ 20(b) is warranted. Applicant’s recent divorce, illness 
and death of his child, and business failures were unplanned and costly. Applicant 
reached out to his creditors, and as noted, has resolved or is resolving 10 out of 11 of 
his debts and is disputing the 11th debt. Applicant has made substantial progress in 
regaining financial responsibility.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. Applicant is living within his means. Having paid or 
in the process of resolving the debts and having a reasonable basis to dispute two of 
his debts, Applicant is able to receive full credit under AG ¶¶  20(d) and 20(e). 
 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guideline F is incorporated in this whole-person section. However, 
further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s military service, assisting other veterans in his post-service, and 
service as a defense contractor weigh heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen, 
a dedicated father, and a productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-
day expenses, lives within his means, and his SOR debts have been resolved or are 
being resolved. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person 
analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept 
of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
 
9 
 
 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Due to circumstances beyond his control, Applicant’s debts became delinquent. 
Despite the financial setback as a result of his most recent divorce, death of his child, 
and business failures, it is clear from Applicant’s actions that he is on the road to a full 
financial recovery. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Both the mitigating conditions under Guideline F and the whole-person analysis 
support a favorable decision. I specifically considered Applicant’s years of financial 
responsibility before falling into debt, the circumstances that led to his financial 
difficulties, his financial recovery and steps he has taken to resolve his financial 
situation, his potential for future service as a defense contractor, the mature and 
responsible manner in which he dealt with his situation, his character evidence, and 
his testimony and demeanor. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
