 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02878 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of illegally using marijuana and failed to disclose that 
information in her March 2013 e-QIP. She is resolving delinquent student loans, but has 
not addressed delinquent medical debts. She failed to rebut or mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct, or Guideline F, Financial Considerations. Her eligibility for a public 
trust position is denied. 
 
On March 7, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 24, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DoD 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
 
Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
On November 7, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 4.) On January 
22, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM).1 He 
mailed Applicant a complete copy of the FORM on February 20, 2015. Applicant 
received the FORM on March 3, 2015, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections 
and submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted four documents, which I 
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, and admitted into the record without 
objection from Department Counsel. On April 9, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the 
SOR. She further admitted them in a subsequent email dated December 5, 2014. (Item 
3.) 
 
 Applicant is 24 years old and unmarried. In January 2013 she began her current 
position with a healthcare company, managing benefits for veterans. She also works as 
a part-time biller for a private company. From March 2010 to February 2011 she 
attended a program to become a pharmacy technician. (Item 4.)    
  
 In November 2010 Applicant tested positive for marijuana during a random drug 
screening for an externship at a pharmacy. She was subsequently terminated from her 
position. The state pharmacy board placed her license on probation for two years and 
required her to complete drug tests twice a month. She failed to complete the tests, 
resulting in further action by the pharmacy board to prohibit her from practicing for 
seven years. She admitted that she illegally used marijuana in 2005, and from April 
2009 to November 2010. (Items 3, 4.) She did not present any evidence that she 
participated in a substance abuse evaluation or treatment.  
 
 When Applicant completed her e-QIP in March 2013, she failed to disclose the 
information about her frequent illegal use of marijuana in response to a question in 
Section 23, inquiring into illegal drug use within the past seven years. Instead, she 
stated that a former roommate in 2011 used it when [Applicant] was sleeping or not 
present. She said she never “intentionally consumed or inhaled the substance.” (Item 
4.)  
                                                          
1
 Department counsel submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 7 is inadmissible 
and will not be considered. It is the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an 
interviewer from the Office of Personnel Management on April 2, 2013. It was never adopted by Applicant 
as her own statement, or otherwise certified by her to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report 
of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating witness. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated March 15, 2013, and August 28, 
2014, the SOR alleged seven delinquent debts, which accumulated between 2010 and 
2014. The allegations consisted of six medical bills and one allegation referencing three 
student loans. (Items 5, 6.)  
 
 Applicant submitted evidence that she is paying the three student loans, alleged 
in SOR ¶ 3.g. In July 2014 she agreed to make monthly payments of $50 on the 
recorded $16,253 balance. She has complied with the agreement as of February 2015. 
(AE B.) The remaining five medical debts totaling $3,049 remain unaddressed.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant obtained credit or financial counseling. She 
did not provide a workable budget, from which her ability to resolve the unaddressed 
delinquencies and avoid additional debt problems could be predicted with any certainty. 
She submitted a February 2015 performance evaluation that documented “Exceeds 
Expectation” as the performance summary. (AE C.) She provided no character 
references describing her judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I, II, and III are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See DoD 5200.2- R ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met 
for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to the DoD and DOHA by the Defense 
Security Service and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense 
contractor personnel are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive 
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ 
C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes two conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant admitted that she used marijuana in 2005, and from April 2009 until 
November 2010, when she tested positive for it on a urinalysis. The evidence raises 
both security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides two conditions that could mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
raised under this guideline: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant admitted to relatively recent use of marijuana with some frequency. 
She presented no evidence to document that she has not used it since November 2010, 
nor did she document a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future. Neither of 
the above two mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness concerns pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
6 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admitted that she failed to disclose her illegal use of marijuana when 
she completed an e-QIP. Instead, she fabricated a misrepresentation of her involvement 
with the marijuana by incriminating her roommate.  
 
AG ¶ 17 includes two conditions that could mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
arising under this guideline: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant attempted to correct her falsification before 
being confronted with the facts. The offense is not minor, given her attempt to conceal 
her illegal conduct in the March 2013 e-QIP. Neither mitigating condition applies. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
    
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2010 to 2013, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that she was unable 
or unwilling to begin to address until July 2014. The evidence raises both security 
concerns.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 The guideline includes two conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she participated in credit or financial 
counseling, established a budget, or developed a plan to manage the unresolved debts. 
However, there are some indications that her financial problems are coming under 
control, based on the payment plan she arranged for her student loans. AG ¶ 20(c) has 
application to those debts alleged in SOR ¶ 3.g. By complying with a repayment plan 
since August 2014 she is demonstrating a good-faith effort to resolve those debts. Thus, 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies to that allegation, but not the remaining allegations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a trustworthiness determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 24-year-old woman, who 
began working for a defense contractor in 2013. When she completed an e-QIP, she 
failed to disclose her past illegal use of marijuana, and instead stated that her roommate 
used it in their apartment, implying that she did not use it. Since August 2014 she has 
been repaying her student loans, whose balance totals about $16,000, and leaving 
about $3,000 in medical debts to address. She did not submit a budget or articulate a 
plan to resolve those. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions 
 
8 
 
 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
arising from her drug involvement, personal conduct, and financial problems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:        Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:        Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a through 3.f:         Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 3.g:           For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
