 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03379 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: [Applicant’s husband], Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 24, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 10, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 13, 2015, scheduling the hearing for April 2, 2015. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 9, 2015.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Peru. The request was not admitted in evidence but was included 
in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant did not object, and I have taken 
administrative notice of the facts contained in HE I. The facts are summarized in the 
written request and will not be repeated in the Findings of Fact. Reference to some of 
the facts contained in HE I will be made in the Analysis section.  
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through C, which were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. She is applying for a security clearance for the first 
time. She worked for a defense contractor when she had an interim clearance. She is 
being sponsored for a security clearance by a defense contractor who will employ her if 
she obtains a clearance. She is married with two adult stepchildren.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Peru to Peruvian parents. She attended college in Peru for 
a period, but she did not earn a degree. She worked for the Peruvian government in 
counter-narcotics for more than ten years. That job involved working in cooperation with 
the U.S. Government.2 
 
 Applicant’s husband is a retired U.S. service member. They first met in Peru 
when he was working there for the U.S. Government. They met again about ten years 
later when they were both working in Afghanistan. She came to the United States in 
2006, and they married the same year. She became a U.S. citizen in 2011. Applicant 
worked with the U.S. Government on a U.S. facility in a foreign country for about three 
months in 2012 and 2013. She surrendered her Peruvian passport to her facility security 
officer in 2013. The passport will expire in about three months.3 
 
 Applicant’s parents, siblings, and their spouses are citizens and residents of 
Peru. Her father is retired. There is no indication that any of her family members have 
any direct ties to narcotics trafficking or Peru’s intelligence services.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24, 47-49, 55; GE 1; AE B. 
 
2 Tr. at 21, 54-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A-C. 
 
3 Tr. at 18, 22-24, 43-44, 50-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE A-C. 
 
4 Tr. at 40-41, 45-46, 50-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2; AE B. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant maintains sporadic contact with people she worked with in the Peruvian 
government. She has not visited Peru since 2011. She talks to her family in Peru about 
once or twice a month, and she maintains e-mail contact with one of her siblings.5 
 
 Applicant has a retirement account in Peru that is based upon her employment 
with the Peruvian government. The retirement account is valued at about $20,000 to 
$30,000 in U.S. currency. Applicant expected the Peruvian government to release the 
funds to her once she became a U.S. citizen, but it has failed to do so. The funds may 
be released to her after she has been a U.S. citizen and pays U.S. taxes for five years. 
She had bank accounts in Peru, but those accounts have been closed or have a 
minimal amount in them.6 
 
 Applicant and her husband own assets in the United States valued at about 
$500,000 to $600,000. She stated that her allegiance lies with the United States. She 
stated that she would report any attempt to use her family in Peru or her retirement 
account against her.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 21, 41, 45, 50; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 31-35, 40, 51-52; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A-C. 
 
7 Tr. at 35-40, 44-47. 
 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
5 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s parents, siblings, and their spouses are citizens and residents of 
Peru. She maintains sporadic contact with people she worked with in the Peruvian 
government. She has a retirement account in Peru that is valued at about $20,000 to 
$30,000 in U.S. currency. Peru has been the world’s foremost producer of cocaine. It 
also continues to have human rights problems.  
 
 Applicant’s contacts in Peru and her Peruvian retirement account create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) have been raised by 
the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property  
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Peru. Guideline B is not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.8  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
6 
 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Narcotics trafficking is a significant problem in Peru. Applicant helped Peru and 
the United States fight that problem for ten years. She also assisted the United States in 
Afghanistan and on a U.S. facility in a foreign country. I find that it is unlikely Applicant 
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the United 
States and the interests of the Peruvian government or a drug cartel. There is no 
conflict of interest, because Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest 
in favor of the United States. I also find that Applicant’s Peruvian retirement cannot be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure her. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(f) are 
applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
