1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 14-02403
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se
May 28, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On August 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and E for Applicant.
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992) (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On September 15, 2014, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing in this case before an Administrative Judge. The Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 9, 2015, and I
convened the hearing by video teleconference, as scheduled, on April 28, 2015. The
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A and B, which were also
admitted without objection. One additional witness testified on behalf of Applicant.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on May 7, 2015. Based upon a review
2
of the pleadings, exhibits, as well as the testimony of Applicant and his witness,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record discussed
above, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 51 years old. He is unmarred, and he has two children. He is a high
school graduate and he attended trade school. Applicant is employed as an electronics
technician by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F -  Financial Considerations)
The SOR lists two allegations, 1.a. and 1.b., regarding financial difficulties of
Applicant.
1.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant has an overdue debt for a second mortgage
that is more than 120 days past due in the amount of $58,916, with a balance in the
approximate amount of $130,000.  In his RSOR, Applicant denied this allegation. The
full data credit report (CR), dated July 25, 2012; and the two additional CRs, dated July
23, 2014; and November 5, 2014, establish that this debt is still overdue and has not
been resolved. (Exhibits 3, 4, and 5.)
1.b. The SOR alleges that Applicant has an overdue debt for a mortgage account
that is more than 120 days past due in the amount of $204,273, with a balance in the
approximate amount of $640,626.  In his RSOR, Applicant denied this allegation. All
three CRs establish that this debt is still overdue and has not been resolved. (Exhibits 3,
4, and 5.)
Applicant testified that he purchased a home in 2003 or 2004, and he stopped
making payments on the house in 2009, at which time he moved out of the premises.
When he left the home, he understood that he still owed money on each of the two
mortgages. Applicant contended that at some point after he left his home, he sold his
interest in the home to another individual (Purchaser) and to a representative of the
Purchaser, (Witness), whose testimony will be discussed below. Applicant never
received any money for the sale from Purchaser, just the promise that the Applicant
would receive some payment from this Purchaser if she was able to resolve the
mortgage with the mortgage holder. Applicant also testified that he has received no
notice, either in written or oral form, informing him that he does not owe the mortgage
holders the amount of the two mortgages as listed on subparagraphs 1.a., and 1.b.
Finally, Applicant also conceded that he never received approval from the mortgage
holder for the transfer of the home from Applicant to the Purchaser.  (Tr at 46-51.) 
  
3
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement,
unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and untrustworthiness.  
2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant failed to provide truthful and candid
answers to Questions asked under section 26 of an Electronic Questionnaires for
Investigations Processing (e-Quip), executed by him on July 10, 2012. (Exhibit 1.) The
questions asked whether in the last seven years Applicant had been over 120 days
delinquent on any debt. It also asked if Applicant is currently over 120 days delinquent
on any debt. Applicant answered, “No,” to these questions and listed no debts. It is
alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that information concerning his
finances and overdue debt as set forth in subparagraph 1.a. and 1.b., above.
In his RSOR, Applicant denied this allegation. During his testimony, Applicant
stated that when he completed his security clearance application in 2014, he was not
sure of his financial status after he had signed over the house to the Purchaser and the
Witness, since he believed they were paying the bills for the house and the homeowner
fees. Applicant conceded that he was never informed by the Witness or the Purchaser
that they were paying all the required bills and fees, nor as discussed above, did the
mortgage holder advise him that he did not owe the amount of the two mortgages as
listed on subparagraphs 1.a., and 1.b., above. (Tr at 46-57.) 
Witness Testimony
As reviewed above, one additional witness testified on behalf of Applicant. The
Witness is a 76 year old individual, who owns a business that helps people when they
are having financial difficulties with their homes and mortgages. The Witness explained
that in around 2008, Applicant was going through a divorce, his wife had separated from
him, and with his responsibility for paying for all of the bills and taking care of their
children, he was unable to make the payments on his mortgage. They attempted a short
sale but were unsuccessful, in part because of the poor economy, and ultimately
Applicant sold his property to an investor (Purchaser.) Witness testified that the property
has never been foreclosed. (Tr at 25-33.) 
Witness claims Purchaser has been attempting to negotiate a payoff with the
mortgage holder since that time. As far as Witness knows the mortgage holder has not
been paid on the mortgage for many years. The transfer of the property from Applicant
to the Purchaser was made on September 11, 2013. Exhibit A is a quitclaim deed
showing that the property was transferred from Applicant to Purchaser on September
11, 2013, and Exhibit B shows Purchaser is being billed by the city and county where
the property is located for property taxes.  (Tr at 34-44.) No evidence was introduced to
show that the mortgage holder approved the transfer of the property from Applicant to
Purchaser, or that Purchaser has made any payments on either mortgage to the
mortgage holder.
Policies
4
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
5
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F -  Financial Considerations)
        The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19 (c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant had accumulated significant delinquent debt on two overdue mortgages. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties: Under AG ¶  20 (b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s overdue finances occurred as a result of his divorce and the downturn in the
economy. However, I do not find that Applicant has acted responsibly because he failed
to contact the mortgage holder to seek approval for the transfer of his property, and he
has never ascertained the status of his home, and his two mortgages. Therefore, I find
that this mitigating condition is not a factor for consideration in this case. 
I also find that because Applicant has not contacted the mortgage holder to try to
resolve the two mortgages, AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable as Applicant has not “initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”  
I conclude that at this time Applicant has not reduced or resolved his overdue
debts. Additionally, no evidence was introduced to establish that his current financial
situation is stable. Therefore, Applicant has not mitigated the financial concerns of the
Government, and I resolve Guideline F against Applicant.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15:  
      Conduct involving questionable judgement, lack of candor, dishonesty,
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
6
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
         The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance
because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement, lack of candor,
and dishonesty.  In reviewing the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E, I conclude
that while Applicant should have made a more concerted effort to ascertain the status of
his overdue mortgages, there was no “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification
of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire” by Applicant, because he
testified credibly that he had a belief that his overdue debts were being resolved. I do
not find disqualifying condition ¶ 16(a) or any other disqualifying condition applies in this
case against Applicant.  I, therefore, resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to the disqualifying conditions apply under Guideline F, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the whole-
person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
7
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.b.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: For Applicant
Conclusion
       In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
        
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
