 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-07618 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro se 
 
 
October 21, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Alcohol Consumption security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 11, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
G, Alcohol Consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 26, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on August 26, 2010, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on September 24, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GEs) 1 through 
 
2 
 
8, which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AEs) A 
through I without objection, called one witness, and testified on his own behalf. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 30, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, through 1.d. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47-years old and has been an employee of a defense contractor for 
the past 25 years. He is married and has a 14-year-old daughter. He has possessed a 
security clearance for 20 years. (GE 1; GE 2; AE A; Tr. 37-39, 68-69.) 
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol at the age of 17, in approximately 1982. On 
January 20, 2005, he was arrested and charged with Driving under the Influence of 
Alcohol, DUI with Blood Alcohol of 0.08% or Higher, and Wet Reckless. Applicant pled 
guilty to Wet Reckless and was placed on summary probation for three years. He was 
also required to enroll in a three month first-offender program and pay a fine of $300. 
Applicant was 42-years old at the time of his first DUI. On this occasion, he had been 
out alone at a bar and grill for dinner. He consumed two to four margaritas with his 
dinner and then chose to drive home. After this arrest, Applicant abstained from alcohol 
use for two years. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; GE 8; Tr. 38-40, 43-45.) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant resumed his alcohol use. Applicant chose to resume drinking 
with his friends after work and on the weekends. At first, he limited his alcohol 
consumption to approximately four beers per week. However, his drinking increased. In 
fact, Applicant admitted, during his testimony, that from approximately 1997 to 2007 
(with the exception of the two years after his 2005 DUI), Applicant would become 
intoxicated two-to-three-times per week with his friends and then drive approximately 30 
miles home. He often would consume alcohol outside of his home as his wife did not 
approve of his alcohol use. (Tr. 40-43, 44-45, 61, 71-72.) 
 
 On November 19, 2007, Applicant was again arrested and charged with Under 
the Influence of Drugs/Alcohol and 08% More Weight Alcohol Drive Vehicle. He was 
found guilty and sentenced to 48 months of unsupervised probation with the condition 
that he attends an 18-month court ordered alcohol recovery program, 49 Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meetings, and serve one day in the county jail. Applicant presented 
evidence that he completed the court’s requirements, but he did not provide any 
documentation to establish that his probation was terminated early. He is still on 
probation for this offense. On the night of his arrest, Applicant had been out alone at a 
bar watching football games. He consumed approximately eight beers. He contends 
that he did not feel drunk on this occasion and had a lot of water prior to driving. 
However, he reported his BAC was 0.13%. (GE 4; GE 5; GE 7; GE 8; AE A; AE B; AE 
C; Tr. 44-49.) 
 
 
3 
 
 In addition to completing the court ordered treatment, Applicant sought help 
through the employee assistance program offered by his employer. He was referred to 
an outpatient program. From November 2007 through March 2008, he attended a 15-
week out-patient course that consisted of group sessions. He received a certificate of 
completion after attending the required 125 hours. Applicant has also sought to better 
himself through taking a three-month Dale Carnegie course. During the past three 
years, Applicant has received his company’s President’s award and has been awarded 
three U.S. “trade secrets.” (GE 5; AE A; AE B, AE C; AE G; AE I; Tr. 35-36, 49-53.) 
 
 Applicant claims that he has been sober since his last arrest in November 2007. 
He testified that he continues to attend AA approximately two times per month. He 
indicated he no longer associates with his drinking friends. Applicant has never had a 
sponsor in AA. He asserts that he has completed the first three steps in the 12-step 
program; however, he was unable to recall what those steps were when asked on 
examination. He referred to a printout of the steps for aide. Further, he was unable to 
identify the name of the handbook relied upon in AA meetings during his testimony. (AE 
A; Tr. 53-55, 74-76.) 
 
 Applicant denied ever being diagnosed with any type of alcohol dependency or 
alcohol abuse at hearing, although his physician had prescribed him Campral, a drug 
that would help him abstain from alcohol. Applicant’s wife testified that Applicant has not 
consumed alcohol in almost three years and she believes her husband is committed to 
abstinence. However, she acknowledged that Applicant promised he would not drink 
alcohol again after his first alcohol related arrest in 2005. (GE 4; GE 5; Tr. 72, 75-90.) 
 
 Applicant has the support of his manager and two colleagues. The letters of 
support indicate Applicant is well respected and a great co-worker. Each recommended 
Applicant for a security clearance. (AE D; AE E; AE F.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
 
5 
 
 (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
Applicant had two criminal convictions for driving after consuming alcohol, 
including his 2005 Wet Reckless and his 2007 DUI. These incidents brought to light 
Applicant’s pattern of consuming alcohol to the point of intoxication and then driving 
home several times per week from 1997 to 2005 and again in 2007. AG ¶ 22 is 
disqualifying. 
 
I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG 
¶ 23 including:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment. 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant has failed to establish that any of the above mitigating conditions fully 
apply to his case. Applicant was placed on probation in February 2008, for 48 months, 
and remains on probation for this offense, despite completing the court ordered 
treatment. Further, he had a two year period of abstinence after his 2005 Wet Reckless 
conviction and subsequent first offender alcohol and drug education program, but 
eventually returned to the consumption of alcohol, despite his promises to his wife. Not 
enough time has passed after Applicant’s second alcohol related conviction to insure 
that he won’t resume his pattern of driving after becoming intoxicated after his probation 
is terminated. While Applicant has completed his court ordered treatment and outpatient 
treatment program, I do not find his testimony regarding his commitment to overcome 
his alcohol problem credible. His inability to recall the first three steps of AA, after 
 
6 
 
testifying that he had completed the first three steps, created doubts in my mind 
regarding the sincerity of his participation in that program. He has no sponsor and does 
not appear to be an active participant in AA meetings. His wife’s testimony on 
Applicant’s abstinence was unconvincing, as Applicant had intentionally consumed 
alcohol outside his home in the past because he knew his drinking upset her. Overall, 
the evidence does not support that he has mitigated the Alcohol Consumption concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis.  
 
 After considering all of the nine adjudicative factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), I find that 
none of the factors are clearly mitigating. While Applicant has a number of favorable 
character references and has received some employment related awards, his alcohol 
consumption is still of concern. He was a mature adult when he chose, two to three 
times per week, to drive after becoming intoxicated, over a long period of time extending 
from 1997 to 2005 and again in 2007. Only three years have passed since his last 
incident, and those three years are part of Applicant’s probationary period for the court.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Alcohol Consumption security concerns. 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
