KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: An SOR allegation may be included under multiple guidelines and given independent
weight under each guideline.  Lack of truthfulness or candor in the security clearance process is
at the heart of Guideline E.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-07575.a1
DATE: 10/08/2010
DATE: October 8, 2010
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-07575
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Michael F. O’Connor, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On December 14, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
2
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement),
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July
14, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr., denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision under
Guideline E was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following discussion,
we affirm the decision of the Judge.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a systems analyst
working for a Defense contractor.  He has a history of significant drug abuse, including the abuse
of marijuana, cocaine, opiates, heroin, and Percocet (without a prescription).  This conduct
continued after Applicant had been granted a security clearance in 2006.  His last instance of drug
abuse was in 2007.  Applicant received in-patient drug abuse treatment and, upon his successful
completion, was discharged with a recommended plan for continued out-patient care.  He has
followed that plan, receiving counseling from a psychologist.  He has also attended Alcoholics
Anonymous meetings to address difficulties with alcohol consumption.  
When he completed his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant answered “no” to
a question inquiring if he had illegally used controlled substances within the previous seven years.
This answer was false, due to the drug abuse described above.  The Judge found that, under the
circumstances of this case, this false answer was deliberate.
Applicant’s false answer to the SCA was alleged under Guideline E and also under Guideline
J.  The Judge found against Applicant under the former, but he cleared him under the latter.
Applicant contends that the Judge’s adverse decision is inconsistent, in that, having found the false
answer to have been mitigated under Guideline J, the Judge should have reached a similar
conclusion under Guideline E.
However, previous decisions by the Appeal Board have stated that an SOR allegation may
be included under more than one Guideline and may be given independent weight under each.
Furthermore, a finding of mitigation under one Guideline does not compel a similar finding under
another.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-05072 at 6 (App. Bd. Jul. 14, 2005); ISCR Case No. 04-90251
at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2007).  In considering an applicant’s claim that a Judge has treated two
Guidelines inconsistently, we will examine the record and the Directive to determine if there is a
rational basis for the Judge’s decision.
The Guideline E security concern includes the following language: “Of special interest is any
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process . . .”  Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 15.  Similar language does not appear in the security concern under Guideline J.  See
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 30.  This language places an applicant’s lack of truthfulness or candor in
the security clearance process at the heart of Guideline E, and the Judge cited it in his decision.
Applicant’s false statement about his drug use (which use was, at the time he completed the SCA,
1Applicant testified that he had attended AA meetings even prior to his entry into the drug treatment program.
He stated that, upon occasion, he would tell his wife that he was going to an AA meeting when in actuality he would
join up with an acquaintance and use illegal drugs.  “It wasn’t every time, but it was certainly convenient for me to . .
. say I’m going to an AA meeting, and that would give me an hour to go use drugs, and then return.”  Tr. at 49-50.  See
also Applicant Interview Summary, included in Answers to Interrogatories: “While attending AA meetings, [Applicant]
met a guy who . . . was not clean.  The guy started offering him drugs . . . He was skipping AA meetings to do drugs with
this guy.  He would tell his wife he was going to an AA meeting, but was actually hanging out with this guy and using
drugs.”  
3
an ongoing course of conduct), was of a nature to frustrate the proper functioning of his clearance
investigation.  This is a sufficient reason for the Judge to evaluate the false statement differently
under Guideline E than he did under J.  Additionally, we note record evidence that he had made false
statements to his wife.1  These statements do not appear to constitute criminal conduct, but they are
relevant to a whole-person evaluation of Guideline E and, therefore, provide another reason for the
Judge to have examined that Guideline in a different context from the way he treated Guideline J.
After reviewing the record, we conclude that the Judge examined the relevant data and
articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the
facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed James E. Moody                 
4
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
