                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ADP Case No. 08-05171 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaires for Public Trust Position (SF 85P) on 
March 31, 2007. On May 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 23, 2009. Applicant sent two 
incomplete Answers to the SOR. DOHA received the first Answer on August 8, 2009, 
and the second one on November 20, 2009. Applicant submitted a complete Answer to 
the SOR in writing on January 4, 2010, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on January 4, 2010. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 4, 2010, and I received the case 
assignment on March 12, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 9, 2010. I 
1 
 
2 
 
held the hearing as scheduled on May 3, 2010. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 
through 8, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Exhibits A through Y without objection. Applicant previously submitted similar exhibits 
pertaining to each allegation with her Answer. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on May 11, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.c, 1.d, 1.f-1.h, and 1.m-1.p of the SOR, with explanations. She denied the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, and 1.i -1.l of the SOR. She provided additional information to 
support her request for eligibility for a public trust position.   
 
 Applicant is 57 years old, divorced, and has three children, ages 37, 28, 25, and 
three grandchildren. She works as a call center representative. (Tr. 85, 86; Exhibits 1, 
W) 
 
 Applicant earns $2,100 monthly after taxes and deductions. She assists her 
children financially and has for several years. Her 28-year-old son is now helping her 
manage her finances. This son was in jail on a felony conviction from age 16 to 22. 
When the state released him from jail in 2004, Applicant supported him because he had 
no job or income. Now he works in a variety of jobs. The youngest son, age 25 does not 
work and lives on welfare payments. Applicant sent him $600 monthly from March 2005 
to June 2008 to assist him and his family. Applicant’s 37-year-old daughter is disabled 
and receives Social Security payments.  
 
 Applicant changed shifts at work in May 2008. This change deprived her of the 
25% shift differential payments, causing her to lose about $11,000 income annually 
compared to her previous schedule. Applicant paid $1,700 to have her son’s 1987 
Blazer repaired between 2004 when he was released from jail and the present time. 
Applicant has also supported him in starting his business. Her monthly expenses total 
about $1,650. She also has a monthly truck payment of $556.71 on her 2006 vehicle. 
She pays $463 for auto insurance on three cars - the truck and two cars owned by her 
oldest son. Applicant has a checking and savings account in which there is almost no 
money. (Tr. 30-32, 92-94, 109-117, 122, 129, 130; Exhibits 1-3)  
 
The SOR lists the following 16 delinquent debts. The debts date from 2000 to the 
present time.  
 
SOR Paragraph Answer Status Evidence 
1.a Credit Card $87 Denies Not paid. Cancelled 
service in 2003. 
Refuses to pay. 
Disputes debt. 
Tr. 21, 24; Exhibits 
2-8, G 
1.b. Fruit club $94 Admits this 2004 
debt. 
Not paid. Attempted 
to cancel because 
Tr. 26-29; Exhibits 
2-8, H 
3 
 
of poor fruit quality. 
1.c. Credit card 
$1025 
Admits. Says same 
as 1.o and 1.p 
Paid $508 in 12/02. 
Does not have 
funds to pay 
balance yet. 
Tr. 32-38; Exhibits 
2-8, F, I 
1.d. Telephone bill 
$517 
Incurred by 
youngest son’s 
girlfriend ordering 
movies on 
television. 
Not paid. Will pay 
settlement of 
$150.87 when funds 
available. 
Tr. 38, 39; Exhibits 
2-8, J 
1.e. Loan $25,684 Denies. Mortgage 
balance on 
foreclosed house. 
Disputes debt. 
Not paid. Claims 
she received an 
eviction notice only 
and was told by 
court she was only 
rental tenant and 
did not owe 
anything on 
mortgage balance.  
Tr. 40-45; Exhibits 
2-8, K 
1.f. VA debt 
$28,672 
Admits. Claims 
injured in 1996, had 
13 surgeries over 
five years and given 
50% disability by VA 
instead of receiving 
unemployment 
compensation. She 
got a disability for a 
post-traumatic 
stress syndrome 
incident in 1970. 
She filed for 
disability but it was 
not granted until 
2006. She returned 
to work in 2003, 
notified the 
Veterans 
Administration (VA), 
benefits did not stop 
though she thought 
they did.  
VA retained her 
disability payments 
and took her tax 
returns. She claims 
she paid over 
$30,000 to the VA, 
but cannot get an 
accounting from the 
U.S. Treasury. The 
fees and interest 
keep adding to the 
balance owed. 
Balance not paid 
except by 
deductions from her 
disability payments. 
Tr.47,50-55; 
Exhibits 2-8, B, L 
1.g. Telephone bill 
for $94 
Admits debt.  Paid $25 in 2005. 
Will pay balance 
when possible. 
Tr. 55-59; Exhibits 
2-8, A, M 
1.h. Telephone bill 
for $464. 
Admits debt.  This debt is for her 
son’s cell phone. 
Tr. 59; Exhibits 2-8, 
N 
4 
 
$100 to be paid as 
soon as possible on 
settlement. 
1.i. Department 
store credit card 
$1076 
Denies.  Her daughter’s 
credit card. 
Daughter lives on 
Social Security 
disability. 
Daughter’s 
boyfriend completed 
card applications 
and put Applicant’s 
name on them. 
Applicant seeks 
copies of 
applications and 
proof of her liability. 
Disputes debt.  
Tr. 59-66; Exhibits 
2-8, O 
1..j. Bank debt $991 Denies. Former husband 
was supposed to 
pay as part of 1996 
divorce decree. It is 
a line of credit. 
Decree does not 
specifically name 
this account, only 
that accounts in 
husband’s name are 
his. Husband is 
deceased. She will 
never pay it, she 
claims. Disputes 
debt. 
Tr. 67-73; Exhibits 
2-8, P 
1.k. Credit card 
$803 
Denies Daughter’s other 
credit card. Not 
paid. Applicant did 
repay part of the 
debt several years 
ago, but ceased 
such payments. 
Disputes debt. 
Tr. 73-75; Exhibits 
2-8, Q 
1.l. Private school 
for son $2,006 
Denies. He 
graduated in 2003. 
This debt was her 
former husband’s 
obligation. She will 
try to pay it in the 
future. Applicant 
disputes the debt 
Tr. 76, 77; Exhibits 
2-8, P, R 
5 
 
because it was her 
late former 
husband’s 
obligation to pay. 
She will pay it when 
possible because 
her son graduated 
from the school. 
1.m. Television 
service debt $315 
Admits  It is her son’s cable 
television debt. 
Applicant disputes 
who is to pay this 
debt, her or her son.
Tr. 77-80; Exhibits 
2-8, S 
1.n. Dental bill 
$2,223 
Admits This debt is being 
paid with $400 
monthly from 
Applicant’s flexible 
spending account 
for medical needs. 
Balance is 
$1,276.88.  
Tr. 78, 81-83; 
Exhibits 2-8, C, T 
1.o. Credit card 
judgment $1,621 
Admits. She claims 
it is a duplicate debt 
of 1.c. and 1.p. 
Not paid. Different 
account numbers. 
Debts are different. 
This debt is 
unresolved. 
Tr. 83-85; Exhibits 
2-8, U 
1.p. Credit card 
judgment $1,230 
Admits. She claims 
it is the same debt 
as 1.c. and 1.o. 
Not paid. Different 
account numbers. 
Debts are separate 
ones. This debt is 
unresolved. 
Tr. 83-85; Exhibits 
2-8, V 
 
 
 Applicant owed $67,000 in delinquent debts in the original listing of the SOR. She 
paid three of the 16 debts. She is paying her VA obligation through monthly offsets to 
her disability payments and income tax refunds. After these payments, Applicant 
continues to owe $54,000 in delinquent debt. These debts arose 2000, and are not 
recently incurred financial obligations. She does have one current credit card debt with 
a $900 balance. The 1996 divorce decree awarded her $37,500 of a workers 
compensation payment for an injury received by her husband during the course of their 
marriage. That money has been spent long ago. Applicant had not filed her 2009 
income tax forms at the time of the hearing, but her taxes were paid by payroll 
deductions. She expects her federal tax refund will be taken for the VA debt.  (Tr. 98, 
103, 134; Exhibits 2-8)  
 
 Applicant submitted two character statements. A co-worker for the past three 
years and now her supervisor stated Applicant is “dedicated and honest.” She is also 
6 
 
“very loyal and trustworthy.” Another co-worker wrote a favorable letter for Applicant. 
Her April 2010 evaluation rated her as “average” with several favorable comments. She 
was hired by her employer in April 2003. Her landlord wrote a letter on her behalf stating 
she is a good tenant for the past year and he has no problems with her or her family 
members in the house. (Exhibits D, E, X, Y) 
 
 Applicant and her oldest son testified at the hearing. They explained the history 
of Applicant’s financial problems and her support of all her children, to her financial 
detriment. Both were credible witnesses. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by an applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness decision.”  
 
7 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt and has 
been unable to pay these obligations for years. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline includes six conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable to Applicant.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s financial worries arose 
from 2000 forward to the present time. These circumstances have been modified.  
 
8 
 
 Applicant got a job in 2003. At the same time her three children were an 
increasing financial drain on her resources from 2000 to 2008. Her oldest son was in jail 
for six years and she took it upon herself to support him upon his release. Her daughter 
is disabled and took out two credit cards in Applicant’s name without her permission. 
The youngest child has two children and Applicant gave him $10,000 from her meager 
earnings for support between 2006 and 2008. Her shift change in May 2008 caused her 
to lose $11,000 income annually. Applicant has now ceased supporting two of her 
children and her third son is managing her money. I find the financial behavior of 
incurring debt and not repaying it while making support payments to her children 
occurred under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur because of her 
oldest son’s control of her finances, and his efforts at self-support, have resulted in a 
reduction of Applicant’s gifts to her children and a more organized attempt to resolve 
her delinquent debts. These situations do not raise concerns about her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The evidence raises this potentially 
mitigating condition.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ She divorced from her 
second husband in 1996.  He subsequently died. Applicant had the responsibility of 
supporting and caring for her three children, who did not work. Her daughter in 1996 
was 23 years old, her oldest son was 14, and the youngest child was 11 years old. Only 
her oldest son is making any current attempt to support himself. Furthermore, Applicant 
had 13 surgeries during that time period until 2003 to correct an injury from 1996.  
 
Applicant had a divorce, death, imprisonment of her son, unexpected medical 
emergencies, and two adult children who do not work. While married to her second 
husband it also appears she did not work regularly.  More importantly, between 1996 
and 2003 she was unemployed. She acted responsibly in identifying and attempting to 
resolve some of these debts within the restrictions of her income. I conclude this 
potentially mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). There is no evidence of counseling; hence 
this mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
 Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated 
a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant 
resolved three of the delinquent debts, either by payment or settlement. This mitigating 
condition has limited application.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (e) states “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.” Applicant disputes in writing six of the delinquent debts for 
9 
 
various reasons. She has a reasonable basis for each dispute. This mitigating condition 
is applicable.  
 
Finally, AG ¶ 20 (f) provides “the affluence resulted from a legal source of 
income” has no applicability. Applicant has clearly shown she is not affluent.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a substantial amount 
of delinquent debt. The two largest debts are owed to the VA for medical bills and a 
bank on a line of credit her late former husband incurred. She is paying the third largest 
debt (the dental bill) regularly. Four debts are owed by her daughter and her youngest 
son. Applicant is an adult and the parent in the family when all this debt was incurred 
within the past decade. Her ability to repay it was hampered by her parental obligations 
for support of her adult children and grandchildren. After 2008 Applicant reduced the 
payments she made to her youngest child. But her monthly expenditures continue to 
exceed her monthly income, at least on the mathematical calculations of her income 
and expenses. Applicant attempts to pay the debts she admits she owes and seeks 
information from the creditors whose claims she disputes. Within the lilmits of her 
income, Applicant is doing what she can to resolve her debts and provide for her 
dependant adult family. It is a difficult situation, but one that does not appear to have 
any other solution than that now being implemented by Applicant.  
 
Applicant is a trustworthy and honest person. Her frank discussion of her debts 
and family obligations demonstrates those qualities. The totality of the evidence 
concerning Applicant applied on a fair and commonsense basis shows Applicant can be 
trusted with sensitive information, as she has been for the past seven years. Her past 
performance is an indication of the likelihood of her future performance.  
10 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a to 1.p:  For Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
