  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10351 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under personal conduct 
related to his overseas employment and completion of security clearance 
questionnaires. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 5, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
personal conduct. 
  
 On February 13, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On April 22, 2010, I was assigned the case. On June 10, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing held on July 1, 2010.  
 
 The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 8, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was held 
open to allow additional information from Applicant. No additional material was 
submitted. On July 12, 2010, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Modification to the SOR 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel (DC) moved to amend the SOR. In the last 
sentence of Paragraph 1.d. subparagraph 1.b.2 is listed twice. DC moved to replace the 
second entry of 1.b.2 with 1.b.3. There being no objection from Applicant, the motion 
was granted. (Tr. 17) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a of 
the SOR. He admitted the factual allegations as to the other SOR paragraphs, with 
explanations. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility 
for a security clearance. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated 
herein. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make 
the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old staff maintenance logistician who has worked for a 
defense contractor since July 2007, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. (Tr. 
33) He is currently assigned overseas.  
 
 Applicant was in the U. S. Army from February 1980 through February 1983. In 
May 1981, Applicant—then age 21—after being stopped for running a red light, was 
found to be in possession of cocaine. Applicant received non-judicial punishment under 
Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for wrongful possession of 
cocaine. He was reduced in rank to PV2, ordered to forfeit $279 pay per month for two 
months, and he received 30 days in correctional custody. (Ex. 8) 
 
From May 1982 through August 1982, Applicant was in a hospital after he broke 
his jaw and arm during a training mission. He fell 40 feet resulting in his jaw being wired 
shut. (Tr. 35) His wrist injury was painful. Every couple of weeks, he had to get a new 
cast for his wrist. Pain medication was restricted due to the possibility he might swallow 
his tongue. He roomed with three other soldiers and one day after having his cast 
adjusted, he was in pain. When he returned to his room, his roommates were smoking 
 
3 
 
                                                          
marijuana and suggested it would relieve his pain. (Tr. 36) On August 16, 1982, he was 
observed smoking marijuana.  
 
 In September 1982, Applicant—then age 23—was investigated for the offenses 
of wrongful possession of marijuana, possessing contraband (a smoking device), and 
wrongful use of marijuana. (SOR ¶ 1.b. (2)) The charges were determined to be 
unfounded. (Ex. 7) No action was taken related to the offenses. (EX. 7) Applicant 
received counseling related to the incident, but never received Article 15 punishment.  
 
 Applicant’s wrist injury resulted in a P-3 medical profile, which restricted his use 
of his right hand. Without the full use of his right hand, Applicant realized he would not 
be promoted and, in 1983, he left the Army as an E-4. (Tr. 37)  
 
In December 1991, he was arrested and charged with Driving Under the 
Influence of Liquor (DUI) and Driving While Intoxicated (DWI). After leaving a bar, he 
was stopped by the police when his car hydroplaned into the other lane of traffic. 
Applicant declined to take a breath analyzer test. At court, he pleaded no contest to the 
charges, was fined $1,200, required to perform 24 months probation, and to attend a 
defensive driving course. Applicant completed all the requirements and his probation 
was reduced to one year. (Ex. 5) Applicant asserted his probation officer told him the 
arrest would be expunged after seven years. (Tr. 41)  
 
 In November 2003, Applicant completed a security clearance application, 
Standard Form (SF) 86. (Ex. 2) Question 24 asked Applicant if he had ever been 
charged with or convicted of any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. He answered “No” 
to the question and did not list the two drug-related incidents or his 1991 DUI/DWI 
arrest. (SOR ¶ 1.d.) When he completed the SF 86, he failed to remember the three 
incidents. The Article 15 had occurred 22 years before he completed his 2003 SF 86. 
The DUI/DWI incident had occurred 12 years earlier. In October 2007, when Applicant 
completed an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (Ex. 1), 
he again failed to lists the three incidents because he had forgotten about them. 
Applicant also stated he was confused by some questions on the questionnaires which 
limited the scope of inquiry to the previous seven years. (Tr. 41)  
 
 Both questionnaires asked about having “ever” been “charged with or convicted 
of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs.” He should have listed his DUI/DWI arrest 
in response to this question. In 1981, he received non-judicial punishment2 for 
possession of cocaine, but was never arrested for this incident. The more specific 
question related to disciplinary proceedings under the Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), to include non-judicial and Captain’s mast, are listed in Section 23. f of the e-
QIP (Ex. 1) and question 25 of the SF 86 (Ex. 2). Both questions limit the scope of the 
question to seven years.  
 
2 Non-judicial punishment is not a charge. A charge under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) 
requires a charge sheet, which is not part of the Article 15 procedure.  
 
4 
 
 In November 2003, Applicant began working for a contractor in Iraq assigned to 
the installation property book office, which controlled property assigned to individuals. 
He worked for the contractor until March 5, 2005. In October 2004, Applicant received a 
certificate of appreciation for his excellent duty performance. (Tr. 50, Applicant’s SOR 
Response) In November 2004, a new site lead arrived who was Applicant’s supervisor. 
(Tr. 27) The site lead ran the office. (Tr. 44)  
 
Applicant and the site lead did not agree on how the office was being run. 
Applicant believed accountable property was being issued without proper tracking 
documents. Applicant believed the site lead was a micromanager whose methods were 
very chaotic. (Tr. 27) He also believed some of the site lead’s conduct not only violated 
company policy, but also defrauded the government. In February 2005, the contractor 
assigned a new country manager to Iraq. When Applicant reported what he believed 
were policy violations to the new country manager, the manager failed to take action. 
When the manager failed to act, Applicant reported the violations to the local Criminal 
Investigation Command detachment (CID). The day after he reported the violation to 
CID, Applicant was told he would be returning to the states. Applicant believed he was 
returning to be assigned to a new location and new position.  
 
 In February 2005, Applicant was scheduled to move from one contractor location 
in Iraq to another location. His job with the installation property book office was to 
remain the same. When items are transferred from one location to another, items are 
moved by shipping container and transferred from the property book at the losing 
location and to the property book at the new location. (Tr. 28) 
 On February 28, 2005, CID started investigating Applicant for theft and failure to 
obey General Order 1a (Ex. 9). It was alleged Applicant was attempting to move 
unaccounted property to his new location. The violation of General Order 1a allegation 
relates to an attempt to ship two AK-47 machine guns and ammunition to the new 
location without authorization. 
Applicant asserted items were put in a shipping container to be transferred from 
one location to another in-country. (Tr. 54) Applicant documented those items on a form 
11-3161, hand receipt for property. (Tr. 53) The hand receipt itemized the items by 
serial number. A copy of the 11-3161 was attached to the outside of the shipping 
container and another was placed inside the container. (Tr. 57) Applicant asserts the 
site lead signed the authorization for the goods to be shipped. (Tr. 58) When Applicant 
reviewed the list of items being investigated, he did not recognize some of the items. 
(Tr. 56)  
In rebuttal, DC offered the Final Report of Investigation (ROI) issued on May 12, 
2005. (Tr. 53, Ex. 9) Only the four page ROI was introduced at hearing. None of the 
sworn statements, exhibits, or other substantiating documents were attached to the ROI 
or present at hearing. The ROI referenced five sworn statements, including one from 
Applicant. The ROI attachments could establish or refute the allegations being 
investigated. Department Counsel (DC) was asked to review the file to determine if any 
 
5 
 
additional information or documents related to the ROI could be provided. (Ex. 61, 64) 
No additional documents were provided. (Hearing Exhibit I)  
The ROI stated the investigation was terminated because it was determined that 
further investigation would be of little or no value or the leads remaining to be developed 
were not significant. (Ex. 9) The ROI indicates the commander’s report of disciplinary 
action taken was pending. No indication of action taken was included in the record. 
Applicant had not seen the ROI until presented in rebuttal at the hearing. (Tr. 59-60)  
 
 After returning to the states, Applicant received an email from a new country 
manager asking if Applicant wanted to return to Iraq. (Tr. 39) Applicant did not want to 
return to his prior location and what he believed was a hostile work environment. 
Applicant informed the manger he was done working for the contractor. (Tr. 29) Having 
refused a new position, Applicant’s employment with the company ended. The next day 
he received an email informing him he was no longer an employee of the company. 
Applicant was never informed he was being fired or terminated for cause from his 
employment. (Tr. 28, 29) Additionally, he did not leave by mutual agreement following 
allegations of misconduct. The year after he left, the contractor lost all government 
contracts it had in Iraq.  
 
In May 25, 2005, three months after the contractor’s project manager’s last 
communication with Applicant, the project manager sent a letter (Ex. 3) to the CID 
stating Applicant was terminated for cause and was not eligible for rehire by the 
contractor. The reason given for the termination was Applicant’s “actions while deployed 
to . . . Iraq. . .” The letter was not sent to Applicant and he never saw a copy of the letter 
until provided by the DC in preparation for the hearing. As previously stated, Applicant’s 
last communication with the contractor was shortly after his return to the United States. 
(Tr. 65) 
 
Since July 2007, Applicant has been working overseas for a different contractor 
providing logistics for maintenance of vehicles. In March 2010, he transferred from Iraq 
to Afghanistan. (Tr. 33) His current living arrangements in Afghanistan are rough. His 
living area is a six feet by seven feet area in a tent. The showers and latrines are in 
tents. There are no TVs or radios. (Tr. 52) 
 
 When Applicant completed his October 2007 e-QIP, he listed his prior 
employment in Iraq. In response to Section 22 of that e-QIP, Applicant did not indicate 
he had been fired from a job, quit a job after being told he would be fired, left a job by 
mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct, or left a job for other reasons 
under unfavorable circumstances.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
 
6 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 
7 
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 15 articulates the security concerns relating to 
personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
 (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
In March 2005, when Applicant returned to the United States, he assumed he 
would be transitioning into a new position with the contractor. The contractor had work 
sites at locations throughout the United States and overseas and employees routinely 
returned to the United States before going to a new location.  
 
Applicant’s last communication with the contractor’s project manager, or any 
other official from the contractor, was an email asking him if he wanted to return to Iraq 
and continue working for the contractor. This email was received shortly after his return 
to the United States. Applicant had no interest in continuing to work for the contractor, 
told the project manager so, and his employment ended.  
 
On May 25, 2005, the contactor’s project manager sent a letter to the CID 
indicating Applicant was terminated, with cause, and was not eligible for rehire by the 
contractor. (Ex. 3) This letter was sent after the May 12, 2005 final ROI was sent. The 
termination letter was never sent to Applicant and he did not see it until he received a 
copy in preparation for the hearing.  
 
The Final ROI stated the CID investigation was terminated and closed. At the 
time of the Final ROI, the Commander’s Report of Disciplinary Action Taken was still 
pending. The record fails to contain what, if any, action the commander took. None of 
the substantiation related to the investigation was attached to the ROI. Applicant asserts 
he did everything properly in relation to the transfer of the property. The ROI does not 
 
8 
 
state Applicant was punished for any misconduct or any action was taken against 
Applicant based on the investigation. 
 
The termination notice sent to CID is sufficiently vague that I will not speculate as 
to Applicant’s actions while employed by the contractor. Applicant was not provided an 
opportunity to contest the contractor’s termination notice. I find for Applicant as to SOR 
¶ 1.a.  
 
There is nothing in Applicant’s return to the United States in March 2005 that 
would indicate he was being sent back to the United States as a form of punishment or 
because he was being terminated. Applicant worked for the contractor in Iraq from 
November 2003 until March 2005. Employees routinely returned to the United States for 
morale purposes or before being assigned to a new work location. The contractor had 
numerous work sites in the United States and at overseas locations and Applicant 
thought he would be assigned to a new location.  
 
When Applicant completed his October 2007 e-QIP, he listed his prior 
employment with the contractor ending in February 2005. He never indicated he had 
been fired, terminated from, left a job following allegations of misconduct, or left a job for 
other reasons under unfavorable circumstances. Applicant’s last communication with 
the contractor was an offer of continued employment with the contractor, which 
Applicant declined. During this last communication between Applicant and the 
contractor, there was no indication Applicant was being fired, terminated for cause, left 
following allegations of misconduct, or left under other unfavorable circumstance. Had 
any of these events occurred, it would have been unlikely the country manager would 
have been asking Applicant to continue working for the company. I find Applicant did not 
deliberately falsify material facts in his answer to the question in section 22. I find for 
Applicant as to SOR ¶ 1.c.  
 
A CID investigation was conducted concerning the transfer of property from one 
location in Iraq to another. The CID report contains a mere one-paragraph synopsis. 
The investigative activity and summaries of witness statements are not provided. 
Property would routinely be removed from the property log at one location and added to 
the property log at a new location, once goods were moved. Applicant put some items in 
a shipping container after he had completed an itemized form 11-1431 hand receipt, 
which the site lead authorized. Applicant recognizes some of the items listed in the CID 
report and has no idea about other items.  
 
Failing to get along with one’s supervisor or the fact Applicant complained to the 
CID about his supervisor is not the type of conduct contemplated in the SF 86 question, 
which asks if Applicant left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances. 
The record fails to establish Applicant left the job because an investigation was being 
conducted. Moreover, the validity of the report’s conclusions cannot be substantiated 
based on the record evidence.  
 
 
9 
 
In 2003, Applicant completed an SF 86. Twelve years earlier he had been 
arrested and convicted of DUI/DWI. This arrest and conviction should have been listed 
on the questionnaire because the question asked if he had ever been arrested or 
charged with an alcohol-related offense. His probation officer told him it would be 
expunged after seven years. Applicant=s failure to disclose this arrest does not, in itself, 
prove he did so in a deliberate effort to conceal those facts from the government. 
Applicant denial of intentional falsification is relevant, but not conclusive. An intent to 
deceive or mislead the government does not require direct evidence and can be inferred 
from circumstantial evidence, but this is not the case here. Applicant asserted he failed 
to list the arrest because a number of the questions limited the scope of inquiry to the 
previous seven years. Although this question is not so limited, Applicant assumed the 
prior seven years was the scope of this question. His explanation for not listing the 
DUI/SWI arrest that occurred 12 years earlier is credible. Applicant did not list the arrest 
on his 2003 SF 86 and for the same reasons failed to list it on his 2007 e-QIP. My 
reasoning and findings are the same for both questionnaires. 
 
The question in Section 23 d. of Applicant’s October 2007 e-QIP and question 24 
of his November 2003 SF 86 asked Applicant about his police record relating to drug 
offenses and are not limited as to when the offenses occurred. However, it is SF 86’s 
question 25. “Your Police Record – Military Court” and the e-QIP’s question Section 23 
e., which specifically asks about disciplinary proceedings under the UCMJ and non-
judicial punishment. These questions are more directly on point as to Applicant’s drug 
use while in the military. In 1981, Applicant received an Article 15 for possession of 
cocaine. Questions 25 (SF 86) and 23.e (e-QIP) relating to court-martial or other UCMJ 
disciplinary proceedings limit the time being considered to the seven year period just 
prior to completing the questionnaire. Applicant’s 1981 Article 15 had occurred more 
than 22 years before he completed his SF 86 and more than 25 years prior his 
completing the e-QIP. Applicant had not thought about the Article 15 or the other drug 
related incident until reminded of them when he received the SOR. (Tr. 37)  
 
In 1982, Applicant was investigated for possession and use of marijuana. His 
commander took no action as to the incident and Applicant did not receive an Article 15 
or other disciplinary action. Since he was neither “charged with” nor “convicted” of an 
offense, he was not required to list this on his SF 86 or his e-QIP.  
 
When Applicant completed his questionnaires, he did not list his 1981 nonjudicial 
punishment. Only non-judicial punishment occurring within the previous seven years 
had to be listed. However, this does not prove Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
information. Applicant denied any intentional falsification. Deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement 
to the Government, when applying for a security clearance, is a security concern. But 
every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and 
material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully.  
 
 
10 
 
When Applicant completed his questionnaires, he failed to remember this 
nonjudicial punishment. Having observed Applicant’s demeanor, listened to his 
testimony, and noted the event occurred more than 20 years earlier, I find his answers 
were not deliberate omissions, concealments, or falsifications. I find for Applicant as to 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In March 2005, a CID investigation 
commenced. When Applicant returned to the United States, he assumed he would 
shortly be reassigned to a new location with the contractor. He never knew, until 
receiving a copy of the letter just prior to the hearing, that he had been terminated for 
cause. One cannot lie about being terminated if he never knew he was terminated. 
Applicant never attempted to hide his employment with the contractor. He listed his 
employment, but did not list being fired or terminated for cause because the last he 
knew, the contractor was offering him continued employment.  
 
More than 20 years before he completed security clearance questionnaires 
Applicant was involved in two drug-related incidents while in the military. One resulted in 
no action and the other Article 15 punishment, neither of which he was required to list.  
 
I had ample opportunity to evaluate Applicant’s demeanor, observe his manner 
and deportment, appraise the way in which he responded to questions, assess his 
candor or evasiveness, read his statements, and listen to his testimony. It is my 
judgment that his explanations regarding the completion of the questionnaires and his 
 
11 
 
previous employment are consistent and, considering the quality of the other 
information before me, are believable.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a —1.d:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
