 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
 
 
 
 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11983 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified an electronic Standard Form 86 (SF-86) on 
June 9, 2008. On February 22, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted pursuant to Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 31, 2010, and requested a decision on 
the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on August 19, 2010. The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 
through 8. By letter dated August 24, 2010, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to 
Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 
30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on September 1, 2010. His response was 
due on October 1. 2010. He filed additional information within the required time period. 
Department Counsel did not object to the admission of Applicant’s additional 
information. On October 18, 2010, the case was assigned to me for a decision. I 
admitted to the record the additional information that Applicant provided in response to 
the FORM. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains six allegations of financial delinquency under AG F, Financial 
Considerations. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.) In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied 
all six Guideline F allegations of financial delinquency and provided additional 
information (¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f.).  (Item 1; Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old, married, and the father of three children, aged 20, 18, 
and 14. Since January 2008, Applicant has been employed as a senior instructor by a 
federal contractor. Applicant was first awarded a security clearance in 1992.1 (Item 4.) 
 
 In October 1981, Applicant enlisted in the United States military. He rose to the 
rank of E-8 and served on active duty for 26 years, until December 2007. In 2004, 
Applicant earned an Associate of Arts degree in Business Administration. (Item 4.)  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant reported a monthly income of $8,700. He 
rents his residence and reported monthly living expenses, including his rent, of $3,200. 
Applicant stated: “I’m definitely not financially overextended, or living outside my means, 
whatsoever.”  (Item 2.) 
  
 When he completed his SF-86, Applicant responded “Yes” when asked if he had 
been over 180 days delinquent on any debt in the last seven years. He then provided 
information on several delinquent debts. He reported that a creditor was suing him to 
recover $5,262 on an account the creditor claimed he defaulted on in March 2004 and 
which had not been satisfied. This debt was alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. In his answer to the 
SOR, Applicant provided court documents establishing that the creditor sought payment 
of the debt. In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided documentation 
establishing that upon a motion by the creditor’s counsel, the court dismissed the cause 
 
1 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he was first awarded a security clearance in 
approximately 1985. (Item 2 at 2.)  
 
3 
 
 
of action against Applicant without prejudice. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 4; Response to 
FORM at 3.) 
 
 On his SF-86, Applicant disclosed a delinquent credit card debt of $9,432, 
incurred in March 1995. In disclosing this debt, Applicant wrote: “This account was 
closed and charged off. Total balance was written off.” The debt is listed as 180 days 
delinquent and the account is listed as closed on Applicant’s credit report of June 19, 
2008. Applicant’s credit reports of June and December 2009 state that the account was 
charged off and that Applicant disputed the account information. This debt is alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.b. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant also identified a delinquent department store charge account on his 
SF-86. He stated that he incurred the debt, which totaled $6,769, in 1989. Applicant 
claimed that the account was closed, charged off, and the balance was written off. 
Applicant’s credit report of December 2009, established that the debt was assumed by a 
successor creditor and had grown to $8,343. This debt is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. (Item 4; 
Item 7.) 
 
 On his SF-86, Applicant also identified a delinquent debt which a creditor alleged 
he opened in 2006. The debt appears on Applicant’s credit reports of June 2008 and 
June 2009. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.d. that this debt of approximately $1,701 remains 
unsatisfied. Applicant provided a letter he wrote to the creditor in May 2008 requesting 
validation of the debt. Applicant claimed the creditor did not respond to his request. 
(Item 2; Item 4; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 When Applicant completed his SF-86, he also identified a credit card debt he 
incurred in 1999. He stated that the account has been closed and charged off. The 
$1,243 credit card debt appears as 180 days past due on Applicant’s June 2008 credit 
report and is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. (Item 4; Item 5.) 
 
    The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.f. that Applicant owes a debt of $314 for a cash 
advance. The debt is listed as a collection account on Applicant’s credit report of June 
2008. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation establishing that the 
debt had been satisfied in September 2008. (Item 1; Item 2; Item 5.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant attributed his financial problems to his wife’s 
loss of employment in 1994: “When my wife lost that job we took a substantial hit in our 
finances, and even though we tried for several years, we were never able to catch-up 
on our bills. I eventually told our creditors what happened, and asked them to stop 
charging over the credit limit fees and late payments, but I was told that they would only 
deal with a third party. . ..”  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant also denied he was 
responsible for debts that had been charged off or which no longer appeared on his 
credit reports. The record does not support a finding that Applicant has sought or 
received credit counseling. (Item 2.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
                     Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. When he completed his SF-86, Applicant identified delinquent debts 
he had accumulated and had not paid. 
 
The record establishes that Applicant satisfied the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. 
Additionally, Applicant provided documentation establishing that the debt alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.a. had been resolved. Accordingly, these two allegations are concluded for 
Applicant. However, four of the debts alleged in the SOR remain unresolved or 
unsatisfied. This evidence is sufficient to raise potentially disqualifying conditions under 
Guideline F. 
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
 
6 
 
 
control, such as loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might be 
applicable include evidence the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control (AG ¶ 20(c) or the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. (AG ¶ 20 (d)). )).  Finally, security concerns related 
to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies that dates to at least the late 
1990s. Four of his delinquencies remain unpaid, and Applicant insists that because 
these debts have been charged off by the creditors and may no longer appear on his 
credit reports, he is no longer responsible for them.   
 
DOHA’s Appeal Board has noted that “a strategy of merely waiting out creditors 
is not an adequate substitute for serious and reasonable efforts to pay off debts.” 
Moreover, it is well settled that failure to discharge debts over a period of time 
constitutes a continuing course of conduct that raises concerns about an applicant’s 
reliability and trustworthiness. ISCR Case No 07-10575 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul 3, 2008).    
 
Applicant reports income and financial resources sufficient to pay or settle 
several of his delinquent debts, and he has failed to do so. Certainly, his wife’s loss of a 
job in 1994, 16 years ago, was beyond Applicant’s control.  However, the record does 
not reflect that Applicant’s actions in the face of his financial difficulties were reasonable 
and responsible. He has not sought financial counseling. While the record reflects that 
Applicant disputed the delinquent debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.d., he failed to 
explain why he was not responsible for paying them. He had steady employment during 
his military service and has worked for his current employer since January 2008.  I 
conclude that AG ¶ 20(e) applies in part in mitigation. However, I also conclude that AG 
¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.        
 
Applicant is a mature adult. He has been steadily employed by his current 
employer since January 2008, and he reports a monthly income of $8,700. Despite 
these financial strengths, Applicant has failed to satisfy his delinquent debts. His failure 
to initiate actions to satisfy his remaining delinquent debts even when he had sufficient 
funds to do so raises security concerns about his judgment and reliability. 
 
In ISCR Case No. 07-08049 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008), DOHA’s Appeal Board 
reiterated the central concern in a security clearance adjudication in which financial 
delinquency is at issue: 
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting 
an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Accordingly, even if a 
debt is legally unenforceable, the government is entitled to consider the 
facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring 
the debt and failing to satisfy it in a timely manner.  See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 07-09966 at 2-3 (App. Bd. June 25, 2008). 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b. through 1.e.: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
                Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
