KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Errors in the Judge’s findings of fact did not likely affect the outcome of the case. 
Therefore, they are harmless.  Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 08-11345.a1
DATE: 10/06/2010
DATE: October 6, 2010
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-11345
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 24, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July 20, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Roger C. Wesley denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact were in error; whether the Judge failed to consider all of the record evidence; whether the Judge
mis-weighed the record evidence; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following discussion, we affirm the decision of
the Judge.
The Judge found in Applicant’s favor as to all of the allegations under Guideline F.
However, he found against him for certain of the allegations under Guideline E.  He made the
following pertinent findings: Applicant is an engineer specialist working for a Defense contractor.
From 1999 until 2004 Applicant worked for a public utility company.  He was laid off from work
in 2004 and was out of work for a year.  He returned to work for the company in 2005 and in 2007
began his current employment.
In completing his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant answered no to four
questions: (1) whether Applicant had ever had any property repossessed; (2) whether Applicant had
ever had a lien placed against his property due to failure to pay taxes or other debts; (3) whether,
within the previous seven years, Applicant had been over 180 days delinquent on any debts; and (4)
whether Applicant were currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts.  
These negative answers were untrue.  In fact, Applicant and his son had had a truck
repossessed due to non-payment; the IRS had taken a lien against Applicant’s property due to non-
payment of tax; and this same IRS debt had been delinquent over 180 days and over 90 days for
purposes of the SCA questions at issue.  
The Judge further found that Applicant’s answers to these four questions were deliberate.
He stated that the questions themselves were clear and that, under the circumstances of the case,
Applicant’s claims of good-faith mistake and/or confusion were not credible.
Applicant enjoys a good reputation for his trustworthiness, honesty, dependability, and for
the quality of his job performance.  He received excellent evaluations by his employer for the 2009
rating period.  
Factual Sufficiency 
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in some of his findings.  He claims, for example, that
the Judge erred in his finding that the omissions on the SCA were deliberate.  He claims that the
Judge erred by mis-identifying which of his sons had been a co-lessee with him on the repossessed
truck; by finding that Applicant had received a degree from college; and by finding that Applicant
had withdrawn $50,000 from his 401k plan.  Applicant also contends that the Judge committed other
factual errors, including mis-identifying his daughters as having come from his current marriage and
under-stating the number of years Applicant had worked for the public utility company.  
We review the Judge’s findings of facts to determine if they are supported by substantial
evidence–“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  We note
the Judge’s finding about the clarity of the questions involved.  We also note record evidence that
Applicant attended a university for nearly two years, thereby demonstrating an educational level that
would render less likely claims not to have understood the questions.  In light of the record, the
1The Judge’s finding about the length of time Applicant worked for the utility company is supported by
Government Exhibit (GE) 1, Applicant’s SCA, at 13.  The finding about Applicant’s withdrawal of $50,000 from his
401k is supported by Applicant’s testimony at Tr. 51.  The Judge’s finding about Applicant’s having received a college
degree is error.  GE 1 at 10.  The finding concerning the son with whom Applicant co-leased the truck appears to be
error.  Tr. at 86.  The record evidence is not clear concerning the finding about Applicant’s daughters. 
 
Judge’s findings about the deliberate nature of Applicant’s omissions are sustainable.  Regarding
the remaining challenged findings, even if they contain errors, they are not such as would have
affected the outcome of the case.1  See ISCR Case No. 08-07528 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2009).
Therefore, the are harmless.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are sustainable. 
Remaining Issues   
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider all of the evidence, for example his
excellent work performance and his good financial record prior to his lay-off from work.  However,
a Judge is presumed to have considered all of the record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-
05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010).  In this case, the Judge found in Applicant’s favor regarding the
Guideline F concerns.  His adverse findings pertain to the false answers on Applicant’s SCA, alleged
under Guideline E.  Under the facts of this case, evidence of prior good financial management is not
relevant to security concerns arising from Applicant’s false answers.  
Additionally, the Judge made specific findings about Applicant’s job performance and good
reputation.  Moreover, the record supports a conclusion that the Judge complied with the
requirements of Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(a) in arriving at his decision.  Applicant’s presentation
on appeal is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record
evidence.  
Applicant contends that the Judge did not properly weigh the record evidence, relying too
much on Applicant’s years of unemployment.  Again, however, Applicant’s appeal brief is not
sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence in an arbitrary or capricious manner.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-21819 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 13, 2009).
After reviewing the record, we conclude that the Judge examined the relevant data and
articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the
facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
