 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
           )  ISCR Case No. 09-03470  
                    ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr.,  Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns related to foreign influence, sexual 
behavior, and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) signed on January 29, 2009. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request.  
 
On February 5, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline D 
(Sexual Behavior) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2 In his Answer to the SOR, signed 
and notarized on February 17, 2010, Applicant admitted all the allegations under 
Guidelines B and D, and denied allegation 1.a. under Guideline E. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on May 20, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on May 
28, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 16, 2010, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on July 7, 2010. I admitted four Government exhibits, marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and offered two exhibits, which 
I admitted as Applicant's Exhibits (AE) A and B. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
July 15, 2010. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to the Russian Federation (Russia). The facts are summarized at pages 
one through seven of the request, and supported by ten documents, U.S. government 
reports, pertaining to Russia. The documents are included to provide elaboration and 
context for the summary. I take administrative notice of the facts included in the reports. 
They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute.  
 
 Applicant objected to GE 2, his statement of April 2009, because he had 
mistakenly provided two inaccurate facts. He corrected those facts at the hearing and I 
admitted the document into the record. (Tr. 17-18) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 57 years old, has worked for the same defense contractor since 1993. 
He currently works as a commissioning manager for that company. He submitted a 
security clearance application in September 2003 to request his first security clearance. 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the adjudicative guidelines implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
He received a secret clearance in 2004 and has held it continuously since then. He 
submitted a second security clearance application in 2009. (GE 1, 4; Tr. 30, 44) 
 
Applicant was born in Kiev in the Soviet Union in 1953. He grew up in Ukraine 
when it was part of the Soviet Union. He was a member of the Communist party’s youth 
organization. He received his engineering degree from the Soviet Merchant Marine 
Academy in 1975. He served three years in the military reserves. He last visited the area 
when he went to Ukraine in May 2010. (GE 1; Tr. 25-28, 30, 42, 44) 
 
Applicant's mother, who is deceased, was a translator. His father, who was born 
in Ukraine, is a mechanical engineer. When Applicant's father lived in the Soviet Union, 
he was a member of the Communist Party. He and Applicant's stepmother are now U.S. 
citizens, and have lived in California for the past eight years. Applicant's sister also lives 
in California. Applicant has no blood relations in Russia or Ukraine. (GE 3; Tr. 25-28)  
 
Applicant came to the United States in 1978, and became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1984. In the 1980s, he lived in Ohio, where he met a Canadian citizen who was 
born in Russia. She left the Soviet Union when she was eight years old. They married in 
1980 and have two daughters, 21 and 27 years old, and a son, 19 years old, all born in 
the United States. They divorced in about 1996. The children lived primarily with 
Applicant after the divorce. (GE 1; Tr. 28-30) 
 
In 2001, Applicant married his current wife. She and her daughter, Applicant's 
stepdaughter, were born in Moscow and are dual U.S.-Russian citizens. Applicant's 
stepdaughter is now 14 years old and lives with Applicant and his wife. Her father lives in 
Moscow and she has contact with him when she visits Moscow. Applicant's wife was 
previously married to a Russian military pilot; she did not have children with him. She 
holds a masters degree in geophysics and was working as a geophysicist when they 
met. Currently, she does not work outside the home. Her parents, who are divorced, are 
Russian citizens living in Moscow. Applicant last visited his in-laws in Moscow in 2005. 
His father-in-law visited Applicant in the United States in 2007. Applicant's wife and her 
daughter last visited her parents in Moscow in 2009. His mother-in-law is retired, but 
formerly worked for an oil institute, and his father-in-law is an assistant director of an oil 
institute. The oil institute is a government entity. Applicant gets along with them, but does 
not communicate with them often. He has talked with them by phone once or twice. He 
has no other relatives in Russia, but does keep in touch with some friends there once or 
twice per year. (GE 1, 3; Tr. 28-36, 42-43) 
 
As part of his job, Applicant traveled abroad. In 2005, while in Moscow, he met a 
travel agent who was a Russian citizen. They kept in touch by email and talked by 
telephone two to three times per week. In about summer 2005, they began a sexual 
relationship. Applicant's wife was unaware of the affair. He and the travel agent had 
sexual relations four times in locations where Applicant was traveling for his job, 
including Russia, Germany, Poland, and Ukraine. Applicant made travel and hotel 
arrangements so that he and the agent could meet. He testified that he told her he was a 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
mechanical engineer, but provided no details of his job. Applicant noted in his written 
statement that he ended the relationship in 2006. However, he testified that the last time 
he had contact with her was “Right after my second polygraph, which was probably early 
2007.”3 At that time, he telephoned her to say they could not continue the relationship. 
(GE 2; AE A; Tr. 36-39, 41, 53-55) 
 
In 2006, Applicant started sending money to the travel agent because she told 
him she had been diagnosed with bone cancer. He sent $100 to $200 several times to 
pay for medication. He did not otherwise support her or send money to any of her 
relatives. Between 2006 and 2007, he sent her a total of about $1,000. (Tr. 38, 53-54) 
 
 Also in 2006, Applicant was being submitted by his company on a contract with a 
federal agency. In preparation, he was required to take a polygraph examination. In total, 
four polygraph examinations were administered to Applicant between 2006 and 2007. He 
took the first one in about November 2006. Applicant did not disclose his illicit 
relationship during the first polygraph examination because the polygrapher was a 
female and he did not feel comfortable discussing it with her. He admitted at the hearing 
that he did not disclose it to her because he was embarrassed and ashamed of it. He 
disclosed the affair during his second polygraph examination, because it was 
administered by a man, and he “…felt more comfortable to tell him about that.” He 
explained in his written statement of April 2009, “I did not deliberately withhold this 
information. I was not attempting to hide the issue because I did admit it to the 
polygrapher.” Applicant testified that he had a security briefing one time regarding 
handling classified documents. He also had briefings before traveling on business 
warning against revealing classified information to foreign nationals. He testified that he 
did not disclose the foreign relationship to his facility security officer because he did not 
know it was required. As of the date of the hearing, Applicant's wife did not know about 
his affairs. He testified that “It wouldn’t be very pleasant if she found out about it.” (GE 2; 
Tr. 22, 39-41, 49, 51, 56-59) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant denied having any other sexual affairs while married to 
his current wife. He then admitted that he had one in New York in 2003. He noted that it 
occurred before he held a security clearance. The woman with whom he had this sexual 
relationship was a Russian citizen. He testified that she is now a naturalized U.S. citizen, 
but he was unsure if she was a U.S. citizen at the time of their affair. (Tr. 41, 46-47)  
 
 Applicant provided performance evaluations from his current employer that cover 
1997-1998, 1998-1999, 2000, 2004, 2006, and 2007-2008. They show that in most 
categories on which he was rated, he achieved a “4” rating, indicating he consistently 
met and sometimes exceeded the performance standards. He also received a “5” in 
some categories, indicating that he often exceeded performance standards. He was 
praised for his extensive engineering background, and mentoring of younger staff. He is 
described as “a man of his word” who is calm and level-headed, and in 2007-2008, his 
3 Applicant provided conflicting statements about whether the affair ended in 2006 or 2007. 
 
 
5 
 
 
work was described as key to the “high level of quality at the conclusion of testing and 
acceptance.” (AE B) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The Russian Federation (Russia)  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts about Russia, which appear in 
official U.S. government publications. 
 
The Russian Federation (Russia) is composed of 21 republics. It achieved 
independence with the dissolution of the Soviet Union on August 24, 1991. It has a 
centralized political system, with a bicameral legislature, a weak judiciary, and power 
concentrated in the president and prime minister. Russia’s large population of more 
than 142 million people is both multinational and multi-ethnic. Russia is a nuclear 
superpower which, since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, continues to develop 
politically, socially, and economically. 
 
The United States and Russia share certain common strategic interests. Of 
interest to both states are counterterrorism and the reduction of strategic arsenals. Both 
share a common interest in controlling the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 
and the means to deliver them. The Cooperative Threat Reduction (CRT) program was 
launched in 1992 to provide for the dismantlement of weapons of mass destruction in 
the former Soviet Union. The CRT program was renewed in 2006 for seven years, until 
2013. 
 
Since 2003, U.S.-Russian relations have often been strained. Tensions between 
the United States and Russia increased in August 2008, when Russia sent its army 
across an internationally recognized boundary in an attempt to change by force the 
borders of Georgia, a country with a democratically-elected government. Russia’s 
assault on Georgia followed other troubling signs: threats against Poland, including the 
threat of nuclear attack; suspicious poisonings and killings of journalists and those 
deemed “undesirable,” including the President of Ukraine; the apparent use of energy 
resources to apply political pressure against Ukraine, Lithuania, and the Czech 
Republic; and the creation in Russia’s state-controlled media of an “enemy image” of 
the United States. 
 
There have been recent encouraging signs that Russia is prepared to be more 
cooperative with the United States, as illustrated by President Medvedev’s agreement 
last summer to support air transit through Russia of military cargo in support of 
operations in Afghanistan, and Moscow’s willingness to engage with the United States 
to reduce the nuclear threat from Iran. 
 
The Russian Federation’s intelligence capability is significant and focuses on 
collection of information from the United States. Russia has targeted U.S. technologies 
and has sought to obtain protected information from them through industrial espionage. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Russian espionage specializes in military technology and gas and oil industry expertise. 
As of 2005, Russia was one of the most aggressive collectors of sensitive and protected 
U.S. technology. In addition to its technology collection and espionage activities against 
the United States, Russia supports missile programs and nuclear and biotechnology 
projects in other countries. Russia has provided missile technology to China, Iran, Syria, 
and Venezuela. These technologies can be used in the construction of weapons of 
mass destruction. Despite U.S. concerns, Russia continues to construct nuclear 
reactors in Iran. 
 
Russia’s internal problems include terrorism and a poor human rights record. 
Human rights abuses, as reported by the United States Department of State, include: 
reports that the government or its agents committed politically motivated killings and 
other arbitrary killings; credible reports that law enforcement engaged in torture, abuse 
and violence; extremely harsh and life-threatening prison conditions; and arbitrary arrest 
and detention. The State Department has warned U.S. citizens of safety concerns 
related to travel in Russia. 
 
The U.S. Department of State reports allegations that Russian government 
officials and others conduct warrantless searches of residences and other premises and 
electronic surveillance without judicial permission. This surveillance includes Ministry of 
Internal Affairs and Federal Security Office monitoring of internet and e-mail traffic. 
Additionally, Russian law enforcement agencies have legal access to the personal 
information of users of telephone and cell phone services. In addition, adults must carry 
internal passports when traveling within the country, and must register with local 
authorities within a certain time after arriving at a new location.  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B, E, and D. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses 
the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 The possession of close family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign country 
is not, of itself, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, the country in question must 
be considered. Russia has focused its significant intelligence capability in an aggressive 
program of targeting the United States to collect information from the United States. 
Applicant has close ties to his immediate family members – his wife and stepdaughter -- 
and currently shares living quarters with them. They maintain Russian citizenship, and 
travel to Russia to visit family. Such ties represent a heightened risk of exploitation and 
support application of AG ¶ 7(a) and (d).  
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B, ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 Relationships with immediate family members are presumed to be close, unless 
the evidence demonstrates otherwise. Here, the record does not provide any indication 
of distance between Applicant and his wife and stepdaughter. In evaluating mitigation 
under AG ¶ 8(b), I considered the extent of Applicant's U.S. ties, including his three 
decades living in the United States, his 26 years as a U.S. citizen, his three adult 
children who were born in the United States, and his years of working for a federal 
defense contractor. However, Applicant also is bound by ties of affection to his wife and 
his young stepdaughter, who maintain Russian citizenship. His wife and stepdaughter 
have relationships with Applicant's in-laws, travel to Moscow to visit them, and were 
there only months before the hearing.  
 
 Significantly, the fact that Applicant chose to begin a close relationship with 
another Russian citizen, despite holding a security clearance, raises serious doubts 
about his willingness to place U.S. government interests before his own. He maintained 
a secret relationship with a foreign citizen for more than a year. In addition, his 
willingness to provide his girlfriend with funds demonstrates that he had strong ties of 
affection and obligation to her. Given his conduct, and Applicant's current ties to 
Russian citizens, I cannot confidently conclude he would resolve a conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(c) do not apply. 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                          
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress 
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference concerning 
the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the 
sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying. The following conditions are relevant: 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant had a sexual liaison with two foreign nationals while he was married. 
He kept both relationships secret from his wife. The first occurred in 2003, before he 
was granted a security clearance. The second was initiated while he was traveling on 
government business, working for a defense contractor overseas, and holding a security 
clearance. He maintained that relationship for more than one year. He did not inform his 
security officer of his relationship. He did not inform the polygrapher during his first 
polygraph examination. He only informed the government at a subsequent polygraph 
examination. As of the date of the hearing, he still had not disclosed these relationships 
to his wife, and he did not indicate any intent to do so. Under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence, Applicant’s behavior made him vulnerable to coercion during all the time 
that his conduct remained hidden from his company.8  He remains vulnerable, because 
his wife is still unaware of his infidelities. AG ¶ 13(c) applies.  
 
AG ¶14 provides the following relevant mitigating conditions: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. 
 
 Applicant's conduct is unmitigated. Applicant's conduct ended approximately 
three years ago. However, it did not occur under unusual circumstances, as it happened 
8 See, ISCR Case No. 91-0259 at 5 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1992). 
 
 
10 
 
 
on business trips, which are part of Applicant's work assignments. The fact that he 
engaged in two separate extramarital affairs raises doubts about his trustworthiness. 
Most significant is the fact that Applicant has not demonstrated rehabilitation by 
disclosing his affairs to his wife. He remains vulnerable to coercion because his wife is 
still unaware of his conduct. AG ¶ 14(b) and (c) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying conditions under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
 As discussed supra, Applicant concealed his extramarital affairs in New York in 
2003 and in Europe between 2005 and 2007. He does not want his wife to learn about 
his liaisons. He engaged in the most recent relationship while he held a security 
clearance. He did not disclose his foreign contacts to his FSO. Applicant is vulnerable to 
exploitation because disclosure would affect his marital relationship. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Applicant’s offense was not minor. He violated his wife’s trust and the 
government’s trust. The fact that he did not disclose his most recent affair until 2009, 
during a polygraph examination, indicates he disclosed the affair due to the security 
process, rather than as an effort toward rehabilitation. His conduct casts doubt on his 
trustworthiness. Moreover, Applicant has taken no steps to eliminate his vulnerability to 
coercion in relation to his wife, who remains unaware of his infidelity.  AG ¶ 17(c) and 
(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Applicant’s history includes many positive elements: he has long been a U.S. 
citizen; has raised three children who are native U.S. citizens; he has provided service 
to the government through his many years working on federal contracts; and has 
maintained a solid record of performance on the job. However, numerous facts weight 
against granting Applicant a security clearance. He has close family ties to his wife and 
stepdaughter, who are dual U.S.-Russian citizens. They have ongoing relationships with 
Applicant's in-laws in Moscow. Concerns remain under Guideline B because of these 
ties to Russia, a country that poses a heightened risk of exploitation.  
 
Applicant's affairs with foreign nationals also raise serious concerns. At the time 
Applicant began his affair with the Russian national in New York, he was 50 years of 
age. When he began the affair with the Russian national in Europe, he was 52. 
Applicant was a mature and responsible adult, yet did not exercise good judgment or 
trustworthiness. His trustworthiness is also undermined by the fact that he consciously 
 
 
12 
 
 
decided not to disclose his affair with a foreign national to the polygrapher during his 
first polygraph examination. Moreover, Applicant made a conscious and voluntary 
decision to engage in a sexual relationship with a foreign national while he held a 
security clearance. Finally, Applicant has not demonstrated rehabilitation, or eliminated 
his vulnerability to coercion, because he has not disclosed his extramarital affairs to his 
wife.  
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
raised under the guidelines for foreign influence, personal conduct, and sexual 
behavior. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.c.  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.b.  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
