  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 09-06930 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 14 charged-off, placed for collection, or past-due accounts, which 
totaled $15,000. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under 
financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 17, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
 
1 
                                                          
  
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                                          
 On June 26, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
June 13, 2010, I was assigned the case. On July 30, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing scheduling the hearing held on August 18, 2010.  
 
 The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibit A, which was 
admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow additional 
information from Applicant. No additional material was received. On August 25, 2010, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the debt listed in ¶ 1.k and admitted 
the remaining debts, with explanations. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations 
are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old mechanic who has worked for a defense contractor 
since June 2004, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Applicant’s team leader 
and supervisor states Applicant is a vital asset to the program and has volunteered for 
extra training which makes him even more valuable. His supervisor has never 
questioned Applicant’s integrity or ethics. (Ex. A)  
 
 In 2004, Applicant incurred expenses when he moved from another state to his 
present location. Applicant obtained student loans of $23,000 to attend school from 
2006 to 2007. (Tr. 43) The credit management corporation servicing Applicant’s 
$20,328 student loan obligation (SOR ¶ 1.j) determined Applicant should pay $70 
monthly. If he makes nine consecutive on-time monthly payments, he would qualify for 
the loan rehabilitation program. (Applicant’s Answer to SOR) The $70 monthly fee is 
debited directly from his pay. He asserts he has made two monthly payments on this 
debt, but provided no documents showing actual payment on his student loan. (Tr. 36)  
 
The $538 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.l is for medical expenses incurred when 
Applicant’s son was born in 2007. Applicant asserts his insurance should have covered 
all medical expenses. Applicant contacted the creditor requesting an explanation of the 
debt. (Tr. 36) He is waiting for a response from the creditor. (Tr. 36) During an August 
2009 interview, Applicant could not recall this debt. (Ex. 5)  
 
 In April 2009, Applicant reported to his company’s security office that he was 
more than 60 days past due on his credit cards, which totaled approximately $58,000.2 
(Ex. 4) He had contacted his creditors in an attempt to establish repayment schedules 
on the debts. He was unsuccessful in his attempts to establish repayment schedules.  
 
2 It is uncertain what credit card accounts are included in this amount. The SOR alleges $15,000 of 
delinquent debt.  
 
3 
                                                          
 In August 2009, Applicant was interviewed concerning his financial situation. He 
indicated that three years earlier he had become involved in a custody battle over his 
nine-year-old daughter, which cost him $6,000 in attorney fees. (Ex. 5, Tr. 34) He was 
paying $400 per week for his son’s daycare. When his daughter visited him during the 
summers, he incurred an additional $500 monthly expense for daycare, clothing, and 
other expenses. This was in addition to his $420 monthly child support obligation. (Tr. 
24) He is current on his child support obligation. (Tr. 25) In March 2008, he was not paid 
for one week due to a work-related accident. A month later, he was unpaid for three 
days following a tree-cutting accident.  
 
 In 2009, Applicant approached a credit counseling service to assist him in paying 
his delinquent debts. It was estimated it would take 49 months to pay off the $13,505 
Applicant owed. The agreement required him to pay the service $533 monthly and was 
to start in September 2009. (Ex. 5) Applicant could not afford the monthly payments and 
therefore, never entered into the agreement. (Tr. 41)  
 
In October 2009, Applicant stated he had paid off his car and would be entering 
into a consolidation repayment program. (Ex. 4) As of December 2009, it was 
Applicant’s plan to pay off all the delinquent accounts under $1,000 and then enter into 
a consolidation repayment program. (Ex. 5) 
 
In May 2010, he signed a retainer agreement with a law firm, which would 
attempt to negotiate Applicant’s unsecured debts for less than the full amount owed. 
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR) The firm was to receive a $100 initial fee and $50 monthly 
administrative fee. Applicant agreed to pay the law firm 30% of the difference between 
the amount owed on the debt and the settlement amount on the debt. He agreed to 
make monthly payments of $173 to the law firm. Some, but not all, of the SOR debts 
were included in his arrangement with the law firm. The law firm’s debt schedule 
included the following debts: SOR ¶ 1.b ($1,422), SOR ¶ 1.c ($571), SOR ¶ 1.d 
($1,428), SOR ¶ 1.e ($2,335), SOR ¶ 1.f ($2,165), SOR ¶ 1.g ($475), SOR ¶ 1.h ($614), 
and SOR ¶ 1.i ($2,434). The debt schedule also included a $468 debt not listed in the 
SOR. Applicant asserted he had made his July and August 2010 payments, but 
provided no documentation establishing the payments. (Tr. 27) Applicant asserts the 
amount is taken automatically from his pay. (Tr. 29)  
 
 Applicant’s base salary is $42,000 per year. (Tr. 29) Except during the summer 
when his daughter visits him, Applicant works overtime3 six to seven days per week. 
(Tr. 29) His wife is a medical assistant with a $27,000 annual salary. (Tr. 30) As of 
August 2009, Applicant’s monthly gross income was $5,166, his total monthly expenses 
were $2,716, and his net monthly remainder was $318. (Ex. 5) When Applicant’s 
spouse’s monthly net income of $3,395 is included in the household’s monthly budget, 
the household’s net monthly remainder was $543. The only credit card he has is a 
3 Applicant states he works a minimum of 10 hours per week of overtime and a maximum of 70 hours 
overtime. (Tr. 46) His gross pay for 10 hours of overtime would be $375. (Tr. 47)  
 
 
4 
ts. (Tr. 46)  
company issued card. (Tr. 43) Six weeks before the hearing, Applicant purchased a 
2008 Dodge pickup truck and is current on his $410 monthly paymen
 
 Applicant was informed he could provide documentation showing he was making 
his monthly student loan payments and the monthly payment to the law firm. (Tr. 44) No 
documents were received.  
 
 In August 2006, Applicant entered into a one-year apartment lease paying $675 
per month. (Tr. 47) In May 2007, Applicant broke his apartment lease because he found 
a house he wanted to buy. He purchased the house for $69,000, which has a current 
fair market value of $76,000. (Tr. 45) He is current on his $697 monthly mortgage 
payments on his home. (Tr. 30, 45) When he broke the lease, he was responsible for 
the monthly rent until the apartment was re-rented and for damages done during his 
occupancy. Applicant believes he owes one month’s rent ($695) and $200 for carpet 
damage. (Ex. 5, Tr. 39) The landlord is demanding $3,966. (Tr. 48) Applicant does not 
know how this amount was determined. The creditor has not contacted him since May 
2007. He intends to contact the creditor to request an itemized bill. (Tr. 39)  
 
A summary of Applicant’s charged-off, collection, and past-due accounts and 
their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Collection agency colleting 
for a delinquent cell phone 
account.  
 
$334 Unpaid. Debt incurred in 2004. (Tr. 31) 
Applicant intends to settle his debt. He 
contacted the creditor, but has yet to 
reach a repayment agreement. He 
hoped to pay the debt within the next 
three months. (Tr. 33)  
b Credit card charged-off 
account.  
  
$1,422 
 
Creditor offered to settle for 75% of the 
debt, but Applicant could not pay that 
amount. It is included in the law firm’s 
debt schedule. (Tr. 33) 
c Department store 
charged-off account.  
$571 
 
It is included in the law firm’s debt 
schedule. (Tr. 33) 
d Credit card charged-off 
account.  
$1,364 It is included in the law firm’s debt 
schedule. (Tr. 33) 
e Charged-off jewlery store 
account. 
$2,334 Debt was incurred just prior Applicant’s 
November 2007 wedding. (Tr. 35) It is 
included in the law firm’s debt schedule. 
f Charged-off jewlery store 
account for the purchase 
of wedding rings.  
$2,165 Creditor offered to settle for $1,624, 
which Applicant was unable to pay. It is 
included in the law firm’s debt schedule. 
 
5 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
g Collection agency 
attempting to collect on a 
delinquent gasoline credit 
card.  
$460 Creditor offered to settle for $300, but 
Applicant could not pay that amount. It 
is included in the law firm’s debt 
schedule.  
h Collection agency attempt 
to collect for a telephone 
account. 
$602 Debt was incurred in 2004. Creditor 
offered to settle for $272, but Applicant 
could not pay that amount. It is included 
in the law firm’s debt schedule.  
i A loan to fund Applicant’s 
wedding. The account 
was 120 days past due. 
$347 It is included in the law firm’s debt 
schedule.  
j Student loan obligation 
was 180 days past due. 
$553 Applicant asserts the monthly $70 fee is 
debited directly from his pay. (Tr. 35)  
k Utility bill owing when  
Applicant vacated his 
rental apartment.  
$43 Paid. This debt was paid in May 2008. 
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR)  
l Medical debt incurred at 
his son’s birth.  
$528 
 
Unpaid. Applicant has contacted the 
creditor and requested an explanation of 
the debt. Applicant is awaiting a 
response. (Tr. 36)  
m Collection account. 
 
$321 
 
Unpaid. Applicant is still attempting to 
learn the nature of this debt. (Tr. 51) 
Applicant thinks he may have disputed 
this debt with the credit bureau. (Tr. 37)  
n Amount owed for broken 
lease.  
$3,966 Unpaid. He will continue his attempts to 
contact the creditor.  
 Total debt listed in SOR $15,010  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
6 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
7 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had 14 charged-off, 
collection, or past-due accounts, which totaled approximately $15,000. He paid a $43 
debt placed for collection, made two $70 payments on his student loan obligation, and 
made two $173 payments to a law firm. Six of Applicant’s debts were at or under $600 
each and remain unpaid. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
In April 2009, Applicant went to his security office and informed them he was 
more than 60 days delinquent on his credit cards. It is to his credit that he was the one 
 
8 
who approached the security office to inform them of his financial problems. Since April 
2009, he has made a total payment of less than $600 on his delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts. The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(a) do not apply. Some of debts were 
incurred in 2004 and others in 2007. However, the debts remain unpaid and are, 
therefore, considered recent. There are 14 delinquent accounts so they are not 
considered infrequent. Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by his child 
support obligations and the extra expenses incurred during his daughter’s summer 
visits. There is nothing to indicate the debts were incurred under such circumstances 
that are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(b) partially apply. Applicant incurred 
$6,000 in legal fees during a custody dispute concerning his daughter. Additional 
expenses were incurred in 2004, when Applicant moved to his current location. The 
divorce, custody dispute, and moving expense were financial problems largely beyond 
Applicant's control. In March 2008, Applicant was not paid for one week and a month 
later, he was unpaid for three days following a tree-cutting accident. These unpaid days 
were also events beyond his control. But the move occurred six years ago and it has 
been two years since he was out of work for less than two weeks. 
 
It is too soon to find the mitigating conditions listed in AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) 
apply. There has been no showing that Applicant has received credit counseling, or 
otherwise brought his delinquent debts under control. The evidence of Applicant’s 
stated intentions to pay off his delinquent debts falls short of demonstrating a track 
record of financial reform and rehabilitation sufficient to permit the conclusion that 
Applicant’s history of financial difficulties will be resolved soon and will not recur.  
 
Applicant asserts he is paying his $70 monthly student loan obligation and the 
$173 payment to the law firm. However, he provided no documentation supporting his 
assertions. Without documentation showing his efforts are actually being implemented 
in an organized or structured way, it is premature to conclude Applicant’s financial 
difficulties have been resolved or are under control. In August 2009, Applicant asserted 
he would start repaying his debts in September 2009. When his monthly payments were 
more than he could afford, he did not enter into the repayment plan. It was eight months 
later before he entered into a new agreement and asserts he has made two payments 
of $173 in June 2010 and July 2010 and two $70 student loan payments.  
 
The lack of documentation prevents the application of AG ¶ 20(d) “[T]he 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” A mere intention to repay debts without documentation establishing repayment 
is insufficient to warrant applying this mitigating condition. Even with the two payments 
on his student loan and two payments to the law firm, it is too soon to tell if Applicant will 
carry through on his promise to make payments and continue making the monthly 
payments as required.  
 
 
9 
When an applicant begins to repay delinquent debt there must be a meaningful 
track record showing the payment of those debts. This includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts. An applicant is not required to establish that he has 
paid off each debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is for an applicant to 
demonstrate that he has established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken 
significant actions to implement that plan. The entirety of Applicant’s financial situation 
and actions taken by Applicant to reduce his outstanding indebtedness must be 
considered. Applicant’s payments for two months are insufficient to establish a pattern 
of payments showing his payments will continue.  
 
Applicant still has unresolved delinquent debts. The new agreement includes 
some, but not all of the SOR debts. He is attempting to contact some of his creditors to 
establish a repayment plan. As previously stated, there is insufficient evidence to 
establish he is trying to address those delinquent debts not included in the law firm’s 
debt schedule.  
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. He has had steady employment since June 
2004. He did not provide documentary proof of any payments to his SOR creditors. He 
has not provided documentation showing sufficient progress on his SOR debts. His 
documented steps are simply inadequate to fully mitigate financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I believe Applicant is sincere about getting his finances in order. Applicant is a 
good and valued employee. Applicant is 29 years old and presumed to be a mature 
adult. He has taken minimal steps to resolve his financial problems even though he has 
been steadily employed since June 2004. Applicant appears motivated to improve his 
 
10 
finances. However, absent a reliable track record of conduct, which he has not 
established, available positive information is insufficient to overcome the adverse 
inferences about his unpaid delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant has failed to show a meaningful track record in addressing his debts. 
He has been aware of his financial difficulties since at least April 2009 when he reported 
to security that he was more than 60 days past due on his credit cards. In December 
2009, he was asked about the debts listed in the SOR. Since then, he has paid less 
than $600 on his charged-off, collection, or past-due accounts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. This decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of true 
reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award of a security clearance. The 
awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on 
applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. Under 
Applicant=s current financial circumstances, a clearance is not warranted. In the future, 
having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan, 
or otherwise addressed his debts; he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his 
security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a—1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant     
  Subparagraphs 1.l—1.n:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
