1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-08383
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
October 28, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On April 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline E for
Applicant. (Item 1.)The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On May 10, 2010, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing. (Item 3.) She
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June
10, 2010, Department Counsel submitted the Department's written case. A complete
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, and she was
given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation. A response was due on July 19, 2010. Applicant did not submit any
additional evidence. The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on August 31,
2010.
2
In the FORM, Department Counsel offered 10 documentary exhibits (Items 1-10).
No additional documents were offered by Applicant; however Applicant had submitted
an affidavit (Item 7), and responded to interrogatories on February 4, 2010, which
included four attachments. (Item 8.) Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the FORM, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 46 years old. She is married and has two children. She served in the
United States Army for 24 years, active duty from January 1983 to April 2000, and in the
reserves from April 2000 to January 2007. Applicant rose to the highest rank of the
senior noncommissioned officer corps, Sergeant Major, E-9. Applicant is currently
employed by a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with her employment in the defense sector.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The SOR lists nine allegations (1.a. through 1.i.) under Adjudicative Guideline E. 
The allegations will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed on the
SOR:
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant falsified several travel expense
vouchers while serving in the United States Army, where she served from 1983 to 2007.
In Applicant’s RSOR, she admitted that she falsified several travel vouchers while
serving in the Army. She claimed that she paid porters to handle her luggage when she
actually carried it herself. Applicant contended that each incident only amounted to a
few dollars per voucher, which she did on five or six vouchers that spanned a period of
about two years.
1.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant was charged with Confinement of
Unattended Child in approximately 2003, after leaving her children, ages five and 10, in
her car while she went shopping. In her RSOR, Applicant admitted that she was
charged with Confinement of Unattended Child. She claimed that she and her husband
were going into a liquor store for less than 15 minutes, and since they did not believe
that this was a place to take a five-year-old, they felt it was more appropriate to leave
both children in their vehicle, since the weather at the time was not overly hot or cold.
Applicant wrote that the court set aside a determination for one year, and the case was
expunged when they were not involved in any other legal situations.
1.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant forged signatures on official
documents pertaining to her retirement from the United States Army in approximately
2007, because she did not want to delay her retirement. In her RSOR, Applicant
admitted that she forged two signatures on two documents associated with her Army
3
retirement, because she did not want to delay the processing of her paperwork.
Applicant stated,  “It was incredibly stupid of me. I regret that, as a Sergeant Major, I
made such an error in judgment. I should have held to my beliefs and left the orders out
rather than submit improper paperwork. I learned a lot about my weaknesses and my
moral courage. I will never repeat anything like this again.”
1.d.  It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant filed a false insurance claim in about
2005, following a car accident, and she received about $2,500 from the fraudulent
claim. In her RSOR, Applicant admitted filing a false claim about a car accident, but
stated that it was in 2003 or 2004. Applicant stated, “It was wrong. I am ashamed that I
did it. I thought I was a better person than that.” In her affidavit, Applicant stated that the
accident was caused because she had drifted off the road and struck a guard rail, but
she told the insurance company that she had skidded on ice, because she believed her
insurance rates would increase if she told the truth. (Item 7.)
1.e. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant inaccurately completed her time and
attendance information for approximately 6 to 8 months at her current employment,
where she has been employed since about January 2007. In her RSOR, Applicant
denied that she falsified her time reports while employed by her current employer. She
wrote that she had a hard time adjusting to a corporate style time reporting and that she
was not sure if she was filling out the electronic timecard properly. She claimed that she
spoke with the person overseeing the project about her time concerns, and she was
assured that she was doing things properly.  
1.f   It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant submitted false travel vouchers to her
current employer. In her RSOR, Applicant denied that she falsified travel vouchers with
her current employer. She contended that the polygrapher must have confused her this
information with her earlier military travel vouchers. She wrote that she had traveled
only one time for her current employer, and that she filled out the voucher carefully and
accurately.
1.g.  It is alleged in the SOR that applicant took home a computer program, worth
$300, from her current employer, and uploaded it onto her personal home computer. In
her RSOR, Applicant denied that she took a computer program from her employer and
uploaded it onto her computer for any long-term gain. She did admit that she borrowed
a computer program and uploaded it onto her computer, but she contended it was only
for her son to use for a science fair project, and that she has not used the program
since that one occasion.
1.h.  It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant stole company T–shirts, valued at $25
to $30 each, from her current employer. In her RSOR, Applicant denied that she stole
company T-shirts from her employer. She claimed that in earlier statements, she had
said that the T–shirts were old and had outdated branding so the company could not
use them. She did concede that she felt bad that she took the T-shirts without informing
her boss because that would have been the courteous option. She stated, “I should
have let her know that I was going to take them rather than just doing so.”
4
1.i. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s access to classified information was
suspended by another government agency on about July 21, 2008, due to her personal
conduct, as set forth above. In her RSOR, Applicant admitted that her clearance was
suspended in May 2009, because she was denied a clearance by another agency due
to the allegations referred to in 1a. through 1h., above.
In July 2008, following a polygraph interview, Applicant revealed the above
conduct. AGA thereafter denied her request for access to SCI, and noted the above
reviewed fraudulent conduct as a basis for its denial in a letter to Applicant, dated
September 15, 2008. (Item 8. b.) As a result of the denial of SCI access, the Defense
Security Service thereafter suspended Applicant’s security clearance. (Item 8. c.)
On the FORM, Department Counsel states Applicant denied allegations 1.f
through 1.h. While Applicant did generally deny 1.e. through 1.h. on her RSOR, she did
admit that she was unsure if she was filling out her electronic timecard properly, that
she took home a computer program and uploaded onto her home computer without
permission, and that she took company T-shirts without permission. The only allegation
in the SOR that Applicant actually denied was that she had submitted false travel
vouchers to her current employer.
Mitigation
Applicant submitted certificates for significant medals that she received while in
the Army. (Item 8.f.) These included: several Meritorious Service Medals and her fifth
Good Conduct Medal. She also submitted NCO Evaluation Reports from 2002 into
2006. (Item 8 g.) Her ratings were always extremely high. Finally, Applicant submitted
her civilian evaluation performance reports for years 2007 and 2008. (Item 8.h.) These
were also extremely positive.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline E,  Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence has established that Applicant
committed conduct that could be considered to involve questionable judgement, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. This included
the following: defrauding the government by submitting several false travel vouchers,
forging of official orders and submitting them to the Army. She also committed fraud on
her insurance company by submitting a false insurance claim, was guilty of the charge
of confinement of her two unattended children, and the taking of company T-shirts and a
company computer program without authorization from her current employer.
In reviewing the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E, I conclude that,
because of Applicant’s conduct as a whole over the course of many years as reviewed
in 1.a. through 1.h., above, ¶ 16(d) “credible adverse information that is not explicitly
covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information supports a
6
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not prefer properly safeguard protected
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of:  . . . (3) pattern of
dishonesty or rules violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer’s time or resources” applies against Applicant. 
Based on the extent of the conduct over many years, I can not conclude that any
mitigating condition under Guideline E ¶ 17 is applicable. I therefore, resolve Guideline
E against Applicant. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the disqualifying condition applies, and why no mitigating condition
applies, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-
person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.- 1. i.: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
