  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 09-05786 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has paid two of her delinquent accounts and entered into a repayment 
agreement on the remaining obligation. She has mitigated the security concerns under 
financial considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
her eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 17, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
1 
  On April 14, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
May 28, 2010, I was assigned the case. On June 10, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on June 30, 2010.  
 
 The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibit A, which was 
admitted into evidence without objection. I held the record open to receive additional 
information from Applicant. On July 6 and July 25, 2010, additional material was 
submitted. Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which was admitted 
into the record as Ex. B and C. On July 9, 2010, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted the three debts listed in the 
SOR. Her admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old logistics specialist who has worked for a defense 
contractor since January 9, 2010, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. (Tr. 29) 
In 2001, she enlisted in the United States Army and was assigned as a fueler and then 
as a supply clerk. (Tr. 22) From March 2003 to December 2003, she was deployed to 
Iraq. (Tr. 22)  
 
 Applicant married in February 2001, just before entering the Army. She and her 
husband have two children ages 7 and 13. (Tr. 22), In October 2008, they divorced after 
separating in March 2008. She has not received any child support because she is 
unable to locate her ex-husband. (Tr. 23) As a result of that divorce, she became liable 
for a number of delinquent marital debts. In January 2009, she obtained her current job 
and starting repaying her debts.  
 
 When the marital problems escalated, Applicant moved out of the family home 
and into a rental. (Tr. 33) The one-year lease required $1,295 monthly payments. (Ex. 
3) After living in the rental house for eight months, the divorce became final, her ex-
husband vacated the family home, and she moved back into the home. When she did 
so, she broke the rental lease. (Tr. 25) At the time she moved out of the rental, there 
was no inspection. The landlord demanded $5,180 in damages. In November 2009, she 
signed a $5,180 promissory note agreeing to pay $50 monthly on the debt. (Ex. 4, Tr. 
21) She accelerated her payments on the debt, and it is now paid. (Tr. 27)  
 
 In June 2008, Applicant was involved in an automobile accident and injured her 
neck and left shoulder. (Tr. 24) Medical bills were incurred for treatment. Applicant hired 
an attorney to help her resolve problems related to the accident. (Ex. 3) A $475 medical 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.a) was incurred, which she paid in December 2009. (Ex. 4, Ex. B)  
 
 
2 
 Applicant’s yearly income is approximately $48,000. (Tr. 29) As of December 
2009, her net monthly income was approximately $4,900, her monthly expenses were 
approximately $2,400, and her monthly debt payment was approximately $1,750. She 
has a monthly net remainder of $700. (Ex. 4) Her monthly income includes 
approximately $1,500 in Veteran’s Administration (VA) disability payments she receives 
for post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). (Tr. 31)  
 
 Applicant incurred a credit card debt of $11,007 (SOR ¶ 1.b) that was charged 
off. She had originally purchased furniture on the account. (Tr. 33) She has made 
numerous attempts to negotiate a repayment arrangement with the creditor. (Tr. 21) 
However, she has been unable to offer a large enough monthly amount for the creditor 
to agree to a repayment plan. She has been communicating with them for over a year. 
(Tr. 32) Applicant offered to pay $250 per month, but the creditor demanded $1,000 per 
month, which she could not afford. (Tr. 32) On July 14, 2010, the creditor had agreed to 
accept $188 monthly payments on this debt starting on July 25, 2010. (Ex. C) 
 
 In October 2006, the family home was purchased by Applicant and her then 
spouse for $160,000 with monthly mortgage payments of $1,318. (Tr. 34) She was 
awarded the home in the divorce and is currently living in the home. She is current on 
her monthly mortgage payments on which $155,000 remains to be paid. (Tr., 34) 
Applicant has about $1,000 in savings. (Tr. 35) 
 
 Applicant owns a 2003 Lincoln town car, which is paid for. (Tr. 30) She is not 
being contacted by creditors for past-due obligations. Applicant has paid a number of 
debts not listed in the SOR. (Ex. 4) She is also current on a $22,000 credit card debt. 
She initially had the account and put her husband on the account as an authorized user. 
In March 2008, when they separated, her husband took the card and went on a 
spending spree without her approval. He spent more than $22,000 on the card. (Ex. 3, 
4) In March 2009, she arranged a $237 monthly repayment agreement with the creditor. 
(Ex. 3, Tr. 32) She is current on her repayment of this debt. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
3 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
4 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had three delinquent accounts totaling approximately $16,600. She 
paid two of the accounts and reached a repayment plan for the remaining debt. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG 
¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The debts were limited to a medical bill, a credit card account, and damages after 
she left a rental apartment. The debts were occurred under circumstances that are not 
likely to be repeated. She is living in her own home and is current on her mortgage. It is 
unlikely she will have to rent another place to live. It is possible Applicant may remarry 
 
5 
and that marriage end in divorce, but it is unlikely she will give any new spouse control 
over her credit cards. The mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 20(a) apply. 
 
Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by her 2008 divorce and her 
ex-husband’s shopping spree with her credit card. She receives no child support 
because she has been unable to locate her ex-husband. Her separation and divorce, 
along with the financial burden associated with each, were conditions beyond her 
control. The mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 20(b) apply. 
 
The mitigating conditions under AG &20(c) apply. Applicant is making monthly 
payments on the sole remaining SOR obligations. She is paying all of her financial 
obligations as agreed. Her car is paid for, she has $1,000 in savings, she is current on 
her mortgage payments, has $5,000 equity in her home, and is current on her debts. 
The mitigating condition in AG & 20(d) applies to the debts.  
 
For a year Applicant was communicating with the remaining SOR creditor. The 
creditor wanted monthly payments of $1,000 per month, which was beyond her ability to 
pay. Following the hearing, a repayment agreement was reached. Even though 
Applicant has not documented payment in accord with the agreement, I believe she will 
honor the repayment agreement based on her conduct related to other debts. She 
entered into a repayment agreement on the debt listed in SOR &1.c. She then 
accelerated payment on the debt, paying it faster than required. Since March 2009, she 
entered into a repayment plan on another credit card debt, not listed in the SOR, and 
has honored that agreement. She has paid off other debts not listed in the SOR. In 
viewing Applicant’s demeanor and deportment, I believe she will pay this debt as 
agreed.  
   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
6 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Applicant has paid two of the SOR debts and negotiated a repayment 
agreement on the remaining debt. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all her 
debts are paid—it is whether her financial circumstances raise concerns about her 
fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)  
 
 I had ample opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of Applicant and observe her 
manner and deportment. I believe she will honor the repayment agreement on the 
remaining debt.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
