1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-02557
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Barry M. Sax, Esquire
October 7, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SCA) in September of
2006, and Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIPs) in March of
2008, and most recently in November of 2009.  On May 6, 2010, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guidelines E, H and J for the Applicant.  The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
The Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 11, 2010.  He answered
the SOR (Answer) in writing through counsel on May 25, 2010, and requested a hearing
before an Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on July 14, 2010, and I
received the case assignment on July 19, 2010.  A notice of hearing was originally
2
issued on July 19, 2010, setting the hearing for August 9, 2010.  However, I granted the
Applicant’s Counsel request for a delay of the hearing until August 19, 2010, in order for
said counsel to be available.  I convened the hearing as re-scheduled on August 19,
2010.  The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 5, which were received
without objection.  The Applicant testified on his own behalf, as did his drug counselor,
and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A through H, which were received without objection.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on August 31, 2010.  The record
closed on August 19, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Motion to Amend SOR
Department Counsel moved to amend Subparagraph 2.c. of the SOR by
excepting “as set forth in Subparagraph 1.f., above,” and substituting therefore “as set
forth in Subparagraph 1.b., above.”  (Emphasis supplied.)  The motion was granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, the Applicant admitted the factual allegations in all the
Subparagraphs with explanations, except for the unamended Subparagraph 2.c.  He
now admits the amended Subparagraph.  He also provided additional information to
support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Paragraph 1 - Drug Involvement
1.a.~1.g.  From about 1992 until about 1996, the Applicant’s drug of choice was
marijuana.  (TR at page 87 line 3 to page 90 line 10.)  He used the drug on an
occasional basis at social settings in high school and in college.  (Id.)  He also
purchased marijuana “a couple of times at a party or something like that.”  (TR at page
88 lines 15~20.)  In addition to marijuana, the Applicant experimented with psychedelic
mushrooms in about 1995.  (TR at page 87 line 25 to page 88 line 3.)
In about May of 2003, the Applicant suffered “a back injury;” and as a result, “was
prescribed Vicodin.”  (TR at page 59 line 23 to page 60 line 20.)  However, after “about
six months,” the Applicant started to illegally use more pills then he was prescribed.
(TR at page 118 line 11 to page 122 line 23.)  He eventually went online, submitted his
medical records; and as a result, “a doctor in Florida” started prescribing Vicodin to the
Applicant.  (Id, and at page 70 line 12 to page 76 line 23.)  His usage also illegally
exceeded this prescription.  (Id.)  In 2005, long after his back had healed, the Applicant
continued to go online and get additional pain killers prescribed.  (TR at page 128 line
25 to page 130 line 23.)  Since October of 2001, the Applicant has been working for his
current employer, and was granted a security clearance in October of 2005.  (GX 2 at
pages 11~12, and at pages 25~27.)  As such, the Applicant had illegally used pain
3
killers while holding a security clearance, until October of 2006, when he went into
inpatient treatment.
The Applicant received inpatient treatment, from October of 2006 to November of
2006, for a condition diagnosed as Opiate Dependency.  (TR at page 44 lines 14~19.)
Since his inpatient treatment, the Applicant has been seeing an “employee assistance
counselor.”  (TR at page 35 line 21 to page 55 line 12.)  Most recently, that counselor
averred, in part, the following:
[The Applicant’s] . . . progress has been excellent.  He has a very solid AA
program.  He attends three or four AA meetings per week.  He has a
sponsor and is working the Steps.
[The Applicant’s] . . . prognosis is excellent.  He is doing everything that is
recommended to him to stay sober.  (AppX A.)
In September of 2008, the Applicant was denied access to classified information
due to his Drug Involvement and related Personal Conduct.  (GX 3.)  In his May 25,
2010 Answer to the SOR, the Applicant has also pledged the following: “It is my intent to
stay clean and sober for the rest of my life.  If I ever use illegal drugs or abuse alcohol
from this day forward, any clearance I hold should be immediately revoked.”  (Answer
the last page.)
Paragraph 2 - Personal Conduct & Paragraph 3 - Criminal Conduct
2.a.~2.e., and 3.a.  The Applicant executed an SCA in September of 2006.  (GX
1.)  The Applicant answered “NO” to Sections 27 and 28.  (GX 1 at page 7.)  Section 27
asks if the Applicant has “illegally used any controlled substance . . . or prescribed
drugs” in the last seven years.  (Id.)  The Applicant’s answer was a wilful falsification, as
he illegally used Vicodin and other prescribed pain killers, as noted above under Drug
Involvement.  (TR at page 136 line 1 to page 138 line 2.)  This wilful falsification is a
violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001.
Section 28 asks if the Applicant has “EVER illegally used a controlled substance .
. . while possessing a security clearance . . . .”  The Applicant’s answer was again a
wilful falsification, as he illegally used Vicodin and other prescribed pain killers after
having been granted a security clearance in October of 2005, as noted above under
Drug Involvement.  (TR at page 136 line 1 to page 138 line 2.)  This wilful falsification is
a violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001.
The Applicant executed an e-QIP in March of 2008.  (GX 2.)  The Applicant
answered “NO” to Sections 24a and 24b.  (GX 2 at page 25.)  Section 24a asks if the
Applicant has “illegally used any controlled substance . . . or prescribed drugs” in the
last seven years.  (Id.)  The Applicant’s answer was a wilful falsification, as he illegally
used Vicodin and other prescribed pain killers, as noted above under Drug Involvement.
4
(TR at page 111 line 4 to page 114 line 15.)  This wilful falsification is a violation of 18
U.S.C. Section 1001.
Section 24b asks if the Applicant has “EVER illegally used a controlled substance
. . . while possessing a security clearance . . . .”  The Applicant’s answer was a wilful
falsification, as he illegally used Vicodin and other prescribed pain killers after having
been granted a security clearance in October of 2005, as noted above under Drug
Involvement.  (TR at page 111 line 4 to page 114 line 15.)  This wilful falsification is a
violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
5
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
Paragraph 24:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
The guideline also notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.
Under Subparagraph 25(a), “any drug abuse” may be disqualifying.  In addition,
“diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional . . . of drug abuse or drug
dependence” under Subparagraph 25(d) may be disqualifying.  Here, the Applicant
illegally used Vicodin and other pain killers from about May of 2003 until he entered
inpatient treatment in October of 2006.  His usage was to the point of Opiate
Dependency.  Subparagraph 25(g) is also applicable, as it prescribes against “any
illegal drug after being granted a security clearance.”  These are countered, however,
by the mitigating conditions found in Subparagraphs 26(b)(3) and 26(b)(4).  The
Applicant has shown “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such
as: (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;” and “(4) a signed statement of intent with
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.”  The Applicant was last involved
with Opiates in October of 2006, about four years ago.  He has also signed a letter of
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future.  I find his statement of intent to be credible
and sincere.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in
Paragraph 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
6
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . or similar form . . . .”  Here, the Applicant
falsified his answers to Sections 27 and 28 on his September 2006 SCA, and he also
falsified his answers to Sections 24a and 24b on his March 2008 e-QIP.  He illegally
used prescribed pain killers from about May of 2003 until October of 2006.  He also
used them after having been granted a security clearance in October of 2005.  I can find
no countervailing Mitigating Condition that is applicable under these circumstances.
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
Paragraph 30 of the new adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern
relating to Criminal Conduct:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
The adjudicative guidelines set out certain conditions that could raise security
concerns.  Paragraph 31(c) provides that an “allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted,@ may raise security concerns.  The Applicant’s falsification of his September
2006 SCA and his March 2008 e-QIP are violations of 18 U.S.C. 1001.  Again, I find no
countervailing Mitigating Conditions that are applicable.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Subpargraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Subparagraph 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
7
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The Applicant has the unqualified support
of his father, and of those who know him in the work place.  (AppX B.)  However, the
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance.  He was clearly less than candid with the
Government as to his past drug abuse.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has
not mitigated the security concerns arising from his Personal Conduct and related
Criminal Conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: Against Applicant
8
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
_________________
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
