 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00528 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Roberto Stefano, Personal Representative 
 
 
October 20, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct, and Personal 
Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H, Drug Involvement; J, Criminal Conduct; and E, Personal Conduct . The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 17, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 22, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on August 16, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
September 8, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A, called five witnesses, 
and testified on his own behalf. The record was left open for the submission of 
additional documentation and on September 23, Applicant submitted 26 pages, marked 
AE B. Department Counsel had no objection to AE B and it was admitted. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 16, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, through 1.g., 1.i. through 1.m., 
2.b., and 3.a. through 3.c. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.h., and 2.a. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Applicant’s use of 
illegal substances began at the age of 14, with marijuana. It escalated at age 17 or 19, 
and led to his use of methamphetamines. He used methamphetamines from 
approximately 1995 through 2007; benzodiazepines, a prescription drug he misused, 
from approximately 1994 to February 2007; codeine, a prescription drug he misused, 
from 1994 through 2006; and opioids, a prescription drug he misused, from 1994 to 
2007; and cocaine once in approximately 1996, despite the fact that he knew it was 
against the law to take illegal substances and misuse prescription drugs. Applicant 
explained that he got into drug use because he had problems with self-worth and self-
esteem. (GE 1; GE 2; GE 4; Tr. 60-65, 98, 107-110.) 
 
 At age 19, in April 2003, he was arrested and charged with Felony Possession of 
a Controlled Substance and Possession of Smoking Device. Applicant pled guilty to 
Possession of a Controlled Substance and was placed on a deferred entry of judgment 
for a period of 18 months. On this occasion, Applicant was in a vehicle that ran out of 
gas on the side of the road. A police officer stopped and asked for identification. The 
officer conducted a search of the vehicle and found paraphernalia in the vehicle. 
Applicant maintained approximately six months of sobriety after this arrest. (GE 1; GE 2; 
GE 5; GE 6; Tr. 66-68, 99-101, 109.) 
 
 Applicant was also charged with reckless Driving with Bodily Injury in May 2003. 
He had made an unsafe lane change and ran another vehicle off of the road. Applicant 
received a summons to appear in court in the mail. He pled guilty to the charge and he 
entered a deferral program where he was fined $140 and placed on probation for 36 
months. He abstained from methamphetamine use during the beginning of his term on 
probation, but resumed its use prior to the termination of probation. (GE 2; GE 5; Tr. 
102-104.) 
 
 Applicant was treated at a residential in-patient drug treatment facility for 30 days 
from November to December of 2003. Applicant successfully completed the 
rehabilitation program. When he left the program, he fully intended to abstain from the 
use of alcohol and illegal substances. He was successful in abstaining from drugs and 
alcohol for approximately one year. However, as time passed, he began to feel hat he 
was “too young” to have a problem with addiction and gradually returned to consuming 
 
3 
 
alcohol when he turned 21. His alcohol consumption led him back to drugs. (GE 1; Tr. 
109-110.) 
 
 Applicant began working for a defense contractor in February of 2006. At that 
time, he applied for a security clearance and was granted an interim clearance in early 
2006. He was aware of both his employer’s policy against drug use and the 
Government’s policies against drug use, and he attempted to refrain from using illegal 
substances. However, he was unable to abstain for long, and soon found himself using 
illegal substances including methamphetamines again. In July 2006, co-workers 
witnessed Applicant with drug paraphernalia in the workplace and confronted him. He 
was referred to the employee assistance program, which referred him to outpatient 
treatment. He was also subjected to a drug test by his employer. Applicant failed that 
drug test and was terminated by his employer. His drug use increased after his 
termination. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 51, 81, 104.) 
 
 Applicant received outpatient treatment in August 2006, but he failed to 
successfully complete it. He was unable to make himself get to his outpatient classes. 
He continued to use illegal substances. (Tr. 68-69, 81-84.) 
 
 In February 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with Under the Influence 
of Controlled Substances, Possession of Controlled Substances, and Possession of 
Smoking Device. He was convicted of Possession of a Controlled Substance. Applicant 
claims he was traveling with people who had paraphernalia, “and stuff,” including 
prescription medications not prescribed to Applicant in the car. They got pulled over. 
The car was searched and paraphernalia was discovered, and they “put it on 
[Applicant].” Applicant was sentenced to one year probation, with the stipulation that he 
have no further arrests and he was required to attend out-patient drug treatment. (GE 1; 
GE 2; GE 5; GE 6; Tr. 84-86, 104.) 
 
 Applicant attended a drug and alcohol treatment facility for 21 days from 
February 14, 2007 to March 8, 2007. He was diagnosed with Chemical Dependency to 
include amphetamine dependence and sedative dependence. Prior to his 2007 
treatment, he had made four prior attempts to stop using drugs, but his attempts were 
unsuccessful and he eventually relapsed. However, he successfully completed the 
treatment program in 2007, and has abstained from drugs and alcohol since entering 
treatment. At the time of discharge, his prognosis was “good-providing client maintains 
12-step meetings and follows [medical] after care plan.” (GE 2; GE 3; AE B; Tr. 71-77.) 
 
 After completing treatment, Applicant chose to move into a sober-living 
environment, on the same city block as the treatment center, with 12 other people for 
one year. During that year, he attended five to six 12-step meetings per week and 
visited the treatment center on a daily basis. He realized that alcohol is a drug and that 
he needed to abstain from alcohol use. He presented a letter from the sober-living 
house that noted he was “an ideal tenant.” He was drug tested on a weekly basis, the 
entire time he lived there, and required to attend at least 4 12-step meeting per week. 
After a successful year at the sober-living house, he moved into a shared apartment 
with others from his treatment program. He now lives with his parents, who are very 
 
4 
 
supportive of his sobriety. Applicant still attends 12-step meetings three to five times per 
week. (AE B; Tr. 58-59, 71-76.) 
 
 Applicant has not used any illegal substances or misused prescription drugs 
since February 2007. Further, he has not associated with any drug users since 
February 2007. He attributes the success of his treatment program in 2007 to the 
support he got after treatment. His pledge not to use illegal substances again is 
credible. He speaks publicly about his drug problem, goes to hospitals, and does house 
calls, to speak about rehabilitation. He has sponsored six to ten other men in a 12-step 
program. He does volunteer activities with the treatment facility including visiting Skid 
Row and feeding the homeless there. He takes 12-step meetings to the jails and tries to 
help others that need help. He now uses the gym, his spirituality, and sporting events to 
fill his time productively. (AE A; Tr. 58-59, 63, 69-70, 75, 112-120.) 
 
 In May 2008, Applicant was rehired by the same defense contractor, after a year 
of sobriety. He was subject to a probationary employment period of one year, during 
which time he underwent random drug urinalysis tests. He presented documentation 
that shows he passed each test. Further, he voluntarily submitted to a drug test on 
September 14, 2010, to verify he is still drug free. He presented documentation of this 
drug test showing he tested negative for illegal substances. Since May 2008, Applicant 
has received no disciplinary write-ups. In fact, he received performance awards in 
October 2008 and January 2009, and an Employee Suggestion Award in January 2009. 
(AE A; AE B; Tr. 87-91.) 
 
 Applicant has the support of his supervisors and colleagues. His witnesses and 
character letters attest to the change Applicant has undergone since he was rehired in 
May 2008. He is now considered to be a dedicated and reliable worker who is 
conscientious about his work. One supervisor opined Applicant “always displays a high 
degree of integrity, responsibility, and ambition; his work ethic was top notch.” 
Additionally, Applicant’s uncle and father testified about Applicant’s accomplishments 
and commitment to remaining sober. (AE A; AE B; Tr. 10-30, 123-141.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
6 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; and  
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR 1.a.-1.m.). Applicant used illegal substances from 
approximately 1994 through 2007. His drug uses lead him to treatment on three 
occasions and resulted in a diagnosis of chemical dependency. He continued his drug 
use, as established by failed urinalysis administered by his employer, despite being 
granted an interim security clearance in 2006. The facts established, through the 
Government’s information and through Applicant’s admissions, raise a security concern 
under all of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs over a period of 13 years, which is a considerable 
amount of time. He also has relapsed back into drug use after treatment in the past. 
However, since 2007, he has demonstrated a firm commitment to abstaining from the 
use of illegal substances. He no longer associates with drug users and he has 
completely changed his environment since he used drugs. He now surrounds himself 
with people focused on recovery. He voluntarily participated in an inpatient treatment 
program in 2007 and was given a “good” prognosis, if he followed up with after care. He 
did in fact participate in after-care, choosing to live in a sober-living house for a year 
after his treatment. He continues to go to 12-step programs weekly. He not only devotes 
his efforts to remaining sober, but he volunteers in many activities to help others in their 
efforts to maintain sobriety. Applicant has demonstrated in the past three years that he 
is committed to a sober life style and has not had any relapses since 2007. AG ¶ 26(b) 
and (d) apply. 
 
7 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant has a history of criminal offenses including his illegal drug use, his April 
2003 arrests, his May 2003 arrest, and his 2007 conviction. The above disqualifying 
conditions have been established.  
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of criminal behavior. However, his offenses occurred 
when he was young and less mature. Three years have passed since his last offense. 
During that time, he has committed himself to sober living. He attends 12-step meetings 
several times a week, surrounds himself with people committed to a sober lifestyle, and 
has redeemed himself in the eyes of his employer. His supervisors support Applicant’s 
application and speak highly of Applicant. Due to the recent, positive changes in 
Applicant’s life, further Criminal Conduct is unlikely to recur. He has demonstrated that 
he has successfully rehabilitated himself. His past criminal behavior does not cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) 
apply. 
 
 
8 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
 Applicant’s past drug use and criminal behavior, to include using illegal 
substances, after being granted an interim security clearance, demonstrates 
questionable judgment. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant has been sober for over three years now. His co-workers, supervisors, 
family, and friends are all aware of his past problems with drugs. He conducts public 
speaking engagements about sobriety, and works publically to assist others in getting 
treatment. Applicant is committed to sober living, and has demonstrated that his past 
drug and criminal involvement does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Further, he has successfully rehabilitated himself 
and has taken steps to avoid ever using drugs in the future, including continuing to 
 
9 
 
attend his 12-step program several times a week. He is unlikely to return to his criminal 
past including the use of illegal substances. AG ¶ 17(c) and 17(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H, J, and E in my whole-person analysis. Independent of my analysis 
under those Guidelines, I find that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under 
the whole-person concept. 
 
Applicant’s life has drastically changed in the past three years. He has accepted 
that he has a chemical dependency, and has worked hard to maintain sobriety. He had 
a serious drug problem, but has dedicated himself to his recovery. He surrounds himself 
with good influences and helps others to fight their addictions. These changes, as 
attested to by Applicant’s friend, uncle and father, are permanent. The potential that he 
would be subject to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress is unlikely, given his 
lifestyle choices since February 2007. There is little likelihood of recurrence as Applicant 
has taken his after care responsibilities seriously and his prognosis is good.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement, Criminal Conduct and Personal 
Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b.:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.c.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
