                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07754 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Marc G. Laverdiere, Esq., Department Counsel 
Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
On May 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 In an undated answer to the SOR, Applicant requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 11, 2010. DOHA issued 
a Notice of Hearing on August 12, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
September 8, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant did 
not object and they were admitted. Applicant and two witnesses testified. Applicant 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted without objections. The record 
remained open until September 22, 2010, to allow Applicant an opportunity to provide 
additional documents, which she did. They were marked as AE G through J. 
Department Counsel had no objections and they were admitted.1 DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 15, 2010.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by deleting from ¶ 2.a, the word 
“trespass.” Applicant had no objection and the motion was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶ 2.b. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. She married in 1994 and separated from her husband 
in 1999. She is estranged from him and intends to seek a divorce. She has a 15-year-
old daughter. She does not receive child support. Applicant is a high school graduate. 
She completed some college classes, but does not have a degree. She has worked for 
her present employer, a federal contractor, since May 2010. Before then, she worked 
for different federal contractors. She has held a Top Secret security clearance for 
approximately nine years.2  
 
 In July 2005, Applicant was involved in an altercation in her home. A person who 
was visiting her roommate refused to leave the house. There was a mutual fray that 
involved pushing and shoving. Applicant was attempting to forcibly remove the person 
from her house. She believed the other person was intoxicated and she was acting in 
self defense. Both Applicant and the person filed assault charges against each other. At 
a later time, they both agreed to withdraw their complaints. Applicant had an interim 
Peace Order issued against her as a result of the charge.3 
 
 In July 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with assault-first degree, 
reckless endangerment, and assault second degree. An argument ensued between 
Applicant, a person she had a relationship with, and a third person. The argument 
escalated into a fight and involved shoving and pushing. One of the people pressed 
charges. Applicant stated she did not know if the person who pressed charges 
sustained any injuries. Applicant pled guilty to reckless endangerment, a misdemeanor, 
1 Department Counsel’s Memorandum was marked Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
2 Tr. 52-53, 64-65, 70-72. 
 
3 Tr. 18-19, 43-44; 72-73; GE 6; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
and the other charges were nolle prosequi. She was sentenced to five days in jail, a fine 
of $207, and three years unsupervised probation before judgment. Applicant served the 
jail time and paid the fine. She remains on unsupervised probation until May 2012.4  
 
 Applicant reported the above incidents to her security manager in a timely 
manner. She was terminated from her job based on the July 2008 arrest. When she lost 
her job, it affected her ability to pay her bills. Before then, she had been paying her bills 
on time. She obtained another job in August 2008 and was employed until February 
2010, but this job did not pay as much as she had been earning previously. She was 
unemployed from March 2010 to April 2010. Applicant used her credit cards to help pay 
her living expenses. She had difficulty paying them and subsequently defaulted on 
some debts. She also withdrew money from her 401(k) pension plan to pay expenses.5  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a credit card debt ($3,377) that was charged off. She 
had been making $100 monthly payments toward the debt. She stated she negotiated a 
settlement agreement with the creditor to make three payments of $647 for three 
months. The agreement is not yet in writing, and she has not begun the payments. She 
provided proof that she made five payments of $100 beginning in April 2010 and her 
last one was made on August 26, 2010. 6 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is a credit card debt ($6,283) that was charged off. 
Applicant stated she attempted to get the creditor to lower the interest rate and reduce 
the payment amount, but was unsuccessful. The debt has been sold to a collection 
company, and she is having difficulty determining what company holds the debt. The 
debt is not paid.7 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is a credit card debt ($9,264) that was charged off. 
Applicant could not negotiate a settlement with the creditor. She stated she has not 
been contacted by a collection company and has not contacted the creditor recently. 
The debt is unpaid.8 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d is a telephone bill debt ($330) that was charged off. 
Applicant settled and paid the debt in the amount of $297 in approximately April 2010.9 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f are student loans ($4,514 and $4,291) that were 
charged off. The debts are now with a collection company. In her answer to the SOR, 
4 Tr. 19-20, 30, 45-48, 50-60; 74; GE 3, 6; AE B. 
 
5 Tr. 20; 27-29 AE C, D. 
 
6 Tr. 31, 36-40, 52-60; AE F, H.  
 
7 Tr. 30-31, 35, 61-62. 
 
8 Tr. 40-41, 62-63. 
 
9 Tr. 44-45; Answer to SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant stated that the two debts were combined and settled for $3,500. She was 
required to make three payments of $1,166.67 for three months. She stated the last 
payment was to be August 15, 2010. She provided proof that she made the three 
payments to satisfy the settlement agreement.10  
 
 Applicant stopped paying the mortgage on her house in January 2010. She 
stated the mortgage company permitted her to sell the house by “short sale.” The house 
has not been sold yet. She stated she was “negotiating a deed in lieu of foreclosure.” 
She moved from the house in August 2010. Her mortgage payments were $1,650. She 
used the money that would have paid her mortgage to pay other bills. She lives with her 
brother now and pays $750 for rent.11  
 
 Applicant filed her 2009 tax return and received a refund. She stated she later 
received a letter from the Internal Revenue Service advising her she owed additional 
taxes. She believes this may be from when she withdrew funds from her 401(k) pension 
plan. She believes she owes around $1,500. She has not resolved this issue.12 
 
 A witness who has known Applicant for 12 years testified on her behalf. She 
considers Applicant a trusted and dependable friend. She is reliable and always willing 
to help her when in need. She has never observed Applicant in a fight.13  
 
 A second witness testified on behalf of Applicant. She has known her for 12 
years and about nine years ago they were coworkers. She believes Applicant to be a 
loving, caring, and responsible person. She is always on time for work and her 
character is beyond reproach. She is not violent and does not abuse drugs.14 
 
 I considered a character letter provided by Applicant from a coworker. He worked 
with her from 2001 to 2007. He believes she has displayed a great work ethic, 
professionalism, and has been an asset to their employer. She is considered a 
supportive and trustworthy friend. He believes her to be an outstanding person and 
citizen.15 
  
 
 
10 Tr. 31-35, 40; 66-70, 76; AE H. 
 
11 Tr. 94-98. 
 
12 Tr. 99-102. I have not considered debts that were not alleged for disqualifying purposes, but I have 
considered them when analyzing the mitigating conditions, the “whole person,” and her complete financial 
situation. 
 
13 Tr. 79-82. 
 
14 Tr. 83-93. 
 
15 AE J. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 30 and especially considered: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 Applicant was arrested and charged with assault in 2005. The charge was later 
withdrawn. She was arrested again in July 2008 and charged with first-degree assault, 
reckless endangerment, and assault-second degree. She pled guilty to reckless 
endangerment and the other charges were nolle prosequi. She served five days in jail, 
paid a fine, and remains on unsupervised probation until May 2012. I find all of the 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant denied she was involved in an assault in 2005 and the charge was later 
dismissed. She was involved in a criminal incident in 2008. She remains on probation 
for the 2008 criminal conviction. Applicant is remorseful for her criminal conduct. It has 
been over two years since the last incident and it appears she is attempting to put her 
 
7 
 
 
life back on the right track. However, Applicant’s probationary period does not end until 
May 2012, which indicates she needs additional time to prove she will not have a 
recurrence of criminal activity. I find AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply because it is too early to 
conclude her conduct will not recur. I find AG ¶ 32(c) applies to the criminal conduct 
alleged in 2005. The charge was withdrawn and Applicant believed she was acting in 
self defense. I find AG ¶ 32(d) partially applies because Applicant is remorseful about 
her past conduct and it appears she has a good employment record. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that are unpaid and unresolved. I find there is 
sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has three delinquent debts, totaling approximately $18,747, that she 
owes. She was delinquent in paying other bills that she recently negotiated settlements 
to resolve. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant still has delinquent debts that 
are unpaid. Applicant found herself in financial difficulty after she was convicted of 
reckless endangerment and lost her job. The financial problems were caused by her 
actions and I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. There is no evidence Applicant received 
financial counseling. She has resolved some of her delinquent debts, but has others 
that remain unpaid and unresolved. I find AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because 
Applicant’s financial problems are not yet under control. In addition to the debts alleged 
in the SOR, Applicant owes the IRS and has not paid her mortgage since January 2010. 
It is unclear how her delinquent mortgage will impact her finances. AG ¶ 20(d) only 
partially applies because, although she has settled some of her delinquent debts, others 
remain unresolved. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In 2008, Applicant was convicted of 
reckless endangerment. She remains on probation for this offense until May 2012. She 
experienced financial problems when she lost her job due to her criminal conduct. She 
is remorseful for her actions. She has made recent attempts to resolve some of her 
 
9 
 
 
delinquent debts, but she has three large ones that remain. In addition, she owes the 
IRS and she moved out of her house after failing to pay the mortgage since January 
2010. Until Applicant completes her probation and resolves her remaining delinquencies 
and financial problems, it is too early to conclude that she has mitigated the security 
concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Financial Considerations and Criminal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
