  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04554 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F.Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used cocaine, once in 2004, and again in 2005, and he used marijuana 
between January 2005 and January 2009. All his illegal drug use occurred while he was 
a college student. His last use was more than 17 months ago. Applicant has rebutted or 
mitigated the security concerns under drug involvement. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 3, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
drug involvement. 
  
 On December 9, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On June 4, 2010, I was assigned the case. On June 10, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on June 29, 2010.  
 
 At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant submitted no exhibits, but did testify, 
as did his mother. On July 29, 2010, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted using and purchasing marijuana 
and cocaine in powder form, but denied using crack cocaine. I incorporate Applicant’s 
admissions. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 24-year-old software engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2009, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 In January 2005, while in college, Applicant started using marijuana and 
continued using it until January 2009, about once per month. He used marijuana in 
social settings with friends. (Tr. 18) He used marijuana only once when he was alone. 
(Tr. 21) From January 2008 through August 2008, Applicant did not use marijuana 
because he was working on an internship where drug testing occurred. (Applicant’s 
Answer to the SOR) When the summer internship ended, Applicant returned to college 
and resumed smoking marijuana.  
 
 In January 2009, Applicant decided to stop all use of marijuana. He began his job 
search and realized many companies require drug testing. On two or three occasions, 
Applicant purchased five to ten dollars worth of marijuana. He last purchased marijuana 
in the fall of 2008. In December 2004 and August 2005, Applicant used cocaine. He 
used cocaine “just to try it.” (Ex. 2) This was not crack cocaine but cocaine in a powder 
form. He has not used any illegal drug since leaving college.  
 
 In May 2009, when Applicant completed his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he listed both his marijuana and cocaine use. At the 
hearing, Applicant stated he found it necessary “to be honest and absolute in this 
process, and I have been since the first day.” (Tr. 14) Now that he is out of college, he 
finds marijuana usage unacceptable. (Tr. 18) He intents to stay away from illegal drugs 
in the future. (Ex. 2) He no longer sees the individuals he previously smoked with. (Tr. 
19) Marijuana use is no longer part of his lifestyle. (Tr. 24) Applicant realizes the 
Government has a strict intolerance position on marijuana use. He realizes the 
seriousness of marijuana use. (Tr. 26) Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that all 
purchase or use of any illegal drugs would stop and any violation of such would result in 
automatic revocation of any security clearance he held. (Applicant’s SOR Response)  
 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
Applicant has never received treatment or counseling for drug use and has never 
been diagnosed with drug abuse or drug dependency.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination about the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 Adjudicative guideline (AG) ¶ 24 articulates the security concerns relating to drug 
involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Those that are potentially applicable are: 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 While a college student, Applicant experimented with cocaine twice—once in 
December 2004 and again in August 2005. From January 2005 until January 2009, he 
smoked marijuana with friends. His use averaged once a month. The disqualifying 
conditions listed in AG ¶¶ 25 (a) and 25 (c) apply.  
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
Applicant’s use of marijuana was during college and his use did not occur under 
unusual circumstances. Applicant no longer sees the individuals with whom he smoked 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
marijuana and is no longer a college student. Applicant had two experimental uses of 
cocaine. The last cocaine usage was approximately five years ago. I find his cocaine 
use not to be recent.  
Applicant’s last marijuana use was in January 2009, 17 months ago. There are 
no bright line rules for determining when conduct is recent. The determination must be 
based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by 
the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the 
Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an 
applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing 
was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without 
any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.”2  
Because of his abstention from drug use for 17 months, and his recognition of 
the adverse impact on his life that illegal drug use could cause, the incompatibility of 
illegal use with his goals, and his stated desire never to use again, there is reasonable 
certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. Applicant did not attempt to hide 
his illegal usage. He disclosed it on his e-QIP and in his subject interview. His college 
drug use does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. Because he will not use illegal drugs in the future, confidence in his current 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment with respect to drug use is restored. The 
mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 26(a) apply.  
The mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26(b) apply. Applicant no longer associates 
with his college friends with whom he used marijuana. He is no longer a college student. 
He has refrained from all illegal drug use for 17 months. In his SOR response, he 
acknowledged his security clearance would be automatically revoked if he used illegal 
drugs again. These are all mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 26(b). 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
6 
 
 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant experimented with cocaine 
and used marijuana. All of his illegal drug usage occurred while he was in college. 
Applicant is now out of college, does not see his college friends, and no longer uses 
illegal drugs. 
 
 Applicant listed his illegal drug usage on his e-QIP and stated his intent to be 
honest about his usage. Due to Applicant’s demeanor and how he responded during the 
hearing, I found his testimony to be credible and worthy of belief. His explanations 
regarding his college marijuana use and his assertion that he will not use it again are 
consistent and believable.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a—1.c:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
