  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04622 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under financial 
considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 18, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
1 
 On April 19, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
June 4, 2010, I was assigned the case. On June 10, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on June 29, 2010.  The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 
through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits A through C, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
On July 29, 2010, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he disputed the reasons why his security 
clearance was not being granted. In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits the 
factual allegations, with explanations and proof of payment on some of the debts. I 
incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of 
the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old personal computer technician who has worked for a 
defense contractor since April 2009, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 From September 1993 to January 2001, Applicant was on active duty in the 
United States Navy. When he left the Navy, he was an E-4. Until February 2007, he 
lived in Virginia when he moved to Texas to take care of his mother-in-law who suffered 
from cancer before her death. (Tr. 52) The SOR alleges five unpaid medical accounts 
and two additional accounts placed for collection or charged-off. Five of the accounts 
have been paid, one is being paid, and he has recently been contacted by the final 
creditor and will establish a repayment plan as to this final debt (SOR ¶ 1.e, $1,482).  
 
On January 1, 2006, Applicant was injured in a motorcycle accident and incurred 
medical debts. Another individual was driving a motorcycle which rear ended a car 
flipping that motorcycle into Applicant’s lane. A number of motorcycles were wrecked. 
The accident occurred in a tunnel limiting Applicant’s ability to avoid being struck by the 
other motorcycles. Applicant broke his wrist resulting in a three-day hospital stay. (Tr. 
28, 38) At the time of the accident, Applicant had employer provided health insurance. 
(Ex. 3) The other driver was uninsured. Applicant’s insurance company contested 
payment, stating Applicant had contributed to the accident. (Tr. 29) Applicant hired an 
attorney to assist him with the accident and his insurance company. Applicant lost touch 
with his attorney and the statute of limitations now prevents him from recovering from 
his insurance company. (Tr. 30)  
 
Applicant’s friend was also involved in the same motorcycle accident. However, 
that individual had full insurance coverage which paid for repairing their motorcycle and 
paid all his medical expenses. From this experience, Applicant has learned to carry full 
insurance coverage in the future.  
 
A number of these accounts are being collected by one collection agency. The 
$325 medical debt (SOR ¶1.a), the $1,207 medical debt (SOR ¶1.b), the $26,043 
 
2 
medical debt (SOR ¶1.c), and the $149 medical debt (SOR ¶1.d) have all been 
consolidated into a single debt. Applicant pays $200 per month on this debt by 
automatic debit. (Tr. 35, Ex. A) As of June 4, 2010, Applicant owed $25,643 on these 
four consolidated debts. (Ex. C) These four debts (SOR ¶¶1.a—1.d) are being paid2 as 
agreed. (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR)  
 
 Applicant wanted to pay the $1,482 medical debt (SOR ¶1.e), but the credit 
bureau report (CBR) failed to list the creditor’s contact information. Unable to contact 
the creditor, Applicant disputed the debt. Applicant recently received a letter from the 
creditor as a result of the dispute. (Tr. 35) Applicant intends to establish a repayment 
plan for this debt. (Tr. 40, Ex. C) 
 
 Applicant had a $825 credit card account (SOR ¶1.f) charged off, which has now 
been paid in full. (Applicant’s Answer to SOR, Tr. 36) When Applicant was unemployed 
during 2006, the credit card account had gone unpaid. (Ex. 3) Applicant had a $582 
gym membership account (SOR ¶1.g) placed for collection, which he paid. (Applicant’s 
Answer to SOR)  
 
 Applicant’s April 2010 CBR lists nine accounts in good standing. (Ex. C) He is 
current on his student loan payments. (Tr. 37) Applicant’s wife is an accountant making 
$42,000 a year. (Tr. 37, 43) They have two children ages 3 and 13. (Tr. 44) Applicant’s 
home is paid for. He just recently purchased a 2011 car. (Tr. 43) Applicant has $8,000 
in his 401(k) retirement plan. (Tr. 46)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s June 25, 2010 CBR lists the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d as having been paid. (Tr. 34, 
Ex.6) 
 
3 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination about the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
 
4 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s motorcycle accident resulted in a number of medical bills. He had five 
unpaid medical bills and two other delinquent accounts, which totaled more than 
$30.000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” 
and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
All but five per cent of the delinquent accounts were the result of the 2006 
motorcycle accident. Applicant is repaying his medical debts related to that accident. He 
has learned the importance of maintaining full insurance. The medical debts are not 
considered remote in time because one remains unpaid and he is making payments on 
the others. However, the majority of the delinquent accounts relates to a single event 
and, as such, could be considered infrequent. Applicant has medical insurance through 
his current employer and he now maintains full insurance coverage. With such 
insurance coverage he is unlikely to incur financial problems due to medical bills. The 
mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 20(a) apply.  
 
 
5 
Under AG &20(b), Applicant relocated to a new state due to his mother-in-laws 
medical problems. This is an event beyond his control as were his medical problems. 
Applicant is acting reasonably by paying his debts. The mitigating conditions listed in 
AG &20(b) apply. 
 
There are clear indications Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He is 
making payments on the largest debt. His home is paid for. He recently purchased a 
new car. There is no indication that he is unable to meet his financial obligations. The 
mitigating conditions in AG &20(c) apply. Applicant is making payment by automatic 
deduction on the medical debt listed in SOR &1.c. The mitigating conditions listed in AG 
&20(d) apply.  
 
Applicant has only recently heard from the creditor listed in the remaining $1,482 
medical bill (SOR &1.d). He wanted to pay this debt earlier, but his CBR failed to give 
any information about the name of the creditor. After disputing the debt and waiting six 
weeks, the creditor finally responded. Applicant intends to establish a repayment plan 
for this debt. Based on how he addressed the other debts and his demeanor, I believe 
he will repay this debt as he asserts he will do.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
types that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the SOR were 
not incurred on luxuries. All but two of the delinquent debts were for medical treatment 
following a motorcycle accident. 
 
 
6 
 
7 
I had ample opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of Applicant, observe his 
manner and deportment, appraise the way in which he responded to questions, assess 
his candor or evasiveness, read his statements, and listen to his testimony. It is my 
impression that his explanations that he wanted to address the final debt sooner, but 
could not because he did not have the creditor’s contact information and now that the 
creditor has responded he will establish a repayment plan, are consistent, and 
considering the quality of the other information before me, have the solid resonance of 
truth.  
 
Five of the debts have been paid, one is being paid monthly, and one will be 
paid. Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his 
financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
(See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a—1.g:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
