                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------   )       ISCR Case No. 09-05831
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
October 15, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) dated March 31, 2009.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On December 8, 2009, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
(as amended), and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January
2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed the
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether a clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR on January 4, 2010, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned Administrative Judge on February 18, 2010 and the hearing was scheduled
for March 30, 2010.  The matter was transferred to another Administrative Judge on
March 1, 2010, and the hearing was convened on April 2, 2010.  The Applicant
requested that the matter be continued to allow him the opportunity to obtain additional
 All references to the transcript hereinafter are from the transcript dated July 27, 2010.1
2
supporting documentation.  Department Counsel also noted that given the apparent
language barrier, the matter could be transferred to a bilingual Department Counsel and
bilingual Administrative Judge for ease of handling.  (Tr. dated April 2, 2010, pp. 14-15.)
The case was transferred back to the undersigned Administrative Judge on April 6,
2010.  A notice of hearing was issued on June 2, 2010, scheduling the hearing for July
27, 2010.  The Government presented seven exhibits, referred to Government Exhibits
1 to 7, which were admitted without objection.  The Applicant presented six exhibits,
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A and F, which were admitted without objection.  The
Applicant also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open for an additional
30 days to allow the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation.  The
Applicant submitted eight Post-Hearing Exhibits, consisting of sixty pages, referred to as
Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection.
The official transcript (Tr.) was received on August 5, 2010.   Based upon a review of1
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on the Applicant’s Answer to the SOR,
the testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 43 years old, and has an eighth grade
education.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Mechanical Assembler and is
seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.  
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  After a complete and
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of the same,
the following findings of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the
SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because he is financially overextended
and at risk to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The Applicant came to the United States from Mexico in 1987.  He worked in the
food service business for about five years, and was a part-time janitor before he started
working in the construction business where he spent twenty-five years, from about 1993
to 2008.  He married in 1994.  His wife and child are United States citizens.  He became
a naturalized United States citizen in 2007.  (Tr. p. 84.)  The Applicant attributes his
financial indebtedness to five separate periods of unemployment due to the downturn in
the economy, that devastated the construction industry.  The Applicant was unemployed
for about a year and a half before he began working for his present employer in March
2009.  He has never applied for or held a security clearance before.  
3
The Applicant admits each of the seven delinquent debts set forth in the SOR
under this guideline that total over $200,000.  (See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  Credit
Reports of the Applicant dated April 10, 2009, September 4, 2009 and February 9,
2010, collectively reflect each of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.
(Government Exhibits 3, 4 and 5.)  
In June 2002, the Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  (Applicant’s Exhibit
A.)  He explained that he had injured his foot, was placed on disability for six months,
and did not have enough money to cover his bills.  (Tr. pp. 49-50.)  His debts were
discharged in September 2002.  At the same time, his attorney advised him to file for
Chapter 13 bankruptcy to protect his house from foreclosure, and to allow him to be
able to transfer title on his house to a purchaser.  He did so, and the title to his house
was transferred when it was purchased.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A and Tr. pp. 51-52.)
  
The Applicant was indebted to a creditor in the amount of $133.00, a creditor in
the amount of $540.00, a creditor in the amount of $2,931.00, a creditor in the amount
of $769.00, a creditor in the amount of $49,762.00, a creditor in the amount of
$236,336.00 and a creditor in the amount of $206.00.  The Applicant made various
attempts to contact his creditors and has had difficulties reaching them and/or
determining who to pay.  
In regard to two of the larger debts for home mortgages, the Applicant explained
that he was a victim of a fraud scheme that he reported to the district attorney.
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  Sometime in 2007, a neighbor, who was a real estate agent,
asked him if he wanted to join an investment group in order to qualify for a loan to buy a
house.  He agreed, and signed some loan documents.  When the Applicant was trying
to purchase a car, he learned that he had derogatory information on his credit report
that said he owed property that he knew nothing about.  He later learned that two loans
had been taken out in his name and had been used to purchase property that he knew
nothing about.  The Applicant never received the money from the loans or the property.
He contacted the district attorney and reported the fraud.  (Tr. pp. 59-65.)  The Applicant
testified that his neighbor, the real estate agent in question, is now in jail.  (Tr. p. 58).  
Applicant contacted a credit consumer counselor and an attorney regarding his
delinquent indebtedness.  His attorney advised him that given his circumstances he
should wait until August 2010, and then file for bankruptcy under Chapter 7.  On August
31, 2010, the Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy to discharge his debts.
(Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 4, 5, 6 and 7.)  Applicant’s Amended Schedule F,
reflecting creditors holding unsecured non-priority claims, lists each of the debts set
forth in the SOR, except a debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $133.00, a debt
owed to a creditor in the amount of $206.00, and a debt owed to a creditor in the
amount of 769.00, each of which have been resolved.        
Applicant’s personal financial statement dated August 17, 2010, indicates that
after paying his regular monthly expenses he has sufficient discretionary money to live
on.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit 2.) 
4
Paragraph 2 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence that could result in the compromise
of classified information.
The Applicant’s mother and father, and three sisters are residents and citizens of
Mexico.  He visits them in Mexico two to five times a year.  They live about fifteen
minutes from the border of the state where the Applicant resides.  He also has one
brother and one step-brother who are residents and citizens of Mexico.  He also has
one sister and one brother who reside in the United States, and are citizens of Mexico.
His mother-in-law is now a citizen of the United States and lives in the United States.
The Applicant credibly testified that if any of his family in Mexico were kidnaped in
exchange for him disclosing classified information, he would never disclose it.  He would
immediately report the matter to his company and the security authorities in the United
States.  (Tr. pp. 71-72.)  The Applicant has no assets of any kind in Mexico.  (Tr. p. 66). 
I have taken official notice of the following facts concerning the country of
Mexico.  The United States relationship with Mexico is as important and complex as
with any country in the world.  The United States and Mexico have a history of
cooperation.  A stable, democratic, and economically prosperous Mexico is fundamental
to United States interests.  The United States and Mexico are partners in NAFTA, and
enjoy a broad and expanding trade relationship.  In March 2005, the United States,
Mexico and Canada formed the Security and Prosperity Partnership, which
contemplates trilateral and bilateral initiatives to develop new avenues of cooperation
that will enhance North America’s security, competitiveness, and economic resilience.
Mexico has sought to maintain its interests abroad and projects its influence largely
through moral persuasion and has championed the principles of nonintervention and
self-determination.  In its efforts to revitalize its economy and open up to international
competition, Mexico has sought closer relations with the United States, Western Europe
and the Pacific basin.  
Crime, including illegal drug trade in Mexico continues to occur at a high rate,
and can often be violent.  In some instances, Americans have become victims of
harassment, mistreatment and extortion by Mexican law enforcement and other officials.
There have been a significant number of rapes, robberies, assaults and credit card
theft.  American tourists are cautioned and should carefully assess the potential risks in
Mexico.  
Letters of recommendation submitted on behalf of the Applicant from his Senior
Pastor, coworkers and friends indicate that he is a hard worker on the job, has good
work ethics, is responsible and trustworthy, is always willing to learn new things, and
gets along well with others.  He enjoys spending time with his family and attends church
regularly.  He also exhibits moral, emotional and spiritual growth.  (Applicant’s Exhibit
F.)
5
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstance;
20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
20.(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the
issue.
Foreign Influence
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
6
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism. 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. 
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
8.(a) The nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S. 
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
7
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, a security clearance is entrusted to civilian workers who
must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours per
day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore appropriately concerned when
available information indicates that an Applicant for such access may be involved in
instances of financial irresponsibility and foreign contacts which demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F) and has foreign contacts
(Guideline B).  This evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and
untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the
Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security
clearance eligibility.
With respect to his finances, most of the Applicant’s delinquent debt was caused
by periods of unemployment from the downturn in the economy that paralyzed the
construction industry.  He was forced to file bankruptcy in the past due to periods of
unemployment.  More recently, he was a victim of a fraud scheme that created a lot of
8
his debt that he did not know about.  Since 2009, he has been working to resolve his
indebtedness.  He has paid off several of the smaller debts.  He has hired an attorney
and filed Chapter 7 Bankruptcy to discharge his debts.  Other than the two creditors he
paid, each of the creditors listed in the SOR are included in the Bankruptcy and are
expected to be discharged.   
There is sufficient evidence of financial rehabilitation at this time.  Under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a) inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations
apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstance, 20.(d) the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts and 20.(e) the
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue are applicable.  
The Applicant has indeed made a good faith effort to repay his overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve his debts.  He is now employed, able to pay his bills, and living
within his means.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).  
Under Guideline B, the Applicant’s foreign family members in Mexico, namely his
mother, father, three sisters, one brother and one step-brother, do not pose a security
risk.  He also has a sister and brother who are Mexican citizens who reside in the
United States.  His contact with his relatives in Mexico is casual at best.  His immediate
family, that include his wife and child, are citizens of the United States and reside with
the Applicant.  The Applicant has made his permanent home in the United States and is
grateful for the opportunities he has in this country.  Under no circumstances will he
disclose unauthorized classified information.  Disqualifying Condition 7.(a) contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who
is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  However,
Mitigating Condition 8.(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S. is more applicable here.
Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). 
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole-person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, candor,  a
9
willingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that
the person may properly safeguard classified information.  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.       
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: For the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.c.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.d.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.e.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.f.: For the Applicant.
    
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
10
