1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-06180
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On April 18, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the adjudicative guidelines (AG).
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 7, 2010. He denied one allegation and
admitted, with an explanation, the remaining two allegations raised under Guideline F.
Applicant also requested a decision without hearing. On June 21, 2010, the
Government compiled a File of Relevant Material (FORM), consisting of a brief and
eight attached items. Applicant received the FORM on July 1, 2010, but did not respond
to its contents within the 30 days provided. DOHA assigned the case to me on
September 22, 2010. Based on a review of the submissions, I find Applicant failed to
provide sufficient documentation to meet his burden in mitigating financial
considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied.
 See SOR, dated Apr. 18, 2010.      1
 FORM, Item 8 (Credit bureau report, dated Jun. 11, 2009), at 6. These student loans are represented in      2
the SOR at allegations ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, for approximate balances of $19,472 and $5,371, respectively.
 FORM, Item 5 (Security clearance application, dated May 27, 2009), at 51 (Additional Comments and      3
Certification section).
 See FORM, Item 4 (Answer to the SOR, dated May 7, 2010, at 3.      4
 Id.      5
 See SOR allegation ¶ 1.a. As well, although not at issue in the SOR, Applicant is satisfying a delinquent      6
child support obligation through a writ of garnishment. FORM, brief at 5 of 8; Item 7 (Credit bureau report,
dated Dec. 4, 2009), at 2; Item 8, supra, note 2, at 4; and Item 6 (Applicant’s Response to Interrogatories,
dated Nov. 18, 2009), at 3.  
 Item 6, supra, note 6, at 3 of 10.      7
 See FORM, Item 4 (Answer to the SOR, dated May 7, 2010, at 3.      8
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old computer support specialist working for a defense
contractor. He has worked for the same employer since 2001. He completed high
school and received a diploma. Applicant is married and has six children.
Between 2004 and 2006, Applicant attended classes at two different institutions
of post-secondary education. While enrolled, he obtained two student loans. Those
loans amount to almost $25,000.  They have been delinquent since at least January1
2008.  When he completed his security clearance application in May 2009, Applicant2
noted that he was working on setting up payments on the loans.  A year later, he was3
still working on setting up those payments. On May 7, 2010, Applicant wrote in his
Answer to the SOR: “I have been talking to the [creditor] who is collecting for this debt.
We are setting up a payment Schedule [sic] with them, we sent the first payment
today.”  No copy of the payment schedule or evidence of payment accompanied the4
Answer to the SOR. In his Answer, Applicant also noted: “When we get in the Loan
Rehab Program, we will be on for 9 to 12 months at first to establish a good payment
practice. Then we can, according to the collection company, drop the penalties and the
loans Would [sic] be taken out of default.”  Applicant attached no correspondence from5
the collection entity to corroborate this representation of the loans’ current status or the
proposed remedial action. No documentation regarding these debts was submitted in
response to the FORM.
Also at issue is a delinquent medical debt for $134, as cited in the SOR.6
Applicant thinks that the debt is related to a nasal reconstruction surgery he underwent
to address migraines.  Regarding that debt, Applicant wrote: “I Deny [sic] that I am7
indebted to [this creditor]. I called and verified with [this entity] that we Paid [sic] this
debt in Dec 2009, Account# [XXXXXXX] was paid in full.”  He provided no8
 Id.      9
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      10
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      11
3
documentation showing that this debt has been paid, his current balance is now zero, or
that he has disputed its continued entry in his credit report. 
Scant additional information was submitted in response to the SOR and FORM.
There is no evidence whether Applicant has received financial counseling. The reasons
for these three debts becoming delinquent are not fully explained. No significant factors
are noted with regard to adverse financial issues occurring in Applicant’s life in the past
few years. In denying that he lives beyond his means, Applicant only noted: “We do not
gamble or spend money on like things. We pay our bills and have spent the last couple
of years paying off old bills.”  9
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a10
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  11
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
 Id.      12
 Id.      13
 AG ¶ 18.      14
4
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified
information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access12
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.13
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) is pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to this AG that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would
mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Under Guideline F, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.”  The guideline sets out several potentially disqualifying conditions. Here,14
Applicant admitted that he has been delinquent on two student loans. While he wrote
that a delinquent medical bill was previously paid, he provided no evidence of payment
or that the balance is now either at zero or reduced. Applicant acknowledged that he
has “spent the last couple of years paying off old bills.” Such facts are sufficient to raise
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 9(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations). With such conditions raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to overcome the
case against him and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant stated that he was working on setting up payments on his student
loans in his May 2009 security clearance application. One year later, he wrote in his
May 2010 Answer to the SOR that “We are setting up a payment Schedule [sic] with
them, we sent the first payment today.” No explanation was provided why a one year
5
delay was necessary to set up a repayment plan, nor was an explanation provided for
what financial issues Applicant had that may have affected his ability to keep the loan
payments current from the beginning.  Moreover, without some evidence providing
insight into his current financial situation, there is no indication whether further
interruptions or delays might occur in the near future. Even assuming the comparatively
minor medical debt was satisfied in December 2009, such facts fail to give rise to
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment). 
The record is devoid of incidents in the past few years that might have impeded
Applicant ability to meet his obligations in a timely and consistent manner. It is also
devoid of facts indicating how he addressed any other “old bills.” Therefore, FC MC AG
¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances) does not apply. Moreover, the record contains no evidence or
indication that Applicant has received financial counseling, nor is there documentary
evidence that any payments have been made on these accounts, obviating application
of FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control).
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant wrote that he has addressed the three
debts at issue. While his veracity is not questioned, the one year delay in starting a
repayment plan on the student loans is worrisome. There is no indication why it took a
year to start a payment plan on the student loans. Moreover, without evidence of his
current ability to make whatever payment arrangements have been discussed, it is
unclear whether the student loan payment schedule is one to which he can adhere
consistently. Furthermore, in failing to provide documentation showing the actual
agreement and evidence of the first payment, Applicant failed to corroborate his
statements. Additionally, there is no documentary evidence showing the minor medical
debt was paid. Lacking such documentary evidence, FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does
not apply.
Applicant provided insufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised.
There is no documentary evidence showing the medical account was addressed. There
is no documentary evidence corroborating his statements regarding the year-long
attempt to get his defaulted student loans into repayment. Based on the record, I find
that financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
6
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a mature man. He is married. He has several children. He has a
career in the field of information technology. He endeavored to pursue post-secondary
education at a mature age. He has some delinquent debt, as evidenced by his
statement that he has spent the past couple of years paying off old bills. Little more is
known of his finances or his life. 
As noted, the burden in these proceedings is placed squarely on the Applicant.
Here, Applicant failed to provide sufficient documentation reflecting his efforts to
address the three debts at issue. Lacking such evidence, financial considerations
security concerns remain unmitigated. The “clearly consistent standard” indicates that
security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. In light
of the evidence presented, clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-1.c Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
