                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-06553 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 27, 2007, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On March 30, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 1, 2010. Applicant requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On July 1, 2010, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
2
on that date. He received the FORM on July 6, 2010. He was given the opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
filed a Response to the FORM on July 28, 2010, within the 30-day time allowed that 
would have expired on August 5, 2010. Department Counsel had no objection to the 
Response. I received the case assignment on August 31, 2010. Based upon a review of 
the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. He denied his financial 
delinquencies met the standards set forth in Guideline F. He submitted 76 pages of 
attachments to his Answer. His FORM Response consisted of another 28 pages.  
 
Applicant is 46 years old, married, and operates a business delivering appliances 
for a department store. His income in 2008 was $173,000 and his wife earned $45,000 
working as an accountant in the state government. (Items 4-6) 
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent debts and a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing in May 
2009. This bankruptcy petition was dismissed in December 2009 on the grounds 
Applicant abused the bankruptcy law by underreporting his income and overstating the 
effect his May 2008 ATV accident had on his ability to operate his business. There was 
a discrepancy about how much time Applicant was not able to work at his business as 
he recovered from his injuries. The discrepancy was whether that time was four to six 
weeks, or four to six months (as Applicant claimed).  The bankruptcy court granted the 
motion to dismiss and allowed Applicant to file a Chapter 13 petition by December 18, 
2009. Applicant did not file another bankruptcy petition. (Items 4, 6, 10-14, FORM 
Response) 
 
 The first debt alleged in the SOR is owed to his first mortgage holder in the 
amount of $14,034. This amount was owed as of May 2009. The mortgage was signed 
in February 2007. The total amount owed on the first and second mortgages was 
$431,000. Applicant submitted documents showing this creditor approved a short sale 
procedure in July 2010 if the sale price was $113,000 and it was paid $99,582.63. The 
debt had to be paid by August 27, 2010. The second mortgage holder would accept 
$8,327 on its property lien no later than August 27, 2010. In February 2010 an offer on 
the house was made to purchase it for $105,000. The result of that proposed 
transaction is not shown by any document submitted by Applicant. Applicant’s personal 
financial statement made in December 2009 states no mortgage payment or rent is 
being paid. On that statement Applicant’s family income is shown as $4,975.65, his 
monthly expenses as $3,560, and his net remainder as $1,415.65. This debt is 
unresolved. (Items 4, 6-9, FORM Response) 
 
 The second debt alleged in the SOR is owed to a credit union in the amount of 
$17,393. This money is the balance owed on a debt consolidation loan taken out in 
 
 
 
 
 
3
February 2008 in an original amount of $20,055. The last payment was April 2009. This 
debt is unresolved. (Items 6-9) 
 
 Applicant’s response to the interrogatories shows his delinquent debt is 
$107,800. This amount includes 11 credit card debts. These debts include $2,100 owed 
on a vacuum cleaner purchase and two credit cards with more than $25,000 on each 
account. (Item 6) 
 
 Applicant admitted he owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) $12,195.87 on 
his 2008 personal income tax account. He under paid his taxes by $11,000. He entered 
an agreement to pay $500 per month and made one payment. Applicant did not submit 
any documents showing he made more than one payment. (Item 6 at 6 to 25 of 131) 
 
 Applicant submitted a letter from a collection agency dated May 10, 2010, in his 
FORM Response. Two accounts they have could be settled for $14,976 if Applicant 
paid $416 a month from May 2010 to April 2013. Applicant did not submit any proof of 
payment of the monthly amounts. His cover letter in the FORM Response states “We 
are making a good faith attempt to resolve our debts with creditors. As they contact us 
we give them to our lawyer to negotiate a payment. We are using legal advice at all 
times showing we are in control of our debt at this time.” This letter is dated July 28, 
2010. Applicant did not submit any documentation from himself or his attorney that any 
delinquent debt is resolved or in the process of being resolved. The balance of 
Applicant’s FORM Response consists of the bankruptcy filings submitted previously in 
his Answer to the SOR. (Items 6-9, Answer, FORM Response)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
 
 
 
 
 
4
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2008 to the present, Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debts, 
totaling $31,724 as alleged in the SOR that remain unpaid or unresolved. These debts 
are only symptomatic of Applicant’s total liabilities. He owes $431,000 on his two 
mortgages on his home, $107,800 on credit card and debt consolidation loans, and 
$12,195.87 to the IRS for his 2008 federal income taxes. Applicant has a financial 
inability to pay his excessive debts and a history of not meeting his financial obligations 
for the past two years, at least. His attempt to rid himself of his delinquent debts in a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing was stopped by the bankruptcy trustee’s motion to dismiss 
for abuse of the bankruptcy law. The bankruptcy court granted the motion and gave 
Applicant until December 18, 2009, to file a Chapter 13 petition. He did not file that 
petition. He has not paid his mortgages for at least 11 months. The two disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties:   
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
No mitigating condition applies. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the 
delinquent debts are still owed and are recent. The situation is recurring. Applicant is 
not paying his debts. The magnitude of the debt and their duration cast serious doubt on 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Applicant’s good judgment, current reliability, and trustworthiness. The bankruptcy 
court’s granting of the motion to dismiss based on abuse of the law gives further serious 
doubt to Applicant’s good judgment and trustworthiness.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply because Applicant has not shown his ATV injuries 
were beyond his control and adversely affected his ability to repay his numerous and 
large debts. There is no evidence Applicant acted responsibly in 2008 and 2009. 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there is no evidence that Applicant received 
counseling for his financial problem, or that his situation is under control or being 
resolved. He does not appear to be paying any debts and hides behind his attorney. His 
FORM Response statement that he refers creditors to his attorney to negotiate a 
payment plan is not supported by any evidence that any plan for any debt exists and is 
being paid monthly. Applicant did not need an attorney to tell him not to pay his debts; 
he took that action on his own initiative in 2009 before he hired an attorney.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because there is no good-faith effort to resolve 
Applicant’s debts. He is not paying any of them, based on the evidence he submitted.  
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not supported by any evidence. Applicant did not show any 
reasonable basis to dispute any debt.  
 
AG ¶ 20(f) is not an issue because no affluence was shown from any source of 
income. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past two years. His Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition was dismissed in 
December 2009 because the court found he had abused the law by providing faulty 
information to the court. It is clear Applicant spent a large amount of money on credit 
cards over the past two years with no realistic possibility of repaying it. His actions are 
irresponsible. In addition, he has not paid his mortgages for at least 11 months while 
continuing to live in his house. He takes no action to resolve any debt, through 
bankruptcy, negotiation of an installment payment plan, or payment in full. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                           
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
