 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-05398 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on April 7, 2009 (Item 4). 
On July 20, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on July 23, 2010; answered it on August 3, 2010; 
and requested a determination on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on September 9, 2010. On the same day, a 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was 
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the government’s evidence. He received the FORM on September 13, 2010, 
and timely submitted additional material, which was incorporated in the record without 
objection from Department Counsel. The case was assigned to me on October 19, 
2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old technical support coordinator employed by a defense 
contractor since September 2004. He has held a security clearance since November 
2004. (Item 4 at 23.) 
 
 Applicant married in August 1988. He and his spouse separated in 2003 and 
divorced in April 2007. They had one child, who was born in December 1992. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in April 2009, he 
answered “No” to question 27d, asking if, in the last seven years, he had any judgments 
against him that were unpaid. (Item 4 at 24.) He did not disclose that his credit union 
obtained a judgment against him for $9,824 in April 2008, which is not yet fully satisfied. 
The credit union judgment is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and Applicant’s failure to disclose it 
is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
Applicant also answered “No” to question 28a, asking if, in the last seven years, 
he had ever been more than 180 days delinquent on any debt. Finally, he answered 
“No” to question 28b, asking if he was currently more than 90 days delinquent on any 
debts. (Item 4 at 25.) He did not disclose three debts reflected on his credit reports: a 
delinquent credit card debt for about $6,301; a second credit card debt for $126, and a 
debt to a credit union (the same credit union that obtained the $9,824 judgment). The 
three delinquent debts are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. Applicant’s failure to 
disclose them is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b. The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the 
SOR is summarized below. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (unpaid judgment for $9,824). Applicant admitted this debt. His 
credit union obtained a judgment against him in February 2008 for a delinquent loan. 
(Item 5.) Initially, his pay was garnished to satisfy the judgment. The collection 
attorney’s ledger reflects that a wage attachment and notice of lien were filed in 
September 2008. Applicant began making payments of $500 per month in January 
2010, and he has made payments every month through September 2010. The unpaid 
balance is about $5,800. (Enclosure to Answer; Response to FORM.)  
 3
SOR ¶ 1.b (delinquent credit card account for $6,301). Applicant admitted this 
debt. In November 2009, he hired a debt settlement service to resolve this debt. 
(Enclosure to Answer.) However, he submitted no documentary evidence of payments 
to this creditor, before or after he hired the debt settlement service. The debt is unpaid. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (delinquent credit card account for $126). Applicant denied this 
debt in his answer to the SOR, asserting that it was paid. However, the documentation 
he provided in his answer pertains to a different debt. It reflects settlement of a previous 
judgment obtained by the same creditor in April 2006 and satisfied in April 2007. 
Applicant’s credit report dated September 8, 2010, reflects that the delinquent debt 
alleged in the SOR was charged off in May 2007. (Item 9 at 2.) He has not disputed the 
credit report entry. The debt is unresolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d (delinquent credit union account for $2,658). Applicant denied this 
debt in his answer to the SOR, asserting that he had only one loan from the credit 
union, which is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He provided no documentary evidence to support 
his denial. This debt is unresolved. 
 
When Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in May 2009, he 
stated that he fell behind on his debt payments while going through his divorce. (Item 6 
at 5.) His security clearance application reflects that he has been continuously 
employed since at least 1997. (Item 4.) His personal financial statement submitted in 
response to DOHA interrogatories reflects that he has net monthly income of $5,019, 
expenses of $3,319, debt payments of $1,306, and a remainder of about $393. (Item 6.) 
 
Applicant has resolved several delinquent debts not alleged in the SOR. A 
judgment for $3,310 was entered against him in April 2006 and satisfied in April 2007. 
(Item 5 at 2; Enclosure to Answer.) In his response to the FORM, he presented 
evidence that he was paying $200 per month to resolve a delinquent account with a 
furniture company. His most recent credit report reflects that a delinquent department 
store account was settled in November 2005. (Item 9 at 2.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
 4
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant’s financial history raises two disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 19(a) 
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting 
financial obligations”). Thus, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on financial considerations may be mitigated if “the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established, because Applicant has multiple debts that are not yet 
resolved and did not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s divorce was a 
condition beyond his control. He receives some mitigation credit because he has 
resolved several debts not alleged in the SOR, is making regular payments on the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, and has hired a debt resolution company to resolve the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
has hired a debt resolution company to assist him with one debt, but this mitigating 
condition is not established because he has not obtained the type of counseling 
contemplated by this mitigating condition, and there is no evidence of payments or other 
resolution of the debt being handled by the debt resolution company. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. See ADP Case No. 06-
18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve 
financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR Case No. 
07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There also is no requirement that an 
 6
applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. Id. Applicant receives some 
credit under this mitigating condition because he has resolved several debts not alleged 
in the SOR and is making regular payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. On the 
other hand, he has denied the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d and has not 
demonstrated any plan to resolve them, either by payment, compromise, or by filing a 
formal dispute with the credit bureaus. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established, because Applicant presented no documentary 
evidence that he has disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d, either by 
contacting the creditors or by utilizing the credit bureau dispute process. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire.” AG ¶ 16(a). When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this 
case, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does 
not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a 
whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 Applicant has denied falsifying his security clearance application. He appears to 
have believed that the credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was settled in April 2007, 
but he has offered no explanation for not disclosing the unsatisfied judgment alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a, or not disclosing that his loan from the credit union was delinquent. The 
evidence shows that his wages were garnished and he was sent a notice of lien about 
eight months before he submitted his application. I conclude AG ¶ 16(a) is raised. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted 
 7
with the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). This mitigating condition is not established because there is 
no evidence that Applicant tried to correct his omissions before being confronted with 
the evidence.  
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s 
falsifications all occurred at the same time, but they were not “minor” because they 
threatened the integrity of the security clearance process. They did not occur under 
unique circumstances making them unlikely to recur. I conclude that this mitigating 
condition is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). This mitigating condition is established for the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, because Applicant has taken positive steps to resolve this 
debt and reduce his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. It is not 
established for the unresolved debts or the falsification of his security clearance 
application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has worked for his current employer for six years 
and held a security clearance for most of that time. However, his lack of candor on his 
 8
most recent security clearance application raises grave doubts about his reliability and 
trustworthiness. My ability to evaluate his credibility and sincerity or to question him 
about his state of mind was limited because he requested a decision on the record 
without a hearing. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial history and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
