 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07205 
 SSN: )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 19, 2010, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on June 10, 2010. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and 
he received it on June 17, 2010. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit a 
reply. The case was assigned to me on August 11, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations stated in the 
SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He is married and has two children. Since June 2007, 
he has worked as a mechanical assembler for a defense contractor. He served on 
active duty in the Army as an enlisted member from October 2000 until January 2007, 
and in the Army National Guard from January 2007 until January 2008. He received an 
honorable discharge.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) using and 
purchasing cocaine between 2007 and May 2009, including while holding an interim 
security clearance as of April 14, 2009 (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c, and SOR ¶ 2.b); (2) 
losing a job because he failed to report to management that he damaged a company 
vehicle by driving it after consuming alcohol (See SOR ¶ 2.a).2 
  
 In explanation, Applicant attributes his cocaine use to experiencing stress and 
because he associated with the wrong type of people. From April 2007 to September 
2007, Applicant snorted cocaine approximately once or twice a month. He ingested 
about one gram each time he used cocaine. He bought the cocaine from a friend and 
they used it together. He stopped using cocaine from September 2007 until April or May 
2009, because his use upset his wife and it was costing too much money. In April or 
May, 2009, he was given an amount of cocaine from someone at a bar and he snorted 
it. He held an interim security clearance at the time of this use. According to Applicant, 
this was his last use of cocaine. One reason he stopped using it, after this last use, was 
because his wife threatened to leave him if he used it anymore. Applicant claims he will 
not use cocaine or any other illegal drug again. He has not sought drug treatment or 
counseling and has not been diagnosed with drug addiction or dependence.3 
 
 In October 2007, Applicant was fired from his job because he failed to report an 
accident he had while driving a company vehicle. Applicant consumed approximately 10 
                                                          
1 Items 1, 4. 
 
2 Items 4, 5. 
 
3 Id. 
 
 
3 
 
 
beers in a three to four hour period on the night of the accident. He became intoxicated 
and hit another parked vehicle with the company vehicle he was driving. He did not 
know he hit the vehicle at the time. Once his company found out about the incident, he 
was immediately fired.4  
 
 Applicant states that he has changed his life for the better. The recent birth of 
daughter has changed his priorities. He now realizes the important things in his life are 
his family and his work.5 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
4 Id. 
 
5 Item 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.   
 
 Appellant used cocaine on a number of occasions including while holding a 
security clearance. He also admitted to buying cocaine. I find that all the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
 
5 
 
 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant claims that he has not used any drugs since April or May 2009. 
That period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent not to 
use in the future. This is particularly so since his history shows he used cocaine 
after a prior period on abstinence. Additionally, his use is recent and he has not 
convinced me that his use will not recur. Neither AG ¶ 26(a) nor (b) applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; and 
 
6 
 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
Applicant’s misuse of a company truck by driving while intoxicated and damaging 
a vehicle shows a lack of judgment. AG ¶ 16(d)(4) applies. Additionally, his use of 
cocaine while holding a security clearance created a vulnerability that called into 
question his suitability to protect classified information. AG ¶16(e) applies. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Applicant’s actions in repeatedly using cocaine and engaging in behavior 
detrimental to his former employer’s interests, cast doubt on his overall reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s 
service in the Army and Army National Guard and the concern he expressed for his 
family. However, I also considered that he used cocaine on multiple occasions, most 
recently while holding a security clearance, and that he abused an employer’s trust by 
driving a company vehicle after consuming alcohol and damaging the vehicle. Applicant 
failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
