The Government submitted nine items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-08533
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Remand Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A. Administrative Judge:
On March 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
On March 22, 2010 in a notarized response, Applicant requested an
administrative determination. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material
(FORM), dated April 15, 2010.  Applicant received the FORM on April 21, 2010. On1
2
April 23, 2010, Applicant submitted a Response to the FORM. On July 16, 2010, the
Director, DOHA, forwarded the case for assignment to an administrative judge. The
case was assigned to me on the same day. 
I issued a decision on July 30, 2010. I found that Applicant did not mitigate the
security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. I concluded that it was
not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to
classified information.
On August 4, 2010, Applicant appealed my decision through counsel. Applicant’s
counsel filed an Appeal brief on September 3, 2010. Department Counsel did not file a
Reply brief. On October 6, 2010, the Appeal Board remanded the case for further
processing based on a review of mitigating factors under the financial considerations
guideline. I received the case file of relevant material (FORM) on October 21, 2010, and
after further review, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She graduated from
college in May 2002. She is divorced, and has two children from her marriage.
Applicant held a security clearance from 1991 through 1998 while employed with the Air
Force. (Item 1) She has worked for her current employer since October 2009. (Item 5)
Applicant explained that her financial problems began in May 2008 when her
husband suffered a “mental breakdown.” He abandoned the family and he quit his job.
Applicant was not working at the time. She relocated to her family home in another
state and sought full-time employment. She was unemployed for approximately ten
months. (Item 1)
The Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleged 11 delinquent debts for unpaid credit
card accounts totaling $41,871. In addition, Applicant reported a defaulted home
mortgage loan that was past-due in the amount of $162,000. (Item 1) Applicant
admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a through k. Applicant denied having “poor self-
control.” 
In 2008, her husband abandoned her and her two children. He was later
institutionalized for mental-health issues. (Item 4) She finally obtained a divorce on
January 26, 2010. She incurred additional expenses to pay for the divorce. She is now
in the process of filing bankruptcy. Her financial problems are directly related to her ex-
husband. (Item 5) Applicant receives sporadic, limited financial support from her former
spouse. She claims that bankruptcy is her only option because she has been
unsuccessful in selling her home. (Item 4) Applicant hopes that a short sale will occur
soon. She fully intends to pay her delinquent debts.
Applicant submitted documentation in response to the FORM to include her July
23, 2010, Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition filed by her attorney. In addition, she completed
the required financial counseling on April 7, 2010. On May 25, 2010, she completed a
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
3
personal financial management course via the internet. She paid the filing fees and the
attorney fee. Applicant stressed that now that she is divorced, she will be liable only for
her bills, which she is able to pay.
The household’s income, which included her husband’s income was more than
$200,000. As a result of the marital settlement agreement and divorce, Applicant
expects to receive child support in the amount of $1,500 a month. She was candid in
relating that she is not sure if she will in fact receive the child support from her ex-
husband. (Item 7) Applicant’s current net monthly income is $3,394. After expenses,
she has a negative net remainder of approximately $200. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The U. S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
The Appeal Board remanded this case for reconsideration of my application of
the Guideline F mitigating conditions. The Board concluded that I erred when I did not
apply AG MC ¶ 20(a). It further concluded that I erred when I partially applied AG MC ¶
20(b). The Board further explained that the “facts cited by the Judge do not render the
mitigating condition inapplicable given other evidence in the record.”
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules
and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.” It also states that “an individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in
illegal acts to generate funds. 
Applicant has approximately $41,000 in delinquent credit card debt. In addition,
she has defaulted on a home loan and is past-due in the amount of $162,000. She filed
a petition for bankruptcy in June 2010. However, Applicant’s financial troubles were the
5
result of her husband’s abandonment, her unemployment and eventual divorce. She is
divorced and gainfully employed. It is unlikely that the circumstances which created the
financial problems will recur and does not cast doubt on her current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Consequently Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FCMC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies. Applicant’s husband’s breakdown
and hospitalization were beyond her control. As noted, Applicant’s sudden separation
and divorce impacted her family finances. She received limited financial support from
her husband. She supported her children. Applicant was unemployed for ten months.
She did not pay any of her delinquent debts due to her lack of income. She attempted
to sell her home but was unsuccessful. She filed for bankruptcy in July 2010, and the
debts have not been discharged. She acted responsibly before filing for the
bankruptcy. However the bankruptcy was not discharged at the close of the record.
While a discharge in bankruptcy is intended to provide a person with a fresh start
financially, it does not immunize an applicant’s history of financial problems from being
considered for its security significance. See, e.g., DISCR Case No. 87-1800 (February
14, 1989) at p. 3 n.2 (“Although bankruptcy may be a legal and legitimate way for an
applicant to handle his financial problems, the Examiner must consider the possible
security implications of the history of financial debts and problems that led to the filing
of the bankruptcy.”) In this unique and severe set of circumstances, Applicant’s decision
to file bankruptcy was reasonable.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. After trying to sell her home, Applicant
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 2010. This is a legal means of resolving debts.
Applicant believes that her debts will be split due to her recent marital settlement and
divorce decree. However, she does not believe that her husband will comply with the
court-ordered child support. Applicant has been steadily employed since October 2009.
Now that she is divorced and has filed for bankruptcy, she believes her debts will be
resolved in the near future. Applicant received the required financial counseling as part
of her bankruptcy petition. She took reasonable actions when she found herself in this
grave situation. Despite the fact that she now has a negative $200 monthly remainder,
Applicant, is gainfully employed. There is no indication that similar financial problems
will recur. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control) partially applies.
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is an educated, recently divorced mother of two children. She held a security
clearance for a period of time when she worked for the Air Force. She suffered financial
difficulty when her husband abandoned the family in 2008. Applicant has not been able
to sell her home, and she filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in June 2010. She has been
steadily employed since October 2009. Applicant’s case is very sympathetic and she
acted as responsibly as she could given the challenging circumstance. She requested
an administrative decision in this case and did not expand the record as she might have
had she requested a hearing. Based on the unique facts in this case, I find that
Applicant has met her burden. She has mitigated the security concerns under the
Financial Considerations Guideline. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
