                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05241 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant and her spouse acquired debts totaling over $820,000. She presented 
limited documentary evidence to establish financial responsibility in the acquisition of 
the debts, good-faith efforts in the resolution of the debts, or a current track record of 
financial responsibility. There are no clear indications that her financial problem are 
being resolved or are under control. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 16, 2009. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 
 
 
                                           
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
On April 9, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) which 
specified the basis for its decision - security concerns raised under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 22, 2010. She elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 4) A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated June 8, 2010, was provided to her by transmittal letter 
dated June 9, 2010. Applicant received her copy of the FORM on June 14, 2010. 
Applicant was given 30 days from the date she received the FORM to submit any 
objections, and information in mitigation or extenuation. She did not respond, and the 
case was assigned to me on August 11, 2010, to determine whether a clearance should 
be granted or denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the four SOR allegations. Her admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old administrative assistant employed by a defense 
contractor since January 2009. She finished high school, and graduated from a 
business trade school in June 1991. She married her spouse in June 1993, and they 
have two children, ages 17 and 13. 
 
According to her April 2009 security clearance application, she worked for her 
current employer from January 1996 until June 2003, when she became a stay-at-home 
mom. Her employer placed her on a “casual status” from June 2003 until December 
2005, when she was terminated due to her inability to work sufficient hours. She was 
unemployed from December 2005 until December 2008. Applicant went on vacation to 
Jamaica for three days in February 2002; The Bahamas for three days in February 
2005; and a seven day Caribbean cruise in March of 2005. Applicant stated she was 
granted access to classified information at the secret level in 2002. There is no 
evidence she has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified 
information. 
 
In her security clearance application, Applicant disclosed that in the last seven 
years she had been over 180 days delinquent on some debts and that she was 
currently 90 days delinquent on other debts. She stated the amount of debt involved 
near $76,500. She listed the following delinquent debts under her name as pending 
resolution under her debt relief program: AT&T ($21,715); Bank of America ($11,523); 
and Capital One ($2,842). She listed the following debts under her husband’s name: 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
Discover ($8,060);3 Bank of America ($12,778); Chase ($11,440); and American 
Express ($8,067). 
 
Applicant also disclosed a defaulted home equity loan with a bank for $80,000 
(SOR ¶ 1.d, opened in November 2005), which was “pending settlement;” and a primary 
mortgage loan that was delinquent over 180 days for $704,035 (SOR ¶ 1.c, opened in 
October 2005), which was under review for a loan modification. 
 
In May 2009, Applicant was questioned by a background investigator about her 
delinquent loans and her overall financial situation. During the interview, she stated that 
in October 2006, her husband lost her job. She claimed that prior to October 2006, he 
was earning between $180,000 and $250,000 per year. 
 
After October 2006, Applicant and her husband used his 401(k) retirement 
savings and their credit cards to pay for their day-to-day living expenses, mortgage, and 
other debts. In February 2007, her husband started his own business, which improved 
with time, but the earnings from his business were not sufficient to pay their expenses 
and outstanding delinquent debt. In December 2008, her husband contracted with a 
debt relief company to help them negotiate with the credit card companies and settle 
their delinquent accounts. She estimated the total credit card debt for the accounts 
enrolled in the debt relief program was $76,520. She claimed they have been making 
monthly payments of $1,372 to the debt relief program since December 2008.  
 
Applicant also stated that in 2008, they contacted an attorney (a friend of the 
family) to help them renegotiate the terms of their mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.c) and their home 
equity loan (SOR ¶ 1.d). In January 2009, Applicant started her part-time job with her 
current employer, earning nearly $1,700 per month. She claimed her spouse’s business 
continues to grow and he is now bringing home nearly $5,000 per month. She failed to 
submit any documentary evidence to support most of her claims. 
 
During her background interview, Applicant averred she and her spouse were in 
the process of reestablishing themselves financially, that they were current on all their 
financial obligations, and that they were making timely payments on their debts, except 
for their mortgage and home equity loan. Applicant’s September 2009 personal financial 
statement indicated she had a household net income of $6,554; with monthly expenses 
of $2,515; and the monthly payment of two debts for $2,010 (debt relief program for 
$1,372, and car payment of $638 (on a total debt of $24,000)). She claimed a net 
monthly remainder of $2,029. Applicant also indicated that the total value of the 
mortgage in foreclosure was $704,000, and that the home equity loan totaled $80,000. 
 
In her September 2009 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant included a 
chart indicating her debts under the debt relief program, the debts’ current balance, and 
their status. The chart included the following debts: Discover ($10,682) (SOR ¶ 1.b, 
opened in March 2003), according to Applicant in settlement negotiations; Amex-gold 
 
3 Applicant’s credit report indicates she was an authorized user on this account. 
 
4 
 
 
($8,522), in settlement negotiations; GC Services Capital One ($3,627), settled for 
$1,451; AT&T ($24,847) in settlement negotiations; Bank of America ($14,620) in 
settlement negotiations; Bank of America ($13,636) settled for $2,200; and Chase 
($11,440) in settlement negotiations. She also submitted a chart of her alleged monthly 
payments of $1,372 to her debt relief program, indicating payments made from 
December 2008 until August 2009. Her evidence is inconclusive as to whether the 
payments were actually made to a debt relief program and the extent of actual 
payments made to her creditors. 
 
Applicant failed to address her mortgage foreclosure of $704,000 and her 
delinquent home equity loan for $80,000. In her response to the interrogatories, 
Applicant failed to include documentary evidence of recent statements or vouchers from 
creditors indicating that her accounts were being resolved or the manner of the 
resolution. She included documentary evidence that one of her properties was pending 
sale after its foreclosure. Both accounts are unresolved.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
 
5 
 
 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleges, and Applicant admitted, she and her spouse acquired four 
debts totaling nearly $823,000 that are currently delinquent. One of the debts concerns 
a mortgage for $704,000 that was foreclosed. Another debt concerns an $80,000 
delinquent home equity loan, and the last two SOR debts allege delinquent credit cards. 
Additionally, the record shows Applicant is individually or jointly liable for her delinquent 
accounts with AT&T ($24,847) and Bank of America ($14,620). AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
6 
 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence fails to fully raise the applicability of any 
mitigating condition. Her financial problems are ongoing and her evidence fails to show 
they occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant presented some evidence to establish circumstances beyond her 
control contributing to her inability to pay her debts, e.g., her husband’s period of 
unemployment and underemployment, her period of unemployment, and the slow start 
of her husband’s business. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s documentary evidence is not 
sufficient to corroborate many of her claims (i.e., her husband’s income before he was 
let go) and show that she and her spouse acted responsibly in the acquisition of their 
debts, that they made good-faith efforts to resolve their debts,4 and that they have a 
track record of financial responsibility. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d) do not apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there are no clear indications that her 
financial problem is being resolved or is under control. She presented some evidence 
that she received some financial counseling through her debt relief program; however, 
the sparse evidence fails to indicate the extent of her financial counseling. Considering 
                                            
4 I give Applicant partial credit because in December 2008, she and her husband contracted with a debt 
relief company to help them negotiate with the credit card companies and settle the delinquent accounts. 
 
7 
 
 
the number of delinquent debts, the date the debts were acquired, the aggregate value 
of the debts, and the limited documentary evidence of efforts to resolve her legal 
financial obligations, Applicant’s information is insufficient to establish that her financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. The remaining mitigating conditions are not reasonably 
raised by the facts in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated in my whole-
person analysis my comments on the analysis of Guideline F. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for her 
work history for a government contractor. She is considered to be a valuable employee 
since she was rehired by her current employer. In December 2008, she and her spouse 
contracted with the services of a debt resolution company to help them resolve some of 
their debts. These factors show some responsibility.  
 
Notwithstanding, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current financial 
responsibility, reliability, and judgment. Applicant’s sparse documentary evidence failed 
to show financial responsibility in the acquisition of the debts, good-faith efforts to 
resolve her financial problems in a timely manner, or a current track record of financial 
responsibility. The sparse mitigating record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial considerations.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
