 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07292 
 SSN: )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 7, 2010, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on July 14, 2010. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and he 
received it on July 22, 2010. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not provide 
additional information. The case was assigned to me on September 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted ¶ 1.a, but denied ¶ 2.a. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He is married and has two adult children. He has 
worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, for 23 years. He is a customer 
service engineer. This is the first time he has sought a security clearance. He served in 
the Marine Corps for six years and was honorably discharged. Applicant received a 
discharge from his debts in 2003 after completing a Chapter 13 Bankruptcy repayment 
plan.1   
  
 The one debt listed in the SOR is supported by three credit reports dated April 
28, 2009, April 8, 2010, and July 13, 2010. The debt alleged in the SOR is 
approximately $58,826 and results from a charged-off home equity line-of-credit loan. 
The debt was reported 120-days late in November 2008 and charged off in December 
2008. Applicant explained that his wife was laid off from her job in 2008 and 
consequently they were unable to meet their obligations, including the monthly 
payments on their home equity loan (SOR ¶ 1.a). Since then, Applicant’s wife obtained 
a job and they applied for and received a loan modification on their home mortgage (not 
SOR ¶ 1.a).2 
  
 Applicant’s current income and expense statement shows net monthly income of 
about $8,100, net expenses of $5,700, and a remainder of $2,400. He also claims that 
in June 2010, he began $300 monthly payments on the home equity debt; however, he 
did not provide supporting documentation of payments. There is no other evidence in 
the record showing a payment arrangement for that debt. There is also no evidence that 
Applicant received any financial counseling.3  
 
 The personal conduct concern arises because of answers Applicant provided to 
financial questions on his security clearance application. The allegation states that he 
falsified answers to his security clearance application (e-QIP) on April 23, 2009, by 
                                                          
1 Item 4, 6. 
 
2 Items 2, 7-9. 
 
3 Items 2, 5-6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
answering “no” to the questions concerning whether he had ever been 180 days 
delinquent on any debt and whether he was currently 90 days delinquent on any debt. 
Applicant gave conflicting reasons for his “no” answers. During his investigative 
interview, he stated he knew he was behind on the home equity loan but because his 
wife handles their finances, he did not think to list it on his application. In his answer to 
the SOR, however, he stated because the home equity debt was not current and had 
been charged off, he did not think he needed to list it on the application.4  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
4 Items 2, 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a $58,826 delinquent debt that remains unpaid or unresolved. I find 
both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence that he paid or resolved his delinquent debt. 
Therefore, his behavior is recent and the delinquent debt remains a concern. I find 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s debt remains 
unresolved. Applicant provided some information that his wife experienced periods of 
unemployment. However, I am unable to determine that his financial problems were 
beyond his control, since there was no evidence offered to show responsible action 
under the circumstances. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant failed to present 
evidence of financial counseling and there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial 
problems are being resolved or under control. There was no documented evidence that 
he has made a good-faith effort to pay his delinquent home equity loan or has 
attempted to resolve it. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire. 
Applicant’s rationale for not reporting the charged-off home equity loan is 
inconsistent and unpersuasive. He clearly was aware of the debt and the questions are 
unambiguous. I conclude from the evidence that Applicant deliberately provided false 
information concerning his home equity debt. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.   
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 
6 
 
 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 The record is absent any evidence that Applicant made any efforts to correct his 
false answers prior to being interviewed by an investigator. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
Falsification of material information on a security clearance application calls into 
question Applicant’s trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that the Applicant’s wife 
experienced periods of unemployment which led to the default on the home equity loan. 
I also considered Applicant’s veteran status. However, Applicant did not supply 
documented proof of a payment arrangement for the home equity debt. He has not 
shown a track record of financial stability considering that he received a discharge in 
bankruptcy in 2003. Additionally, he also engaged in deliberate falsification on his 
security clearance questionnaire. Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
7 
 
 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
