                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-----------------------------  )       ISCR Case No. 09-07126
SSN: --------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
October 13, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D.,  Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on May 26, 2009.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On April 28, 2010, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
the security concerns under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued
after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on May 21, 2010, and he requested a
hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to another
Administrative Judge on June 30, 2010.  The matter was transferred to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on July 12, 2010.  A notice of hearing was issued on July 13,
2010, and the hearing was scheduled for August 26, 2010.  At that hearing the
2
Government presented two exhibits referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which
were admitted into evidence without objection.  The Applicant presented five exhibits,
referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through E, which were admitted without objection.
The Applicant also testified on his own behalf.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received
on September 9, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 34 years old and has a Master’s Degree in Mechanical
Engineering.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Test Engineer and is
applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant admitted that he used marijuana, at varying frequencies, namely
about once or twice a month from about May 2002 to at least July 2009.  He states that
he used it a total of fifty times.  (Tr. p. 47.)  He denies that he may use it in the future.
(See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  He also testified that he used marijuana earlier than
2002, during his undergraduate education from 1994 to 1998, but not on a regular
basis.  He never used it alone, but was in social settings with roommates or friends.
During the periods he used it, he knew it was against the law.  
The Applicant began working for his current employer in November 2006.
Shortly after starting his employment there, (by late 2006, early 2007), it became clear
to him that as a Test Engineer he would begin the process of applying for a security
clearance.  (Tr. pp. 38-39.)  Even so, he continued to use marijuana.
In May 2009, he completed a security clearance application and admitted his
marijuana use.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  He subsequently underwent an interview  by a
DoD investigator in July 2009, wherein he stated that he may use marijuana in the
future because at that time, he could not say for certain that he would not.  (Government
Exhibit 2 and Tr. p. 65.)  The Applicant testified that since then, he has come to realize
how important it is not to use marijuana while holding a security clearance.  (Tr. p. 66.)
He now states that he has no intent of using it in the future.  (Tr. p. 51.)  He understands
that to use marijuana is against DoD policy and his company policy.  Although he
continues to maintain contact with friends who use marijuana, and attends social events
once a month where marijuana may be used by others, he does not use it.  As the
Applicant explained, he lives near the beach where marijuana is hard to avoid.  At times
he can smell it on the streets.  (Tr. p. 73.)  For the past year, he has lived with his
girlfriend who does not use marijuana.  (Tr. p. 44.)        
The Applicant prepared and submitted a letter of intent dated August 26, 2010,
that indicates that he does not intend to use marijuana in the future.  He understands
3
that any further use of marijuana will be grounds for his security clearance to be
immediately and permanently revoked.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
An e-mailed note of appreciation dated March 3, 2010, remarks that Applicant
was involved in a difficult task that was well done.   A letter dated March 24, 2010,
reflects that the Applicant’s work product significantly contributed to the successful
outcome of the project.  He is said to be technically sound with a willingness to get the
job done under tight deadlines.  He is considered a valuable asset to the organization.
(Applicant’s Exhibit B.) 
Applicant’s Client Satisfaction Survey indicates nearly perfect ratings and very
favorable comments from the customer.  The Applicant was complimented by his
superiors for his outstanding job performance on a challenging and demanding job
assignment for a critically important customer.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)
Applicant testified that his performance appraisal ratings have been outstanding
so far.  (Tr. p. 42.)  The United States Patent and Trademark Office data base reflects
four patents registered in the Applicant’s name.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.)  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24. The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25. (a) any drug abuse;
25. (c) Illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26. (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
4
4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for
any violation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”             
                     
5
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in Drug Involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline H of the SOR.  I have considered all of the
evidence presented in this case, including the e-mail notes of commendation, the client
satisfaction survey, the patents, and the letter of intent signed by the Applicant.  The
Applicant has not used marijuana or any illegal drug since July 2009, a one year period,
and he has no intentions of ever using any illegal drug again.  He now has a better
understanding of the seriousness of the matter.  He realizes that he used bad judgment
during the period he used marijuana and is now committed to a drug-free lifestyle.  He
has significantly matured over the past year.  Applicant has signed a statement of intent
indicating that he will not use illegal drugs in the future, and if he does, his security
clearance will be immediately revoked.  This further demonstrates his commitment to a
drug-free lifestyle.
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions, 25.(a) any drug
abuse, and 25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, apply.
Mitigating Conditions 26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future,
such as: 26.(b).(3) an appropriate period of abstinence, and 26.(b).(4) a signed
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation applies.
Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is 34 years old, educated,
6
intelligent and successful.  He understands the responsibilities of an individual who has
the privilege of holding a security clearance.  He realizes the seriousness of illegal drug
use and how negatively it can effect his professional career.  He no longer uses illegal
drugs, and is looking forward to a successful career and a good life.  Under the
particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth above, when viewed
under all of the guidelines as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of good
judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, a willingness to comply with rules and
regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may properly
safeguard classified information.  
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and that he meets the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information at this time.  Accordingly, I
find for the Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1.                                                                                                                      
  
  FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
