 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-06319  
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline 
for Financial Considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is 
granted. 
  
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting a Questionnaire for 
Sensitive Positions (SF 86) on May 13, 2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
 
On March 2, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, dated March 24, 2010, Applicant denied 9 allegations 
and admitted 11 SOR allegations. She also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 22, 2010, 
and I received the case on May 3, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 21, 
2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 9, 2010. 
 
During the hearing, the Government offered 12 exhibits, which I admitted as 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 through 12, and one demonstrative exhibit, marked Hearing 
Exhibit I. Applicant testified, and did not present witnesses. She offered 19 exhibits, 
which I admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through S.3 I held the record open to 
allow her to submit additional documentation. She timely submitted one document, 
which I admitted as AE T. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 16, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the 
SOR, and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 50 years old, is a high school graduate. In 1992, Applicant married a 
citizen of another country. He was arrested for theft. While awaiting trial, he withdrew all 
the funds from their joint bank account and left the United States. They have not been in 
touch since that time. She has worked full-time as a special police officer for a defense 
contractor since 2004. In July 2009, she began a part-time job, working as a security 
officer on weekends for another defense contractor. She works a total of about 80 hours 
per week. (GE 1, 4; Tr. 55-59, 72-73) 
 
 Applicant has no children of her own. However, in the mid-1990s, a friend asked 
if Applicant could take in her seven-year-old son for a while because she was having 
financial problems. Applicant thought the arrangement was temporary. She did not 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness 
determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
3 At the hearing, Applicant informed Department Counsel that she had four character references in her 
vehicle that she would like to submit. Department Counsel informed me of the additional documents that 
day. She forwarded them to me without objection on September 21, 2010. I accepted the documents 
without re-opening the record; they are marked as AE P – S. 
 
 
3
legally adopt him; however, his parents granted her full legal custody. Once she realized 
his parents did not want to take him back, she sought financial assistance. They were 
required only to provide funds for medical treatment, but did not do so. She has raised 
him for the past 15 years without financial support from his parents. She applied for 
assistance form the state because he had been diagnosed as a child with depression 
and Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Her request was denied. Sometime 
after finishing high school, he was shot in the head. Last year, he was diagnosed with 
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. (Tr. 59-61, 79-80)  
 
 The boy’s behavioral problems forced Applicant to move from at least three 
apartments. Most recently, he damaged electrical wiring in their apartment in 2009, and 
also flooded it by playing with the water heater. The resulting flood caused 
approximately $5,000 in damages. The owner is a friend of Applicant, and allowed her 
to forego paying for the damage because she knew the young man, who is now 21 
years old, has psychological problems. However, Applicant believed she should pay for 
it. She has been paying $50 per month to the owner and is current on the payments. 
Recently, Applicant contacted the young man’s biological mother and asked that she 
take responsibility for him. He moved from Applicant's home about three months before 
the hearing, and is currently in a rehabilitation center. She no longer has financial 
responsibility for him. Applicant described the situation as “really, really difficult 
financially and emotionally.” (GE 6; Tr. 60, 69-72) 
 
Applicant filed a chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in 1998. At the time, she was 
unemployed because her employer lost its contract. She was unable to find a job for 
eight months. She was supporting the boy, and did not have income to keep up with 
their expenses. In 2005, Applicant was working two full-time jobs simultaneously. 
Relying on her two incomes, she made poor financial decisions, “spoiling” the child, and 
purchasing more than she should have. She did not plan for the possibility of losing a 
job. She filed for bankruptcy again when she lost the second job, and could not meet 
her debts. (GE 7, 8; Tr. 61-63) 
 
Applicant did not work two jobs again until July 2009. This time, she used the 
additional income to begin paying down her debts. In November 2009, she contacted a 
credit repair company. (Tr. 39) The law firm assists clients by verifying the accuracy of 
credit report entries, and disputing suspected errors. It has also helped by counseling 
her on how to organize and plan her debt payments. She has arranged payment plans 
with creditors based on advice from the company and from family members. Applicant 
pays the firm a monthly fee of $39. She also contacted a debt resolution company in 
early 2010 to assist her with paying her payday loans. However, she found that the 
company charged upfront fees that would not be applied to her debts. Applicant decided 
to work out a plan to resolve the payday loan debts herself. She has paid one, and is 
making payments on the other two. (Answer; Tr. 30-31, 53-55)  
 
Applicant completed a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) in December 2009 
which indicated a monthly net remainder of $222, after expenses and debt payments. At 
 
 
4
that time, Applicant was supporting the young man. However, he currently does not live 
with her and consequently, her expenses have decreased. She also works fewer hours 
per week at her full-time job, and more hours at her part-time job. She estimates her 
gross monthly income from her full-time job will be about $3,700, and from her part-time 
job about $1,700, for a total of $5,400 per month. After deductions, her net monthly 
income will be about $3,900. Her expenses have decreased from $2,800 to $2,000. 
After debt payments of approximately $950 per month, Applicant will have a net monthly 
remainder of approximately $1,000 per month. (GE 6; Tr. 64-69)  
 
The debts as listed in the SOR total $22,500. Applicant disputed the following 
nine debts with the assistance of the law firm: 1.a. - 1.d., 1.f. - 1.i., and 1.l. (AE G; Tr. 
54-55). The current status of each debt follows. 
 
Allegations 1.b. ($193); 1.n. ($6,043) - medical debts  
1.b. – Applicant provided proof of a $10 payment in May 2010. However, she 
denied this debt in her Answer because it was included in her bankruptcy. Her 2005 
bankruptcy filing shows the debt is included in Schedule F. The credit agency has 
deleted it from her credit bureau report. (GE 3, 6, 7: AE B, G; Tr. 18-22) 
 
1.n. – This medical debt results from treatment of injuries Applicant sustained in 
a car accident in 2005. She signed a payment plan in 2009 for monthly payments of 
$50. She provided proof of three $50 payments, and testified that she is now current on 
her plan for this debt. (GE 1, 5; AE M; Tr. 38-39, 48-51) 
 
Allegation 1.f. ($1,260) - utilities – Applicant provided proof of two $10 payments in 
April and May 2010. However, Applicant disputed this debt through the law firm. AE G 
shows that, upon investigation, the credit reporting agency deleted this account from her 
credit report. (GE 2, 6; AE A, F, G; Tr. 29-30) 
 
Allegations 1.c. ($451); 1.d. ($579) - credit cards 
1.c. – Applicant contacted the lender and was offered a new credit card with a 
balance reflecting the balance on the previous card. She does not use the new credit 
card, but makes $35 per month payments on the balance. She plans to destroy the card 
once she has paid the balance. She provided proof of the arrangement, and a payment 
of $35. (GE 2, 4, 6; AE C; Tr. 24-25) 
 
1.d. – Applicant accepted a settlement offer of $300 from the creditor, with 
monthly payments of $96. She provided proof of two payments of $10 and $96 (GE 2, 6; 
AE D; Tr. 25-27) 
 
Allegations 1.a. ($575); 1.e. ($420); 1.l. ($205) - payday loans -  
1.a. and 1.l. - The same creditor holds these two debts. Applicant provided proof 
of $10 payments on each debt in April and May 2010. (GE 3, 4, 6; AE A) 
 
 
 
5
                                                
1.e. – Applicant paid this debt. She received a settlement offer of $210 in 
January 2010. She provided proof that on March 4, 2010, the full amount was deducted 
from her bank account. (GE 3; AE E; Tr. 28-29) 
 
Allegation 1.k. ($2,857) - state tax lien – Applicant pays her state and federal taxes 
each year. However, in 2005, she had her federal and state tax returns prepared 
professionally. The preparer failed to submit her returns timely, and did not inform 
Applicant.4 (GE 4) She was unaware of the tax lien until 2007, when she applied for a 
car loan. Applicant established a payment plan of $142 per month. She provided 
documentation showing her payments in 2009 and 2010. She testified that she has 
reduced the balance to approximately $1,200. (GE 3, 4, 5, 6; AE K; Tr. 35-36, 45-49) 
 
Allegations 1.j. ($2,768); 1.o. ($735); 1.p. ($789); 1.q. ($902); 1.r. ($2,747) – rent  
 1.j. and 1.r – Applicant testified that these two allegations refer to a debt related 
to the same property. She moved out of an apartment in 2008 before the lease had 
expired and was charged a fee. She arranged a payment plan with the creditor in 2009 
for payments of $250 per month. Applicant provided documentation showing two $250 
payments in December 2009, one in February 2010, one in April 2010, and two in May 
2010. (GE 2, 12; AE J; Tr. 33-35, 44-45) 
 
 1.o. – Applicant provided a letter from the creditor stating that this debt was 
cancelled because it was included in her bankruptcy petition. The creditor requested 
that it be removed from Applicant's credit report, and it does not appear on her 
December 2009 credit report. (GE 9; AE N; Tr. 40) 
 
 1.p. and 1.q. – These allegations refer to the same debt. Government exhibits 2, 
3 and 7, show that the debt to this realty company was included in Applicant's 2005 
bankruptcy petition. Applicant hired a law firm in June 2010 to demand that the creditor 
cease sending her collection notices for this debt. She also submitted documentation 
from her law firm showing that it was removed from her credit report. (GE 2, 3, 4, 7, 10, 
11; AE O, T; Tr. 40-43, 51-53) 
 
Allegations 1.i. ($747); 1.m. ($700) – communications 
 1.i. – Applicant established a payment plan for this cell phone debt. She provided 
proof of two $10 payments in April and May 2010. In her interrogatory response, she 
noted that she was disputing this debt through the law firm. Applicant provided 
documentation showing that as of March 2010, the debt to this creditor, with the correct 
account number, had been deleted from her file based on the credit reporting agency’s 
investigation. (Answer; GE 6; AE A, I; Tr. 33) 
 
 1.m. – Applicant initiated a payment plan for this cell phone debt and provided 
evidence of payments in April and May 2010 totaling $50. (GE 3; AE A, L; Tr. 37) 
 
 
4 Applicant made payments of $108 per month to the Internal Revenue Service on the federal tax debt 
for 2005 and it is paid in full. (GE 6; Tr. 64-65) 
 
 
6
                                                
 
Allegations 1.g. ($573); 1.h. ($42) – other debts 
 1.g. - Applicant provided documentation showing that as of March 2010, the debt 
to this creditor, with the correct account number, had been deleted from her file 
following an investigation by the credit reporting agency. (GE 6; AE G; Tr. 31-32) 
 
 1.h. Applicant stated in her security interview that she did not recognize this debt 
to a book club. However, she provided proof at the hearing that in March 2010, she paid 
the debt in full. (GE 6; AE H; Tr. 32) 
 
 Applicant’s coworker of two years attested to her strong work ethic and honesty. 
Her current supervisor describes her as dependable, conscientious and sincere, and 
highly recommends her. Her pastor, who has known her for more than three decades, 
states that she is a person with strong values, integrity, and honor. Another friend, who 
has known Applicant for more than 20 years, believes that loyalty is Applicant's 
foremost trait. She cites Applicant's loyalty to the child who was not her own, but who 
she raised for more than 15 years. He had psychological problems, but did not leave 
Applicant's care until he was in his early 20’s. As she did not receive assistance, she 
suffered financial setbacks as a result. (AE P – S) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
 
5 Directive. 6.3. 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
7
                                                
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 Applicant earns a modest income, and until recently, had little money available 
at the end of the month to apply to her past debts. The following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶19 apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
There is no evidence of or debts related to alcoholism, gambling or deceptive 
practices.  
 
 The Financial Considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
security concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, especially 
the following:  
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and, 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
  
 Several factors affected Applicant’s finances. Her husband fled the country with 
all of her funds in the early 1990s. About two years later, she agreed to help a friend 
who was having financial problems by taking in her son temporarily. Later, Applicant 
discovered that her friend did not want to take the child back, and refused to contribute 
financially to his care. Since that time, Applicant has supported herself and the child 
without assistance. The boy had serious emotional problems. His behavior caused 
damage in at least three apartments, requiring her to leave them. In 2009, his actions 
caused flooding and other damage totaling $5,000. She could not predict or control her 
husband’s actions, her friend’s abandonment of the child, their refusal to help support 
him, or the child’s emotional problems, all of which affected her financially. Applicant 
did maintain employment for the past 15 years, at times working two jobs, but did not 
always make responsible financial decisions. AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part. 
 
 Applicant has been working on her financial situation since 2009, when she was 
able to obtain a second job and could begin making payments. She sought assistance 
and counseling from a credit repair agency, as well as advice from family members. 
She has paid two debts in full. She has been making payments on the state tax debt, 
which occurred through her preparer’s error; her payments have reduced it from 
$2,800 to $1,200. On other debts, she has set up payment plans involving small 
payments, which she has made. She disputed numerous SOR debts in her credit 
report. Her challenges resulted in deletion of four debts from her credit report, reducing 
the alleged SOR debt by $2,773. Another $1,691 alleged in the SOR relates to debts 
that were discharged by Applicant's 2005 bankruptcy. Considering the debts Applicant 
has paid, made payments on, and had removed from her credit report, she has made 
substantial progress in resolving her financial situation. AG ¶ 20 (c), (d) and (e) apply.   
 
 
 
9
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant was candid about her poor choices in the past that led to her financial 
problems. Her current situation is unlike the one she found her self in earlier this 
decade. She is earning two incomes. She no longer supports the young man she 
raised, which leaves her with a higher monthly net remainder. She has the assistance 
of a firm to help resolve her debts, and a record of working to resolve her debts since 
2009, before the SOR was issued. 
 
 The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrates that he has ‘…established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
 
 
10
a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR.9  
 
Applicant’s testimony was credible and sincere. Moreover, based on her efforts since 
2009, I conclude she will continue to make payments and resolve her debts. Finally, 
some of Applicant's financial difficulties arose from the hardships of caring for a child 
with emotional problems who was unexpectedly abandoned by his parents. Applicant's 
actions in caring for the child for years, without financial assistance and in the face of 
his severe problems, demonstrate maturity, strength of character, and trustworthiness.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.t.  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                 
9 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
