                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08340 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gerald Gilliard, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 22, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 6, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 19, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on August 23, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant and two witnesses testified 
on her behalf. Exhibits (AE) A through P were offered and were admitted without 
objections. The record remained open until September 7, 2010, to allow both parties an 
opportunity to provide additional documents. Department Counsel offered GE 10. 
Applicant offered AE Q through X. There were no objections and the exhibits were 
admitted. Applicant requested the record continue to remain open to provide additional 
documents. The request was granted. Applicant’s attorney provided exhibits AE Y 
through CC. I marked a letter from Applicant’s attorney as AE DD. Department Counsel 
had no objections and they were admitted. The record closed on September 28, 2010.1 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 1, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. She graduated from high school in 1995. She took 
computer classes from 1996 to 1997, and attended college from August 2001 to 
December 2002, but did not earn a degree. She married in March 2001, and divorced in 
June 2003. Her son was born in June 2002, and she receives child support from the 
child’s father. She married again in 2004 and was divorced in April 2005. There are no 
children from the marriage. She has worked for her current employer, a federal 
contractor, since January 2010. Before then, she worked for a different federal 
contractor.2 
 
 In December 2002, Applicant, her first husband, and her parents purchased a 
home (Home #1) together. In approximately 2003, when she filed for divorce, she and 
her parents refinanced the house so they could have the first husband’s name removed 
from the mortgage. The agreement was for Applicant to pay half of the mortgage and 
her parents to pay the other half. The mortgage payment was approximately $3,200 a 
month.3  
 
 In October 2007, Applicant’s mother had a stroke and was unable to work. In 
December 2007, Applicant’s father was laid off from his construction job. During this 
time, Applicant and her fiancé were in the process of purchasing a house (House #2) 
together. She believed that she and her parents would be able to sell House #1 and her 
father would not be unemployed for a long time. She planned on moving into House #2. 
Her name is on the deed of House #2, but not on the mortgage loan. The house cost 
$550,000. The mortgage payment for House #2 is $3,544. She contributes $2,500 
toward the mortgage and utilities. Her fiancé contributes $1,500, and pays some 
1 Hearing Exhibits I –VI are letters, requests, and responses from Department Counsel and Applicant’s 
Counsel. 
 
2 Tr. 30-34, 62-68. 
 
3 Tr. 68-69. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
utilities. She moved into House #2 in January 2008. Applicant stated her fiancé was 
unemployed from October 2009 to March 2010, and they got behind in paying some of 
their bills.4  
 
 Applicant’s father was unemployed for more than a year. Her parents moved into 
House #2 with her fiancé and her son. House #1 was rented in March 2008, but the rent 
was less than the mortgage payments. Applicant paid the $800 difference on the 
mortgage until the tenants moved out a year later. Applicant stopped paying the 
mortgage in February 2009. She attempted a “short sale” on House #1, but was 
unsuccessful. House #1 was foreclosed in December 2009.5 This debt is listed in SOR 
¶ 1.e as a past-due account for $52,716. Evidence shows the property was sold for less 
than the mortgage.6 Applicant does not know if she owes the deficiency. She stated she 
believes the debt on the mortgage is zero and the account is closed. She has attempted 
to find out from the creditor if she owes anything on the debt. She was advised the 
account is closed, but has not been advised if she owes the deficiency.7 The debt is 
unresolved.8 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a credit card debt that was 120 days or more past due 
in the approximate amount of $429. Applicant stated she has caught up on her past-due 
payments and she is now current on the debt. Her credit bureau report (CBR) shows the 
debt is current and also reflects that in the past seven months she has been late paying 
the debt four times.9 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b is a credit card debt that was 60 days or more past due in 
the approximate amount of $278. Applicant stated she has caught up on her past-due 
payments and she is now current on the debt. Her CBR shows the debt is current and 
also reflects that in the past seven months she has been late paying the debt four 
times.10 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is a credit card account placed for collection in the amount 
of $144. The debt was owed from 2008. Applicant paid the debt on March 22, 2010, and 
closed the account.11  
4 Tr. 69-78, 118-126. 
 
5 AE K. 
 
6 GE 9, 10; AE W. 
 
7 AE M, R, S, T, U, V, W. 
 
8 Tr. 43-62, 78-87, 135-144; GE 6 at 3. 
 
9 Tr. 37, 105-106; Answer Exhibit C; AE O at page 8-9, AE BB. 
 
10Tr. 37, 106-108; Answer Exhibit D; AE O at page 9-10. 
 
11 Tr. 37; Answer Exhibit E. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant disputes the account in SOR ¶ 1.d for a charged-off amount of $469. 
The account was for telephone services that she canceled when she moved to a new 
residence. She advised the telephone company to stop the service, but they did not. 
Instead, they continued to bill her at the residence. She repeatedly disputed the debt 
with the creditor, but to no avail. To resolve the debt, she accepted a settlement offer 
from the creditor for $402.16. She made two payments in March 2010, to satisfy the 
settlement and resolve the debt.12 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f is for an account that was 120 days or more past due in 
the approximate amount of $4,327. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g is for an account that was 
120 days or more past due in the approximate amount of $1,514. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h 
is for an account that was 120 days or more past due in the approximate amount of 
$430. The creditor is the same in all three accounts. No payments were made on these 
debts from July 2008 until September 2009. Applicant requested the accounts be 
consolidated, and she was given a six-month temporary hardship plan where she was 
permitted to make minimal payments. On May 3, 2010, the account summary showed 
Applicant owed a total of approximately $19,950 on the consolidated debts. The creditor 
noted on May 19, 2010, that two payments were made on the consolidated accounts 
and they were in good standing. Applicant estimated she has paid $600 on the 
consolidated debts. The creditor stated: “We accepted a minimal payment to bring all 
the above accounts current in your favor.”13 Applicant’s reduced payments will end in 
October 2010. She believes she will be able to pay the required amount.14  
 
 When asked if she had other delinquent debts not listed on the SOR, Applicant 
provided the following information. Applicant owes a balance of approximately $954 for 
student loans. She did not recall how many payments she had missed. Her CBR 
reflects that the last payment received was November 2009. The monthly amount owed 
is $19. She is $154 past due. Applicant stated she got behind on paying her student 
loan because she had to pay her lawyer. Applicant also stated she received a line of 
credit with Creditor X in approximately 2002. She permitted her sister to use the line of 
credit to purchase two computers, one for herself and one for Applicant’s son. The 
amount of the debt is listed as $2,559 and her credit limit is $2,500. She stated she tries 
to make payments on the debt when money is available. The debt is past due. Applicant 
stated that another debt to a department store, that was listed as past due, is now 
paid.15  
 
12 Tr. 38-39; Answer Exhibits F and G, AE X.  
 
13 Answer Exhibit I. 
 
14 Tr. 40-43, 87-105; AE H. 
 
15 Tr. 110-117; AE O. I have not considered any debts not alleged for disqualifying purposes, but have 
considered it when analyzing Applicant’s financial status, ability to pay her debts, and when analyzing the 
“whole person.” 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s fiancé was unemployed from October 2009 to March 2010. He used 
money from his pension plan during this time period. Applicant used her 2008 tax refund 
of approximately $15,000 to eliminate some high-interest credit card debts. She used 
her 2009 tax refund of approximately $5,000 to $6,000 to pay two credit cards.16 
 
 Applicant stated she is current on her other bills. She has approximately $750 in 
her checking account and $100 in savings. She has no other liquid assets. In 2008 and 
2009, she earned approximately $103,000 and $105,000 respectively. In January 2010, 
she began a new job and she expects her annual income to increase to approximately 
$130,000. She stated that she paid for her mother’s medications because her father 
could not afford them.17  
 
 A friend testified on behalf of Applicant. She has known her since 2006 and has 
no reason to question her reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.18 
 
 Applicant’s co-worker testified on her behalf. He has known her since 2007 and 
they have worked together in a support group. He is not aware of any financially 
irresponsible conduct by her. He noted that Applicant always followed the rules and 
procedures when working with classified networks.19  
 
 I have considered all of the documents provided by Applicant, including her post-
hearing submissions. I have considered Applicant’s post-hearing statement that her 
fiancé placed an earnest money deposit on a home in November 2007 and that she is 
not listed on the mortgage of House #2.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
16 Tr. 127-128. 
 
17 Tr. 118-119, 129-130. 
 
18 Tr. 146-156. 
 
19 Tr. 157-160. 
 
6 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a large delinquent debt that remains unresolved. She has other 
debts that were past due that she recently paid. I find there is sufficient evidence to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant recently paid some of her delinquent debts and paid others that were 
past due. She is also making reduced payments on three debts that were consolidated, 
under a temporary hardship reduction granted by the creditor. Her largest debt listed on 
her credit report is for a deficiency on a foreclosed mortgage that is not yet resolved. 
Applicant purchased House #2 after she was aware that her father lost his job and her 
mother was unable to work. For a while she was able to stay current with the mortgage 
on House #1, but eventually she stopped paying it when she could not afford it. I find 
that Applicant’s behavior is recent because she is still resolving the deficiency on the 
foreclosure of Home #1. She has paid or caught up payments on some of her 
 
8 
 
 
delinquent and past-due debts, but not all of them. Although her parents’ circumstances 
were beyond her control, her financial decision to purchase a second house was within 
her control. Although she provided a statement that her name is not on the mortgage of 
House #2, she made and continues to make substantial payments towards the 
mortgage of House #2. She stopped making the payments on House #1 that she was 
contractually obligated to pay. I find she did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances. I find AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do not apply. I have considered Applicant’s 
total financial circumstances, her financial decisions, and her current ability to continue 
to pay her bills and debts. She has made significant steps in stabilizing her finances, but 
at this juncture, I am not convinced that the problem is under control. She was given a 
grace period due to hardship on three debts that will expire in October 2010. She has 
two other delinquent debts that are not alleged in the SOR, but impact her financial 
situation. Her student loan payment is only $19 a month, yet she has not made 
payments on it in months. There is no evidence she received financial counseling. I find 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. I find AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies because Applicant has 
paid some of her delinquent debts and some that were past-due are now current.  
 
 When Applicant’s security clearance became a concern, she began to address 
the mortgage deficiency that was listed on her CBR. She has contacted the creditor to 
determine if she owes a deficiency. She has not received a response. However, the 
circumstances surrounding the foreclosure on her first home were due to poor financial 
decisions she made. She chose to continue with the purchase of House #2, knowing 
her parents would be unable to contribute to the mortgage. She defaulted on the House 
#1 mortgage, that she was contractually obligated to pay, after she decided to provide 
funds to her fiancé to purchase House #2. The debt is not paid and is unresolved. 
Applicant settled a debt for telephone services that she disputed. She provided 
documentation to support her dispute. I find AG ¶ 20(e) applies to this debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant experienced financial difficulty when she decided to purchase a second 
home. She relied on her parents to pay half of the mortgage on the first house. She 
made a decision to proceed with the purchase of the second home even though she 
was already aware that her father had lost his job and her mother was unable to work. 
Although she hoped to sell the house quickly and her father would resume employment, 
neither happened. The home was foreclosed, and there is still an issue about the 
deficiency owed on it. Some of Applicant’s debts became delinquent and others were 
past due during this time. She has paid or resolved some, but she has other debts that 
affect her financial situation that have not been addressed. Applicant will begin making 
full payments to a creditor that permitted her to make reduced payments until October 
2010. Her student loan remains delinquent.  
 
I have considered Applicant’s total financial situation. I have considered that she 
took action to resolve some of her delinquent debts, but has others that were not on the 
SOR that have not been addressed. She made a risky financial decision by providing 
funds to purchase a second home at a time when her parents were not able to 
contribute to the mortgage on her first home. At this juncture, it is too early to conclude 
Applicant’s finances are stable and are not a security concern. Her financial situation 
remains precarious. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline 
for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
