 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-04185 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William O’Neil, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 5, 2009. On May 
28, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 21, 2010; answered it on July 22, 2010; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on July 
23, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on August 4, 2010, and the case 
was assigned to me on August 10, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 
12, 2010, scheduling the hearing for September 7, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 11 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until September 8, 2010, to 
enable him to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX E 
through J, which were admitted without objection. On September 16, 2010, he 
submitted AX K. Department Counsel did not object to AX K as untimely, and it was 
admitted. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX E through K are attached to 
the record as Hearing Exhibits (HX) I and II. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
September 14, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d. 
His answers to SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.d were ambiguous, and I have treated them as denials. 
His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old security officer employed by a defense contractor. He 
has worked for his current employer since July 2007. He has never married, but he has 
a child for whom he is obligated to pay child support. He has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 Before his current employment, Applicant was employed as a security officer by 
another defense contractor. The company records reflect that he was terminated in 
August 2007 for insubordination and rules violations. The company records include two 
employee counseling reports dated June 9, 2007, for incidents that happened about 
four hours apart on that day. The first counseling report was for having a personal 
laptop computer at his guard post, in violation of company rules. The second counseling 
report was for parking in an unauthorized space and then falsely denying that the 
vehicle was his. The third counseling report, dated August 7, 2007, was for wearing an 
incomplete uniform on the previous day and using profane and insubordinate language 
when he was informed that he would not be issued a weapon until he was in a proper 
uniform. (GX 2 through 5.) The documentation of Applicant’s termination was forwarded 
to the company’s human resources department, but there is no indication that a copy 
was delivered to Applicant. Applicant testified he did not receive a copy of the 
document. (Tr. 83.) His termination is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b. 
 
Applicant denied that he was terminated. He testified he voluntarily left this job 
for a better job, but he admitted he had a disagreement with his supervisor about 
uniforms. (Tr. 36, 44.) He submitted a sworn statement from his former supervisor 
stating that they had a disagreement about the company’s uniform requirements, but 
 
3 
 
 
they remained friends. The former supervisor also stated that Applicant was “a model 
employee who went beyond the call of duty for his job assignments.” (AX C.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in January 2009, he 
answered “no” to question 22, asking if during the last seven years he had been fired, 
quit after being told he would be fired, left a job by mutual agreement following 
allegations of misconduct, left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of 
unsatisfactory performance, or left a job for other reasons under unfavorable 
circumstances. (GX 1 at 24.) He did not disclose his termination in August 2007 for 
insubordination and rules violations because he believed he voluntarily left the job. His 
failure to disclose his termination on his security clearance application is alleged in SOR 
¶ 2.c. 
 
 In February 2009, Applicant was terminated from another job as a security officer 
for abandoning his post without being properly relieved and making a false statement. 
(GX 6.) During an interview with a security investigator in March 2009, he told the 
investigator he left this job for a better opportunity, and “there were no problems or 
issues” with this employer. (GX 7 at 9.) At the hearing, Applicant submitted a statement 
from a fellow security officer, stating that Applicant’s post was never unattended 
because he relieved Applicant at their supervisor’s request after Applicant told him he 
needed to leave work. (AX B.) 
 
 An internal investigation by the company determined that Applicant told his 
supervisor he needed to leave his post because his apartment was flooded, but he 
actually left to perform duties for another security company for whom he also worked. 
Evidence from the apartment manager established that Applicant’s apartment flooded a 
month before the date he asked to leave his post. Applicant admitted that he performed 
duties for his other employer after being relieved from his post, but he testified that his 
statement was not false because he was still cleaning up from the previous flooding. 
(Tr. 77-80.) Applicant’s termination notice gave him a choice of resigning or being fired. 
(GX 6 at 2.) He did nothing because he already had another job. (Tr. 81-82.) This 
termination is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. 
 
 During an interview with a security investigator in March 2009, Applicant falsely 
stated that “there were no problems or issues” with the employer who terminated him for 
leaving his post and making a false statement. Applicant’s false statement to the 
security investigator is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d. 
 
 Applicant has experienced financial problems in addition to his employment 
problems. The SOR alleges four delinquent debts. The evidence concerning these 
debts is as follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a collection account on behalf of a bank, in the amount of 
about $141. Applicant’s credit report dated February 26, 2010, reflects the debt, which 
was placed for collection in March 2009. It also reflects that this debt is disputed. (GX 
11 at 1.) Applicant testified that he signed up for a credit report monitoring service, for 
 
4 
 
 
which he was charged $29 per month, which was deducted automatically from his bank 
account. He contacted the monitoring service and told them he did not want the service, 
but they continued to collect the fee from his bank account, even after he closed the 
account, resulting in overdrafts. According to Applicant, the monitoring service promised 
to refund the fees, but have not. (Tr. 47-50.) There is no evidence that Applicant 
instructed his bank to stop processing the automatic withdrawals. In Applicant’s last 
email exchange with the monitoring company in October-November 2009, the 
monitoring company told him they were not responsible for overdraft charges, and 
Applicant threatened to sue them if they did not refund the fees. (AX J.) Applicant’s 
dispute is with the monitoring company, but the debt for the overdraft is owed to the 
bank. The debt to the bank is unpaid. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a child support arrearage, in the amount of about $21,535. 
Applicant’s federal tax refunds in the amounts of $484 and $932 were applied to this 
debt. (AX E and F.) Applicant testified the child support payments were deducted from 
his paycheck while he was working for a previous employer, but he now pays the court 
directly by money order. (Tr. 58-59.) He did not submit any receipts, cancelled checks, 
money order receipts, or similar documentation of payments; but he submitted a 
document dated September 1, 2010, reciting that he is in compliance with the child 
support order. The document enabled him to have his driver’s license reinstated. (AX 
A.) The arrearage appears to have been resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a collection account for a credit card account, in the amount of 
about $845. In September 2009, the collection company accepted an offer to settle this 
debt for $200, payable in two installments. (GX 7 at 13.) The account has been paid in 
full. (AX D; Tr. 51.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a debt to the state for overpayment of unemployment benefits, 
in the amount of about $2,326. Applicant’s credit report dated February 21, 2009, 
reflected that the debt was referred to an attorney for collection in July 2005. Applicant’s 
state tax refunds for 2007 ($94), 2008 ($104), and 2009 ($88) were applied to this debt. 
(AX G, H, and I). He testified that, other than the seizure of his tax refunds, he made 
only one or two payments of about $50 on this debt. (Tr. 62.) Applicant was not sure 
how much he owed on this debt, but he admitted that it is unresolved. (Tr. 89-90.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
 
5 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant resolved the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, but the 
unresolved delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d raise two disqualifying conditions: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”). Since the Government produced substantial evidence to 
raise these disqualifying conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant has multiple unresolved debts that are 
ongoing and not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). This mitigating condition is not established 
because Applicant did not show that the delinquent debts were the result of conditions 
beyond his control. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not sought or obtained 
financial counseling. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
 
7 
 
 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. See ADP Case 
No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). An applicant need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR 
Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There also is no requirement that 
an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. Id. This mitigating condition 
is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, both of which have been 
resolved. It is not established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. Applicant has 
an ongoing dispute with the credit monitoring agency, but he has not resolved the debt 
to the bank for the overdraft. He has reacted passively to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, 
allowing his tax refunds to be seized, but he has taken virtually no affirmative action to 
satisfy the debt. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
has disputed the credit monitoring company’s continued collection of fees, and he has 
contacted his bank regarding the overdraft. He admits the overdraft but is unwilling to 
pay it until he receives a refund from the credit monitoring company. Although Applicant 
appears to be focused on the wrong party in resolving this dispute, he receives some 
credit under this mitigating condition because of the circumstances in which the debt 
arose and his continuing contacts with the credit monitoring company. However, he has 
not documented a legitimate basis for his dispute with the bank. Thus, I conclude that 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not fully established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 
8 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.c alleges that Applicant falsified his security clearance application by 
deliberately failing to disclose his unfavorable termination of employment in August 
2007. Applicant denied being fired in August 2007. The company records clearly reflect 
that he was fired, but there is no evidence that he was notified that he had been fired. 
The sworn statement from his supervisor suggests an amicable termination of 
employment. I conclude that SOR ¶ 2.c is not established by substantial evidence. 
 
 On the other hand, the record clearly establishes that Applicant left his 
employment in February 2009 following allegations of misconduct. Thus, his misleading 
statement to the security investigator that “there were no problems or issues” with this 
employer, alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d, raises the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 17(b) 
(“deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an 
employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official 
government representative”).  
 
 Applicant’s two instances of being separated from employment under 
unfavorable circumstances, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b, raise two disqualifying 
conditions: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and  
 AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers during a security 
interview may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant 
made no effort to correct his misleading statement. 
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s 
uniform violations and insubordinate conduct during his first period of employment are 
arguably “minor,” but his falsifications during his security interview and false statements 
to his employers are not “minor” within the meaning of this guideline. His multiple 
violations of company rules were recent, and they did not occur under unique 
 
9 
 
 
circumstances. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. No other enumerated 
mitigating conditions are established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under those guidelines and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on financial considerations and personal conduct. Accordingly, 
I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:     Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
