 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04258 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 27, 2010, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on July 11, 2010. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant received a copy of the FORM on July 19, 2010. As of October 6, 2010, he had 
not responded. The case was assigned to me on October 7, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance for the first time. His Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86), submitted in April 2009, listed that he worked for his current employer since 
January 2008, he attended community college, he has never been married, and he has 
a child that is now two years old.1  
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana in about 1997 and continued through early 
2009. He estimated smoking marijuana a couple times a week during that period. He 
purchased marijuana for his use, but never grew or sold the drug. He also used 
cocaine, methamphetamine, psilocybin mushrooms, LSD, and ecstasy at various times 
during the same period. He used each of these drugs about once or twice, because he 
did not want to risk becoming dependent on them.2   
 
 Applicant was arrested in a state forest in about June 2006. He was charged with 
possession/use of marijuana, possession of drug paraphernalia, violation of a fire ban, 
and criminal littering/polluting. Applicant obtained a deferred prosecution in which he 
was required to perform community service and complete group educational counselling 
sessions. Applicant completed the conditions of his diversion program.3 
 
 Applicant listed his 2006 arrest under the pertinent police record question on his 
SF 86. Section 23a of the SF 86 asked: 
 
In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for 
example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants 
(amphetamines, speed, crystal methamphetamine, Ecstasy, ketamine, 
etc.), depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), 
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants, (toluene, amyl 
nitrate, etc.) or prescription drugs (including painkillers)? Use of a 
controlled substance includes injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, 
experimenting with or otherwise consuming any controlled substance. 
 
Applicant answered “Yes,” and stated that between “05/2003 (Estimated)” and “06/2006 
(Estimated),” he used marijuana. He added that it was “Recreational. I was arrested in 
[J]une 2006 and offered a first time offender diversion plan in order to avoid being 
charged. I was order[ed] to attend group coun[se]ling from January 2007 through April 
                                                          
1 Item 5.  
 
2 Items 4-6. 
 
3 Items 4-8.  
 
3 
 
2007.” He did not list his marijuana use after June 2006, and he did not list his use of 
other controlled substances. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted to SOR ¶ 
2.b, which alleged that he intentionally falsified the SF 86 by omitting his use of other 
drugs and by listing the end date of his marijuana use as June 2006. He did not respond 
to the FORM in which Department Counsel specifically commented that Applicant 
intentionally falsified the SF 86.4 After considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant 
intentionally falsified his SF 86 by failing to divulge the full extent of his drug use. 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in April 2009. He fully discussed his 2006 arrest and his illegal 
drug use. He stated he stopped smoking marijuana in early 2009, because he no longer 
saw using illegal drugs as a reasonable risk and he knew that his employer would not 
tolerate drug use. He stated that he did not intend to use illegal drugs of any kind in the 
future.5   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
4 FORM, Items 4, 5. 
 
5 Item 6. 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for Drug Involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;6 and  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant’s drug possession and use are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c) 
as disqualifying conditions.  
 
Two Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
                                                          
6 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from 
approved medical direction.  
 
5 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant started smoking marijuana at a young age and used it regularly for 
years. He experimented with other illegal drugs but only used each drug once or twice, 
because he did not want to become dependent upon them. He stopped using illegal 
drugs in early 2009. There is no bright-line rule as to whether conduct is recent. 
Applicant has not used illegal drugs in more than a year. However, his drug use was 
extensive, occurred over a long period, and continued after his arrest and participation 
in group educational counselling sessions. I am unable to make a determination that 
illegal drug use is completely in his past. His drug use continues to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is not applicable. Applicant 
stated he does not intend to abuse drugs in the future. He does not receive full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b) for the same rationale discussed above. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 in 2009. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. His 
illegal drug use created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 
16(e) is also applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant revealed his full drug use when he was questioned by an OPM 
investigator in April 2009. That is insufficient to establish a mitigating condition for the 
falsification of his SF 86. His honest answers to the OPM investigator and his 
abstinence from illegal drug use constitute positive steps to reduce or eliminate his 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is applicable to the 
security concerns raised by Applicant’s illegal drug use. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is 26 years old. He used illegal drugs for many years and provided false 
information on his SF 86. Applicant deserves credit for abstaining from illegal drug use 
since early 2009 and for being truthful in his background interview. However, concerns 
remain about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
