                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03635 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant made some efforts prior to receipt of her SOR to resolve her financial 
problems, caused in part because of circumstances beyond her control. She acted with 
some responsibility under the circumstances. She now understands the importance of 
having and maintaining financial responsibility. Her recent behavior shows some 
judgment and reliability. She mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
1 
 
 
                                           
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 16, 2009. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992. 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
On March 5, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision - security concerns raised under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2  
 
On March 31, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and initially 
elected to have her case decided on the written record. On June 23, 2010, she 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1) The case 
was assigned to me on July 2, 2010, to determine whether a clearance should be 
granted or denied. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 16, 2010. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled on August 5, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. Post-hearing, she 
submitted Exhibit (AE) 1, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 12, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all SOR allegations, except for SOR ¶ 1.h, which she denied. 
Her admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence of record, and having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make 
the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old administrative assistant employed by a defense 
contractor. She married her husband in November 1993, and they have two children, 
ages 16 and 13. She completed her associate’s degree (electronic technician) in 1996, 
and her bachelor of science degree in 2006. She financed her education primarily 
through student loans. She is currently pursuing a degree in education with the goal of 
becoming a teacher. 
 
Applicant was hired by her current employer, a government contractor, in 1999 
and has been consistently working for her employer since. Because of her position, 
Applicant has had access to classified information at the secret level from 2000 to 
present. There is no evidence that Applicant has compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation, which 
revealed she had financial problems. The SOR alleges six delinquent student loans 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f), a mortgage foreclosure with a loan balance of $279,000 (SOR ¶ 1.g), 
and one delinquent medical account owing $116 (SOR ¶ 1.h).  
 
Applicant testified that between 2000 and 2004, she and her husband engaged in 
frivolous and reckless spending using their credit cards. Thereafter, they have been 
struggling to pay their debts for many years. They unsuccessfully attempted to take 
control of their financial situation by refinancing their home and taking home equity 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
loans to consolidate their debts. Apparently, some of their refinancing involved 
adjustable rate mortgage loans that spiraled out of control. Even though she and her 
spouse had been consistently employed since 1999, they could not afford the $2,035 
mortgage payment and their day-to-day living expenses, and their home was 
foreclosed. 
 
Applicant and her spouse bought a home in 2000 for approximately $150,000. 
Her initial monthly mortgage payment was around $1,200. Between 2000 and 2008, 
when she defaulted on the mortgage and it was foreclosed, Applicant and her spouse 
refinanced their home three times and took two home equity loans against the property. 
According to Applicant, the refinancing and home equity loans were taken primarily to 
consolidate their debts. At the time of the foreclosure, her monthly mortgage payment 
was around $2,035, and she owed $279,000. To her knowledge, the house has not 
been sold and is still in the market. Applicant does not know whether she will be legally 
responsible for any remaining balance on the mortgage after the sale of her home. 
 
Between 2002 and 2006, Applicant took seven student loans to pay for her 
college education in two different academic institutions. As of June 10, 2010, she owes 
approximately $17,400. Initially, she was able to make some payments, and the loans 
were deferred while she attended college. Applicant defaulted on her student loans 
during 2005-2007. Her student loans became delinquent when she started having 
problems paying her mortgage and her day-to-day living expenses. In 2007, she 
established a payment plan for her student loans, but she was unable to make her 
payments consistently. Sometime in late 2009 – early 2010, she defaulted on the 
student loans again. In 2010, Applicant entered into another payment agreement to pay 
$194 a month for a certain period to redeem her student loans. She made payments in 
June, July, and August 2010, to a collection company. She is trying to redeem her 
student loans to establish a new payment plan with Sallie Mae.  
  
Applicant explained that she and her husband separated for one year. As a 
single mother, she received financial assistance from the government. She also 
developed breast cancer in 2007 and underwent a radical mastectomy. She developed 
diabetes. Applicant claimed her medical problems and subsequent expenses adversely 
impacted her ability to pay her debts. Her documents show that since 2007, her medical 
expenses totaled approximately $75,000. Her health insurance paid for most of her 
medical expenses. According to Applicant, her co-pay share for her current expenses 
total approximately $660. She intends to pay it by making a monthly payment of $100 
until the debt is paid. She failed to indicate when she plans to start the promised 
payments. Applicant stated that she intends to pay her medical bills first. She then 
intends to increase her student loan payments by $100 a month to accelerate the 
payment of her student loans. 
 
Applicant acquired the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h as a result of medical treatment 
she received in 2000-2001. She claimed the medical provider failed to promptly file the 
claim with her insurer. Later, the insurer denied the claim because it was untimely filed. 
She offered to pay the medical provider her share of the debt (her co-pay), and the 
 
4 
 
 
provider refused it. Applicant believes she is not responsible for the debt because the 
medical provider was negligent filing the claim. 
 
Applicant and her spouse have a combined monthly net income of $4,336. She 
testified her husband started a second part-time job in September 2010, seeking 
additional income to pay their debts. Their current rent is $1,095. Her monthly expenses 
total $2,682. She disclosed debts totaling approximately $586 (Sperry Visa $293, 
education loans $194, medical debts $100). Her monthly net remainder is approximately 
$1,065. 
 
Applicant accepted responsibility for her financial obligations and stated her 
financial problems were due, in part, to her and her husbands’ financial irresponsibility 
and ignorance. She claimed they are currently doing the best they can to resolve their 
financial problems. Applicant and her husband can afford to pay their rent, their day-to-
day living expenses, and their debts. She testified she never would do anything illegal or 
against the United States because she has too much to lose.  
 
Applicant appears to be a good employee. She is a devoted mother, daughter, 
and wife. She received some financial counseling from her mother many years ago. Her 
mother helped her to establish a budget and advised her to stay away from using credit 
cards. Applicant claimed she sometimes follows her budget, but not regularly. At her 
hearing, she acknowledged that she should have followed her mother’s advice and 
stayed away from abusing her credit cards. She has not participated in any recent 
financial counseling. She intends to visit her employer’s credit union, sometime in the 
near future, to ask for financial counseling and assistance to prepare a budget.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
 
5 
 
 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Between 2000 and 2004, Applicant and her husband engaged in frivolous and 
reckless spending at the expense of their credit. They have been struggling ever since 
to pay their debts. They unsuccessfully attempted to take control of their financial 
situation by refinancing three times the home they bought in 2000, and by taking two 
home equity loans to consolidate their debts. Some of their refinancing involved 
adjustable rate mortgage loans that spiraled out of control. Even though she and her 
spouse have been consistently employed since 1999, they could not afford to pay their 
mortgage payments, their day-to-day living expenses, and their accrued debts. 
Applicant’s home was foreclosed with an outstanding balance of $279,000. 
 
Applicant owes approximately $17,400 as a result of seven student loans she 
took to pay for her college education between 2002 and 2006. She has been delinquent 
paying her student loans at least twice. She also owes a $116 medical debt dating back 
to 2001. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations” apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s being a single mother with limited financial support (albeit for one 
year), as well as her medical problems may be considered as circumstances beyond 
her control, which contributed to her inability to pay her debts. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies, but does not fully mitigate the financial concerns. Applicant’s evidence is not 
 
7 
 
 
sufficient to show she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Her financial 
problems are primarily the result of her financial irresponsibility (abusing her credit and 
living beyond her means), the continued acquisition of debt without the resolution of 
prior delinquent debts, and her negligence (she did not educate herself prior to 
refinancing her home). All of these factors were within her control. 
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s credit reports and her documentary evidence show 
her past efforts to pay her student loans, the resolution of other non-SOR debts, and the 
consolidation of debts (refinancing of her home) prior to receipt of the SOR. Applicant 
made efforts to resolve her debts and did not just ignore her delinquent debts. She has 
made three consecutive payments on her current student loan payment plan. Her 
actions show some reliability and trustworthiness. Based on her household’s combined 
income, she has the ability to continue with her current payment plan to redeem the 
student loans. Currently, she appears to have the financial means to pay for her day-to-
day living expenses and her outstanding debt. The only concern left is whether she will 
be required to pay any remaining mortgage deficiency after the sale of the foreclosed 
home. Not considering the possible foreclosed mortgage deficiency, Applicant would be 
in control of her financial situation.  
 
Applicant’s behavior shows she has been making some effort to be financially 
responsible. Because of the security clearance process and the possibility of her losing 
her job, she now understands the importance of having and maintaining financial 
responsibility. She appears to have learned from her mistakes and her financial 
problems are not likely to continue.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated in my whole-
person analysis my comments on the analysis of Guideline F. 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has worked for a 
government contractor for approximately 12 years. She has possessed a security 
clearance for around 10 years. There is no evidence she has ever compromised or 
caused others to compromise classified information. She is considered to be a valuable 
employee. She is a good mother, wife, and daughter. These factors show some 
responsibility, good judgment, and mitigation. Applicant also established some 
circumstances beyond her control, which contributed to her inability to pay her debts. 
Applicant’s financial problems were primarily the result of her financial 
irresponsibility (abusing her credit and living beyond her means), the continued 
acquisition of debt without the resolution of prior delinquent debts, and her negligence 
(she did not educate herself prior to refinancing her home). 
Applicant negotiated payments on her student loans, resolved other non-SOR 
debts, and attempted the consolidation of debts (refinancing of her home) prior to receipt 
of the SOR. She made efforts to resolve her debts and did not just ignore her delinquent 
debts. She has made three consecutive payments on her current student loan payment 
plan. Her actions show some reliability and trustworthiness. 
Applicant should have been more responsible in addressing her financial 
problems. Notwithstanding, I find her actions are sufficient to show she acted with some 
responsibility under the circumstances. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find 
Applicant has demonstrated she understands the importance of having and maintaining 
financial responsibility. Her recent behavior shows some judgment and reliability.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
