                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05576 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant and his spouse acquired three real estate mortgages totaling 
approximately $568,000. One of the mortgages was foreclosed and the other two were 
charged off. He presented no evidence to establish a track record of financial 
responsibility. There are no clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved 
or is under control. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 9, 2009. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 
 
 
                                           
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
On February 2, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision - security concerns raised under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2010. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 4) A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM), dated April 16, 2010, was provided to him. Applicant received 
his copy of the FORM; however, he misdated his receipt of the FORM. The FORM letter 
of transmittal (which includes Applicant’s receipt), is also dated April 20, 2010. Applicant 
indicated he received his copy of the FORM on “April 7, 2010,” before the mailing date 
of the FORM. I conclude Applicant received a copy of the FORM sometime after April 
23, 2010. Applicant was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to submit 
any objections, and information in mitigation or extenuation. He did not respond, and the 
case was assigned to me on July 20, 2010, to determine whether a clearance should be 
granted or denied. As of October 25, 2010, he did not submit an answer to the FORM.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the three SOR allegations, indicating the accounts were “in 
the process of being resolved.” His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After 
a thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of 
fact. 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old local area network administrator II, employed by a 
defense contractor. He graduated from high school in June 1986. He married his 
spouse in February 1996, and they have three children, ages 13, 12, and 5. According 
to his security clearance application, he has been consistently and fully employed from 
February 1999 to present, except for the period of January 2000 to August 2001, when 
he was unemployed. He has approximately eight years of experience working for 
several government contractors. From July 2006 until September 2007, he was self-
employed as a realtor. This appears to be his first security clearance application. 
 
In June 2009, Applicant was confronted by a background investigator about his 
delinquent mortgages and his overall financial situation. During the interview, he stated 
he and his wife purchased the property alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c for $424,000, with a 
$40,000 down payment. Based on the December 2009 credit report, the account was 
opened in March 2006. Applicant did not make his mortgage payments and the property 
was foreclosed in May 2009. He indicated he did not have the ability to make any 
payments on that property. As of the day of his interview, Applicant claimed he was 
current on his day-to-day living expenses and was paying his bills on time. He averred 
he had no knowledge of the other mortgages alleged in the SOR. He claimed his wife 
handled all the household finances, and even though the accounts were joint accounts, 
he denied any knowledge of them.  
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
 
Later, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant admitted that the account 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($169,000) resulted from a second mortgage (home equity loan) 
he and his wife took on one of their investment properties. Based on the December 
2009 credit report, the home equity loan was opened in March 2006, and it was 
reported delinquent in May 2008. The account was charged off. He claimed the loan 
would be satisfied upon the sale of the property. He presented no evidence showing the 
property was sold, or that the debt has been paid. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a 
originated as a real estate mortgage acquired jointly by Applicant and his spouse in 
March 2006. The credit report shows the account was charged off in May 2009. He 
presented no evidence showing that the debt has been resolved. 
 
The SOR alleges the three delinquent mortgages for a total of near $568,000 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c). In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted these were his 
delinquent debts. Applicant presented almost no information about his past or current 
financial situation in the FORM. He failed to indicate why he acquired the alleged 
mortgages, when and why they became delinquent, and what efforts, if any, he took to 
resolve these debts. There is no evidence to show Applicant has participated in financial 
counseling, or whether he and his wife follow a budget. Applicant presented no 
documentary evidence showing any efforts to resolve his debts since he acquired them. 
Moreover, the record has little documentary evidence about Applicant’s current financial 
situation. 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Between early 2006 and late 2009, Applicant and his spouse acquired three real 
estate mortgages that became delinquent. One of the mortgages was foreclosed and 
the other two were charged off. The three delinquent mortgages total approximately 
 
5 
 
 
$568,000. Applicant has been consistently employed since 1999, except for a 20-month 
period in 2000-2001. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 
19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations” apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence fails to fully raise the applicability of any 
mitigating condition. His financial problems are ongoing and his evidence fails to show 
they occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant presented little evidence to establish circumstances beyond his control 
contributing to his inability to pay his debts, except for his 20-month period of 
unemployment in 2000-2001. However, there is no evidence showing how this period of 
unemployment adversely affected his financial situation, particularly since he acquired 
the mortgages in 2006. Applicant presented no evidence of efforts to resolve his 
financial obligations since he acquired the debts. His favorable information fails to 
establish a track record of financial responsibility. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there are no clear indications that his 
financial problem is being resolved or is under control. He presented no evidence that 
he has received financial counseling. Considering the number of delinquent debts, the 
date the debts were acquired, the aggregate value of the debts, and the lack of 
documentary evidence of efforts to resolve his legal financial obligations, Applicant’s 
information is insufficient to establish that his financial problems are unlikely to recur. 
The remaining mitigating conditions are not reasonably raised by the facts in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated in my whole-
person analysis my comments on the analysis of Guideline F. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for his work 
history and eight years working for government contractors. He is considered to be a 
valuable employee since he was rehired by his current employer. These factors show 
some responsibility.  
 
Notwithstanding, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current financial 
responsibility, reliability, and judgment. Applicant has failed to show good-faith efforts to 
resolve his financial problems in a timely manner. The sparse mitigating evidence fails 
to convince me of Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
