1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-06349
SSN: --------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
Applicant has a history of financial problems as shown by past-due mortgage loans on
two residential properties that were later sold via short sales. A balance of more than
$70,000 is owed on the second mortgage loan for the second property. Applicant does
not have a concrete plan in place to resolve this debt, which is now in collection with a
third party. Her ongoing financial problems justify current doubts about her judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. Accordingly, as explained in further detail below, this
case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Exhibits C–H. 2
 Exhibit B. 3
 Exhibit 3. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on June 15, 2010,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR also recommended that the
case be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me August 4, 2010. The hearing took place as scheduled on
September 9, 2010.
The record was kept open until October 8, 2010, to allow Applicant an
opportunity to submit additional documentary evidence. Applicant made a timely
submission and that document is admitted without objections as Exhibit I, as Applicant’s
Exhibits A–H were admitted during the hearing.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a federal contractor. Her educational
background includes graduating from high school and taking some college courses at a
community college. She is employed as a senior human resources associate, and she
has worked for this company since 2004. She appears to be a reliable, competent
employee as shown by the favorable performance reviews received during the last
several years.  She is known as an employee who has integrity and who exercises good2
judgment.3
Applicant is married and has two children, an eight-year-old daughter and a
three-year-old son. Her husband is employed as a shop manager for an automobile
body shop. Together, Applicant reported that she and her husband earned a gross
income of about $105,000 in 2009.  4
 The SOR alleges the mortgage loans for Property #2, but not for Property #1. The mortgage loans for5
Property #1 are relevant to provide the context or history of Applicant’s financial situation.  
 Exhibit 6. 6
 Exhibit 2. 7
 Exhibit 4. 8
 Exhibit A. 9
 Exhibit I. 10
 Tr. 45–47. 11
3
  During the recent real estate boom and bust, Applicant and her husband bought
two residential properties (referred to as Property #1 and Property #2).  Both properties5
were financed with a first and second mortgage, and all four mortgages became past
due. Both properties were sold via short sales, one in 2009 and the other in 2010.
Applicant and her husband appear to have no ongoing liability for Property #1, but that
is not the case for Property #2.  
 
Applicant and her husband bought Property #1 in 2005 for about $300,000. The
purchase was financed with the same lender with two mortgage loans of $233,280 and
$58,320.  They lived in this home for about two years and four months until they bought6
their second property. They then rented Property #1 for less than their mortgage loan
payments. The tenant moved out at some point. They were unable to keep up with the
required payments and the loans became past due in 2008. Property #1 was sold via a
short sale in October 2009 for $140,000, which included a payoff of about $124,000 to
the lender.  The most recent credit report indicates that the mortgage loans have zero7
balances and the accounts are described as paid for less than full balance.8
Applicant and her husband bought Property #2 in 2007 for about $500,000. The
purchase was financed with different lenders with two mortgage loans. The first
mortgage loan was for $417,000; the second mortgage loan was for $80,000. For a
time, Applicant’s sister-in-law lived with them and paid $600 rent, but she moved out.
They were unable to keep up with the required payments and the loans became past
due in 2009. They vacated Property #2 in September 2009, and moved into their current
residence, which they are renting. Property #2 was sold via a short sale in June 2010
for $300,000, which included a payoff of about $276,801 to the first lender and about
$3,000 to the second lender.  The first lender considers the mortgage loan paid in full.9 10
But the second lender charged off the account with a balance of about $78,000, and the
debt is now in collection with a third party. Applicant presented no documentary
evidence from the third party. Her husband has had some contact with the third party,
but they have been unable to reach an accord or devise a plan to resolve the debt.11
 Exhibits 4–6. 12
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to13
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.14
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 15
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 16
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.19
4
Besides the mortgage loans, the various credit reports reveal that Applicant has
no other delinquent debts.12
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As13
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt14
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An15
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  16
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting17
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An18
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.20
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 21
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).22
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.23
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 24
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an25
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  26
5
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme20
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.21
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.22
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it23
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant24
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline25
F is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  26
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
 AG ¶ 19(a).  27
 AG ¶ 19(c). 28
 AG ¶ 20 (a) – (f). 29
6
information within the defense industry. Indeed, the practice of evaluating a person
based on their record of financial responsibility (or lack thereof) is used in various
industries. For example, the insurance industry uses credit-based insurance scores
when determining insurance rates because the scores have been found to be effective
in predicting future losses.  
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
excessive indebtedness. Her history raises security concerns because it indicates
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial27
obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish28
these two disqualifying conditions.  
Under Guideline F, there are six conditions that may mitigate security concerns:29
(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent here are subparagraphs (b)
and (d). Applicant is entitled to little credit under subparagraph (b), however, because
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).30
7
there is no evidence of loss of employment by Applicant or her spouse during the
relevant period, an unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation in
Applicant’s family. Certainly, Applicant and her spouse, like many other Americans,
experienced an unexpected decline in values of residential real estate. But they largely
brought their current problem on themselves when they financially overextended
themselves by borrowing more than $750,000 in mortgage loans on a gross annual
income of about $105,000. Debt equals risk, and these numbers show Applicant and
her spouse put themselves in a high-risk situation by incurring excessive indebtedness
or by living beyond their means or both.  
Applicant is entitled to credit in mitigation under subparagraph (d). Applicant and
her spouse disposed of both properties via short sales and were able to resolve three of
the four mortgage loans. The fourth mortgage loan, the second mortgage loan on
Property #2, is unresolved. It is now in collection with a third party after it was charged
off by the lender. Resolving three of the four mortgage loans is making a good-faith
effort, but Applicant and her spouse are still facing a large amount of delinquent debt
(about $78,000). Moreover, they do not have a concrete plan in place to resolve this
debt. Lacking such a plan, as well as any measurable progress in working the plan, the
credit in mitigation is insufficient to mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s ongoing
financial problems raise doubts or questions about her judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness.
To conclude, following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these
doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due
consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence, which30
was not insubstantial. Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
