 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08713 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 23, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 27, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 17, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on June 30, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
July 15, 2010. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received 
without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified but did not submit any exhibits at the hearing. The record was 
held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted 
documents, which were marked Applicant exhibits (AE) A through G and admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel’s post-hearing memorandums were marked HE 
II and III. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2009. He attended college for a period but is about 
30 credit hours short of a degree. He is single. He has one daughter who is 17 years 
old.  He pays child support. He is an Air Force veteran who served on active duty for 
seven years and in the Air Force Reserves for 10 years. He received an honorable 
discharge. He held a security clearance from 1984 until 2008.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts and a prior bankruptcy discharge in 1996. 
The debts were listed on credit reports obtained on August 26, 2009 and April 8, 2010. 
Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b - 1.k, 1.m – 1.n and 1.p – 1.s. 
and receiving a bankruptcy discharge as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He disputes the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶1.l and 1.o.  
 
 Applicant attributes his 1996 bankruptcy (SOR ¶ 1.a) to events associated with 
his first divorce. He was unable to pay the bills he was responsible for based upon the 
loss of his ex-wife’s income. As a result, he declared Chapter 7 bankruptcy and his 
debts were discharged.2  
 
 Applicant attributes his more recent financial delinquencies, of approximately 
$250,000, to periods of unemployment and a downturned real estate market. From 
1995 to January 2006, Applicant worked as a government contractor employee. He was 
laid off from that job in January 2006. While he was working, he bought his first home 
(P1) in the local area in 2004. In September 2006, while he was still unemployed, he 
bought a second home in the local area (P2). He tried to sell P1 at this time but was 
unable to do so. Instead, he rented it out and initially received $4,500 per month rent. 
He used this rental income to pay both mortgage payments on P1 and P2. He remained 
unemployed until August 2009 when he was hired by his current employer. He 
supported himself during this time with the rental income from P1, credit cards, and his 
savings. In an attempt to find employment, Applicant moved to a different city in 
December 2007. He bought a condominium in this new location (P3). Applicant has first 
mortgages on all three properties and second mortgages on P1 and P2. He was able to 
make the monthly payments on all these obligations once he started working for his 
current employer until August 2009, when he again fell behind on his payments. In April 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26-36; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 43; GE 5. 
 
 
3 
 
2010, Applicant was put in a non-pay status by his current employer until his security 
clearance issue was resolved.3    
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is the delinquent mortgage debt on P2. Applicant 
has not paid this debt. He has sought a loan modification agreement, but no completed 
modification was introduced into the record.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a delinquent debt of $4,031 owed to a credit card company. 
This debt remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in place.5   
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is the delinquent mortgage debt on P1. Applicant 
has not paid this debt. He has sought a loan modification agreement, but no completed 
modification was introduced into the record. Additionally, Applicant has this property on 
the market for a short sale.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a delinquent debt of $741 owed to a credit card company. 
This debt remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in place.7   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a delinquent debt of $9,838 owed to a credit card company. 
This debt remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in place.8   
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.k are the delinquent second mortgages 
on P1 and P2. Applicant provided a copy of a bank statement showing his payments are 
current through July 2010 on both accounts.9   
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i allege delinquent debts of $1,365 and $7,309 owed to a 
credit card company. These debts remain unpaid with no repayment agreement in 
place.10   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j alleges a delinquent debt of $15,066 owed to a credit card company. 
This debt remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in place.11   
                                                          
3 Tr. at 27-28, 38-41, 44-61; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 57-62; GE 2 - 4; AE G. 
 
5 Tr. at 72; GE 2-4. 
 
6 Tr. at 65-66; GE 2 - 4; AE E, F. 
 
7 Tr. at 73; GE 2-4. 
 
8 Tr. at 73; GE 2-4. 
 
9 Tr. at 64-65; AE D. 
 
10 Tr. at 73, 95; GE 2-4. 
 
11 Tr. at 73, 95; GE 2-4. 
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a delinquent debt of $13,000 owed to a collection agency on a 
credit card. Applicant denies this debt, but admits he has not contacted anyone to 
dispute it. No documentary evidence was presented supporting its illegitimacy.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m alleges a delinquent debt of $8,708 owed to a credit card company. 
This debt remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in place.13   
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n is the delinquent mortgage debt on P3. Applicant 
has not paid this debt. He has sought a loan modification agreement, but no completed 
modification was introduced into the record.14 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.o alleges a delinquent debt of $3,215 owed on a credit card. Applicant 
denies this debt, but admits he has not contacted anyone to dispute it. No documentary 
evidence was presented supporting its illegitimacy.15 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.p alleges a delinquent debt of $1,603 owed to a credit card company. 
This debt remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in place.16   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.q alleges a delinquent debt of $3,294 owed to a credit card company. 
This debt remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in place.17   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.r alleges $1,037 past due on a debt of $75,377 owed to a credit card 
company. This debt remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in place.18   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.s alleges a delinquent debt of $56,620 owed to a credit card company. 
This debt remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in place.19   
 
 Applicant is current on all of his property taxes. He has cut up all of his credit 
cards. He took an on-line credit counseling course. As of the date of the hearing, 
Applicant had $200 in his checking account. Applicant believes that once he receives 
his security clearance and goes back to work he will be able to set up payment plans to 
deal with all his debts.20   
                                                          
12 Tr. at 74-75; GE 3-4. 
 
13 Tr. at 75; GE 2-4. 
 
14 Tr. at 53-56, 67-68; GE 2 - 4; AE C. 
 
15 Tr. at 76; GE 2-4. 
 
16 Tr. at 77; GE 4. 
 
17 Tr. at 77; GE 4. 
 
18 Tr. at 77; GE 4. 
 
19 Tr. at 77; GE 4. 
 
20 Tr. at 80, 83-84, 87; GE 2. 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant was the recipient numerous decorations and certificates of appreciation 
and training from the Air Force. He also was recognized for his training and skills by a 
former federal contractor employer.21   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
21 AE A. 
 
6 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts including several mortgage 
payments and was unable or unwilling to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
7 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Except for the two second mortgages, which are current, Applicant still owes on 
the remainder of the many debts listed in the SOR with no payment plan in place. His 
financial issues are recent and ongoing. However, Applicant’s 1996 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy is remote and those debts were resolved by Applicant. AG ¶ 20(a) is 
partially applicable to SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties were partly caused by his the downturned real 
estate market and his periods of unemployment. These qualify as conditions that were 
outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual 
act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant did not act responsibly when he 
purchased both P2 and P3 when he was unemployed. He then took the first steps 
toward acting responsibly when he sought loan modifications for his mortgages. 
However, loan modifications have yet to be reached and he has done nothing to resolve 
the remainder of his debts. I am unable to determine that he has acted completely 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling. He clearly can benefit from counseling 
and advice on how to manage his money. However, at this point, his finances are not 
being resolved and are not under control. His limited payments on his two second 
mortgages are insufficient to support a finding that he has made a good-faith effort to 
pay or otherwise resolve his remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are only applicable 
to the debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.k.  
 
 Applicant disputes owing the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.o. His testimony 
about the disputed debts was not supported by corroborating evidence. AG ¶ 20(e) is  
not applicable to those debts.  
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service and numerous awards and training 
certificates. I also found Applicant to be honest and candid about his finances. I believe 
he is sincere about getting his finances in order. However, he dug a deep financial hole 
by becoming encumbered by his multi-mortgage obligations particularly because he 
was unemployed when he acquired P2 and P3. He is not currently in a position to make 
his mortgage payments, much less the payments on numerous credit card debts. His 
past financial track record, that includes a prior bankruptcy action, also does not inspire 
confidence that he will resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.f:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h - 1.j:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l - 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
