 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07858 
                                                            )                                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified a security clearance application (SF-86) on 
July 13, 2009. On September 24, 2009, she was interviewed by an investigator from the 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management and provided information about her financial 
obligations. On April 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant responded to the SOR on June 4, 2010, declined a hearing, and 
requested that her case be adjudicated on the written record. The Government 
compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 21, 2010. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 10. By letter dated July 21, 2010, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on July 27, 
2010. Her response was due on August 26, 2010. She did not file additional information 
within the required time period. On September 21, 2010, the case was assigned to me 
for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eleven allegations of financial delinquency under AG F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.k.). In her Answer to the SOR,     
Applicant neither admitted nor denied the allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c.,    
thereby constructively denying the three allegations.1 She admitted the allegations at 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f., which alleged unpaid medical accounts, and she stated that 
she was “in dispute with medical claim” for each of those allegations. Applicant also   
admitted the SOR allegations at ¶¶ 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., and 1.k. She denied the debt alleged 
at SOR ¶1.j.  Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.  (Item 1; Item 
4.) 
 
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government. 
The record evidence includes Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; her 2009 SF-86; two 
personal subject interviews, dated September 2, 2009 and September 24, 2009; her 
responses to DOHA interrogatories;2 and her credit reports of April 4, 2010, January 28, 
2010, and August 8, 2009. (See Items 5 through 10.) 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old and never married. In December 2007, she completed 
her higher education and received a Bachelor of Science degree. Since December 
2008, she has been employed as a lead technician by a government contractor. She 
seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Item 5.)  
 
 On March 30, 2010, Applicant responded to DOHA’s financial interrogatories. 
She acknowledged five delinquent medical debts, which are identified on the SOR at ¶¶ 
1.a., 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f. as unsatisfied as of April 29, 2010. In her response to the 
 
1 In response to SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c., Applicant stated: “Cannot admit nor deny; I was not aware of 
this debt but will inquire.” (Item 4 at 1.) 
 
2Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on September 2, 2009 and September 24, 2009. On March 30, 2010, in response to DOHA 
interrogatories, Applicant signed a notarized statement affirming that she had read the summaries of the 
interviews and found them to be true and correct. She provided additional information about her 
roommates and said they did not incur unreasonable utility expenses while she was away from the 
apartment she shared with them between January and April 2008.  She made no other changes, 
additions, corrections, or revisions to the investigator’s summaries. (Item 6.) 
 
3 
 
 
interrogatories, she stated she had disputed these debts with her insurance providers. 
She also stated she would ask her insurance providers to review the debt again. 
However, in her June 4, 2010, answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed she was not 
aware of the delinquent debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.c., but would inquire about 
their status. She did not provide documentation to corroborate her statements that she 
had disputed the debts or had contacted her medical insurers to request further review 
of the debts. (Item 7 at 7; Item 4 at 1.) 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant also constructively denied a delinquent 
medical debt of $30, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. as unsatisfied as of April 29, 2010. 
Applicant’s credit report of April 5, 2010, shows that the debt was placed in collection 
status in December 2009. (Item 4 at 1; Item 8 at 1.) 
 
 Applicant admitted the delinquent medical debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.e., 
and 1.f. In her personal subject interview of September 24, 2009, she claimed she was 
not aware of the debts and speculated that they arose from a clerical mistake that 
resulted in the failure of her health insurer to process and pay the claims. She told the 
investigator she was working with the health insurer to rectify the situation. In her March 
30, 2010, response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated she was continuing to 
dispute the debts with the insurance provider. In her June 4, 2010, answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the three delinquent debts and reported that she continued to 
dispute them. She failed to provide documentation to corroborate her statements that 
she had disputed the debts. (Item 4 at 2; Item 6 at 8; Item 7 at 7; Item 8.) 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted she owed approximately $20,000 
in delinquent student loan debt. She stated that the debt, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g., had 
been in repayment status for nine months. In March 2010, in response to DOHA 
interrogatories, she provided a statement from the creditor, dated February 6, 2010, 
identifying the amount of the debt as $20,332. The creditor’s statement also 
acknowledged that Applicant had authorized a monthly withdrawal from her account of 
$165 in payment of the debt. (Item 4 at 2; Item 7 at 6.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j. alleged that Applicant was 120 days past due in payments on an 
additional student loan of $7,903 and owed $844. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant 
denied this debt and stated that it had been consolidated with the $20,000 student loan 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. In her personal subject interview, Applicant explained that she 
had difficulties not entirely of her making in satisfying requirements for her college 
degree. Her advisor did not accept her internship report, which was the final 
requirement for her degree. Subsequently, Applicant was required to take an additional 
three-credit course to complete the degree. She did not learn until 2008 that the 
university was charging her for the course, which she had thought she was not required 
to pay for. In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant also stated that the $7,903 
student loan was combined with the student loan debts alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. 
Additionally, she stated that she would go the university that claimed she owed the debt 
and seek clarification of her responsibility for paying the debt. Applicant failed to provide 
documentation to corroborate that the student loan debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j had been 
 
4 
 
 
consolidated with the student loan debts alleged at ¶ 1.g. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 6 at 8-9; 
Item 7 at 9-10.) 
 
 Applicant admitted the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.h., 1.i., and 1.k. On her 
personal financial statement, she identified the debt at ¶ 1.h. as a financial obligation 
and indicated she was paying the creditor $30 a month on the debt. In her personal 
subject interview, she told the investigator that, since March 2009, she had paid the 
creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.i. $20 a month on the debt, and she produced receipts to 
corroborate her statement. She also told the investigator that the debt identified at SOR 
¶ 1.k. arose between 2004 and 2007, that she paid the creditor $50 a month for several 
months and then fell into delinquency on the debt, and that she was currently paying the 
creditor $25 a month. In response to DOHA interrogatories, however, she stated she 
was unable to continue paying the delinquent debts identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.i. and 1.k. 
because she was paying her student loan debts. She stated that she intended to make 
payments on those debts again at some time in the future. (Item 6 at 8-9; Item 7 at 3, 8.)   
 
 In her personal subject interview, Applicant acknowledged that she was 
inexperienced in managing her money and her credit. She stated that she did not keep 
track of her debts during her college years and was naïve in thinking she would obtain a 
good job after college that would enable her to quickly pay off her debts. (Item 6 at 9.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a pay slip from her 
employer and a personal financial statement. Applicant’s pay slip established that her 
net monthly income is $2,176.84. In her personal financial statement, Applicant listed 
the following fixed monthly expenses: rent, $800; groceries, $250; clothing and personal 
items, $50; utilities, $168; car expenses, $213.15; life and other insurance, $2.16; 
medical expenses, $94; and miscellaneous, $71. Applicant’s fixed monthly expenses 
total $1,648.31. (Item 7 at 3-4.) 
 
 In her personal financial statement, Applicant listed a monthly payment of $30 on 
the account listed at SOR ¶ 1.h. She also listed a monthly payment of $165 to the 
student loan creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.g.  Additionally, she indicated she paid $400 
a month on a debt to an automobile creditor. Applicant’s financial statement shows a 
negative monthly remainder of $66.47. (Item 7 at 3.) 
 
 Under the Remarks section of her personal financial statement, Applicant wrote: 
“Parental assistance when necessary.” The record does not establish that Applicant has 
sought or received financial credit counseling. (Item 7 at 3.)  
 
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
5 
 
 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and the record 
reflects that she did not satisfy her debts. This evidence is sufficient to raise these 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, [such as] loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence the person “has received or is receiving counseling for 
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)); that “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)); or that “the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20(e)). 3 
 
3A sixth possible mitigating circumstance applies when “the affluence resulted from a legal source 
of income.” (AG ¶ 20(f)). This mitigating circumstance is not relevant in this case. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies which are recent, ongoing, and 
occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur. She has been steadily employed 
by her current employer since December 2008, and her unresolved financial 
delinquencies are not the result of conditions or circumstances beyond her control.  She 
provided some evidence that she had made monthly payments of $165 on her $20,000 
student loan delinquency, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g, and the credit card debt alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.h. However, Applicant’s personal financial statement listed these payments 
and also reflected a monthly net deficit of $66.47, suggesting ongoing financial 
instability and making it unlikely that she would be able to satisfy these and the 
delinquent debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.i. and 1.k., which she said she would satisfy at 
some unspecified future time. In determining an individual's security worthiness, the 
Government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might resolve his or her 
outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 
1999). 
 
While Applicant constructively denied the medical debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 
1.b., and 1.c., the three debts were listed on Applicant’s April 2010 credit report. In 
response to DOHA interrogatories, she stated she had disputed the debts alleged at 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.c., but she failed to provide documentation to corroborate the 
disputes. She admitted the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f. and stated she 
was also disputing those debts. However, she also failed to provide documentation to 
corroborate the disputes. 
 
Applicant also claimed that the student financial aid debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.j. 
had been consolidated into the student financial aid debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. 
However, the two debts were listed separately on her April 2010 credit report, and 
Applicant failed to provide documentation establishing that the debts had been 
combined. 
 
Applicant acknowledged her inexperience in managing her finances and 
satisfying her debts. However, the record does not reflect that she has sought consumer 
credit counseling that could provide her with strategies for resolving her delinquent 
debts. The record suggests that Applicant relies on parental assistance in paying her 
debts. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply in 
mitigation to the security concerns raised by the facts in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
8 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult who has 
a college education. She has no dependents and has been steadily employed since 
December 2008. Despite a steady income, Applicant has failed to satisfy debts which 
arose during her student years, and her financial statement suggests that she is 
financially overextended. The record does not reflect that she has sought consumer 
credit counseling. Her current financial instability raises security concerns about her 
judgment and reliability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her 
financial delinquencies. If her employer concurs, Applicant can reapply for a security 
clearance one year after the date that this decision becomes final. If she wishes, she 
can produce new evidence that addresses the Government’s current security concerns.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.k.: Against Applicant 
 
                           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
__________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
