                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07674 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 28, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 21, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 10, 
2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 12, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on September 9, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant and a witness testified on her 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
behalf. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without 
objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 19, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old. She is not married and has no children. She graduated 
from high school in 2002. She works as a security officer for a defense contractor.1  
 
 Applicant admitted she used marijuana about ten times when she was in high 
school. She completed her security clearance application (SCA) on July 29, 2009. In 
response to question 23(a) which asked if, in the last 7 years, she had illegally used any 
controlled substance, to include marijuana, she answered “yes.” The question went on 
to request she provide the dates of use/activity, type of controlled substance(s), and the 
frequency of the use. She listed she had used marijuana from “1/2009 to 6/2009.” At her 
hearing, she denies that she used marijuana during these dates. She explained that she 
was nervous about completing the SCA and wanted to make sure she answered all of 
the questions honestly. She stated she completed the SCA on a computer and she 
wanted to finish it quickly so she could turn it in to the employer. She asked her cousin 
for help in completing the SCA. She stated she did not review her answers after 
completing the SCA. She further explained that she admits she used marijuana while in 
high school from about 1999 to 2000. She estimated the number of uses in high school 
as 10, but she is not sure of the exact number of times.2  
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by an OPM investigator on September 4, 2009, 
she did not review the SCA. She admitted drug use in 1998 when she was in high 
school. She has no idea why she said 1998. Her Facilities Security Officer (FSO) gave 
her a copy of her SCA, but she did not review it before her interview. After her interview, 
she realized there was an issue with the dates of her marijuana use. She stated that 
when she realized there was a mistake, she did not contact the FSO or anyone else to 
report the mistake. She did not do anything until she received the SOR seven months 
later. When she received the SOR, she states she then told her FSO that there were 
errors on her SCA.3  
 
 In about June 2009,4 as part of her employment application, Applicant was 
required to submit to a drug test. She took the test and the result was positive for 
marijuana. She stated she was told to sign a piece of paper which verified that 
1 Tr. 20-22. 
 
2 Tr. 18-20, 23-42. 
 
3 Tr. 36-58. 
 
4 The SOR alleges the test occurred in about July 2009. Applicant testified she took the test in June 2009. 
I find the difference in dates is not material.  
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
marijuana was found in her system. When she arrived home, her father told her she 
should have asked for a retest. She did not seek a retest. She denies using illegal drugs 
prior to the test. She did not get the job she was seeking after she failed the drug test.5  
 
 Applicant believes the positive result is the product of second-hand smoke 
inhalation from being in the close vicinity for six months, of people who smoked 
marijuana. During the period of time prior to her drug test, she had been socializing with 
people who used drugs. She stated she associated with these people from March 2009 
to August 2009. She would be at their houses for parties and there would be marijuana 
present and others would be smoking it. She also would ride in cars with people who 
smoked marijuana. She stated that leading up to her drug test, the majority of people 
she was associating with were using marijuana. She stated she decided not to use 
marijuana because she thought she would have to take a drug test. Prior to her drug 
test, she was with two people who were smoking marijuana outside of their vehicle. She 
was about ten feet away and they smoked a marijuana cigarette. She believes this 
could have caused her positive drug test result. She also recalls going through a car 
wash and remaining in the car wash with a group of people who were smoking 
marijuana. She asked them to extinguish the marijuana cigarette. Applicant stated she 
was in constant contact with her friends who used marijuana. She would see them 
throughout the week and on the weekends. After she tested positive for marijuana, she 
no longer associated with her friends who used the drug. She acknowledged she should 
have used better judgment regarding the company she associated with.6  
 
 Applicant’s father testified on her behalf and acknowledged being aware that 
Applicant used marijuana in high school. He was present when she asked for help in 
completing her SCA. He verified that she does not associate with her high school 
friends any more. He did not review her SCA. He did not believe the friends Applicant 
associated with used drugs.7  
 
 Applicant provided character letters. She is described as having a good work 
ethic. Her professionalism and integrity while on duty has never been questioned. She 
is extremely knowledgeable and takes her responsibilities seriously. She has 
remarkable motivation and drive. She looks for new and positive opportunities. 
Applicant is considered dependable and her performance in stellar.8 
 
 Applicant provided the results of a drug test conducted on January 18, 2010. The 
results were negative.  
 
 
5 Tr. 61, 73, 86-87, 94, 99-100. 
 
6 Tr. 61-77, 79-89. 
 
7 Tr. 73, 92-102. 
 
8 AE A, B. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case, and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and especially considered the following:  
: 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
 Applicant tested positive for use of marijuana in July 2009. I find all of the above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case, and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; 
 
 Applicant used marijuana while she was in high school. In July 2009, she tested 
positive for marijuana. I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible that she must have 
tested positive for marijuana due to second-hand smoke. She listed her recent drug use 
on her SCA. She stated she knew how important it was to complete the SCA honestly, 
yet when she became aware of what she now says is a mistake, she failed to address it 
with the FSO. She had opportunities to correct mistakes listed on her SCA and did not 
do so. She tested positive for marijuana use, which is consistent with her admission. I 
found Applicant’s explanations for her mistakes and failure to correct them 
disingenuous. Applicant confirmed that she spent most of her time for several months in 
an environment where there was regular and heavy marijuana use. Her father testified 
that her friends did not use illegal drugs, which is inconsistent with her testimony. She 
 
6 
 
 
stated hours before she took her drug test, her friends were standing outside of a car 
smoking marijuana and she was nearby. It has been over a year since she tested 
positive for marijuana. However, I find that her actions cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 26(a) does not 
apply.  
 
 The burden shifted to Applicant to mitigate the security concerns raised by her 
illegal drug use. She claims she no longer associates with her former friends. It appears 
since she tested positive for marijuana in July 2009, she has refrained from illegal drug 
use and she does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. I find AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant used marijuana when she 
was in high school. She listed on her SCA that she also used it from January 2009 to 
June 2009. She tested positive for marijuana use in July 2009. She is a young woman 
who made poor choices when she associated on a regular basis with friends who used 
drugs. Her choices could be attributed to youthful indiscretion. However, her 
explanations for how she incorrectly noted her past drug use on her SCA are not 
believable, nor is her explanation for how she tested positive for marijuana in July 2009. 
When considering the whole person, Applicant has not met her burden of persuasion. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Drug 
Involvement.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
