  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07248 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O'Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Starting in 2004, Applicant invested heavily in the Florida real estate market. She 
purchased three houses and six lots. By 2009, the dramatic decline in the real estate 
market left her owing approximately $5,700,000 on property worth $4,000,000. The 
lender has accepted short-sales on the houses. Applicant is awaiting responses from 
the mortgage company as to her requests to surrender the lots in lieu of foreclosure. 
Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under financial considerations. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
1 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 17, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On June 24, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated August 10, 2010. The FORM contained 15 
attachments (Items). On August 19, 2010, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, 
along with notice of her opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
On September 3, 2010, Applicant responded to the FORM and submitted 
Exhibits (Ex.) I through V. Department Counsel did not object to the material. Applicant's 
response was admitted into the record. On September 17, 2010, I was assigned the 
case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual 
allegations, with explanations. Her admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated 
herein. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old president and CEO of an information technology 
business who has worked for a defense contractor since December 1989, and is 
seeking to maintain a security clearance.  
 
 In 2004, Applicant and her husband formed a limited liability company (LLC)2 and 
began purchasing residential lots. Their intent was that the profits from the sale of a 
home would support construction of additional homes on the vacant lots. However, their 
timing was not good and the real estate market in Florida declined dramatically. (Item 
10, page 7 of 12) Prior to entering into the venture, both Applicant and her husband 
studied the Florida real estate market. Applicant and her husband had no experience in 
the real estate market, but she had 15 years of experience running a multi-million dollar 
information technology business and her husband had a PhD in molecular biology. 
(Applicant’s FORM response)  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 A limited liability company is a legal form of business organization with daily activities like a partnership 
but with limited liability similar to a corporation. The owners of an LLC are called "members" rather than 
partners or shareholders. A single-member LLC is taxed as a sole proprietorship, while a multiple-
member LLC is taxed as a partnership. The record is not clear if the property was purchased by Applicant 
or by the LLC. In either event Applicant would be liable either as purchaser or partner of the LLC.  
 
 
2 
 Applicant purchased three homes, six3 additional lots, and two residences. (Item 
9) She borrowed $5,733,000 on the real estate and, as of December 2009, the fair 
market value of the property was $4,000,000. (Item 9, page 5 of 6) The monthly 
mortgage on the property was between $30,000 and $35,000. (Ex. 10, page 7 of 12) 
She was able to pay her monthly mortgages until March 2009. (Id.) 
 
 The adverse economic situation prevented them from selling the homes or lots. 
The homes and lot prices were lowered to 60% of their former asking price in order to 
secure buyers for the property. The homes and lots did not sell. Applicant attempted to 
sell a home and the lots at auction, but found no buyers. Attempts to sell by owner, 
through realtors, and on computer sites did not meet with success.  
 
 Since 2006, Applicant has called the creditor weekly, attempting to renegotiate 
the loans. (Ex. 10, page 7 of 12) She is attempting to sell the property by “short sale.4” It 
took her five to six months from the date of submission for the creditor to approve the 
short sales. (Item 5) She hired a real estate attorney to assist her in submitting Deeds-
In-Lieu (DIL) requests on the lots. With a DIL request Applicant would surrender the 
property to the creditor. She may have to contribute funds to the creditor. If the DIL 
requests were accepted, she would owe the creditor the difference between the 
appraised value and the sale price. (Item 10, page 8 of 12) If the property sells for more 
than the appraised value, the creditor keeps the amount. (Id.) The creditor routinely 
takes approximately 60 days to process a DIL request. (Item 5)  
 
 The lender has approved short sales on the three homes. Applicant had a 
$1,052,000 mortgage on the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.a. She was $61,000 past due on the 
note. The house went to settlement in July 2010 with her contributing $50,000 at time of 
settlement. (Items 4, 5)  
 
 Applicant was approximately $43,000 past due on a $700,000 mortgage (SOR ¶ 
1.d). In June 2010 the house went to short sale. (Item 4) The amount received on the 
sale covered the debt owed. She was not required to pay any additional amount on the 
home.  
 
                                                          
3 Although there are six lots, there are only five mortgages for the lots. Two lots (SOR ¶ 1.h) are on the 
same mortgage.  
4 A short sale is a sale of real estate in which the mortgage lender agrees to allow a sale of the 
mortgaged property for less than the outstanding balance of the loan. The proceeds of the sale go to the 
lender. The lender must approve any proposed short sale.  
     A short sale typically is executed to prevent a home foreclosure, but is based on the most economic 
way for the mortgage lender to recover the amount owed on the property. A short sale is typically faster 
and less expensive than a foreclosure. A short sale is simply negotiating with the mortgage lender for a 
payoff for less than the full debt amount. It does not extinguish the remaining balance unless settlement is 
clearly indicated on the acceptance of offer. 
 
3 
 Applicant was $48,000 past due on a $1,290,000 mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.g). In 
February 2010, the creditor approved a short sale, but the purchaser chose to walk 
away from the purchase. In May 2010, another short sale was approved, selling the 
house for approximately $800,000. (Items 4, 5) The house was to close September 30, 
2010 with her paying $24,000 at closing. (Exs. I, III). 
 
 In June 2010, Applicant submitted DIL requests to the creditor for the six unsold 
lots. She realizes she may be required to pay additional funds if the DIL requests are 
approved. Creditor has yet to respond. (Item 4) She was approximately $156,000 past 
due on the six lots (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.h.). She owed the lender 
approximately $2,700,000. As of December 2009, the fair market value on the lots was 
approximately $1,400,000, approximately one-half of the value owed on them. (Item 9, 
page 5 of 6) 
 
 There is no showing Applicant has been unable to address her other financial 
obligations in a timely manner. Other than the real estate delinquencies, there is no 
evidence of financial problems. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
4 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant purchased three homes and six lots for resale, incurring mortgages of 
$5,700,000. Until March 2009, she was able to make timely mortgage payments. She 
became more than $300,000 past due on the property. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
 
5 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The mitigating conditions of AG ¶ 20(a) have limited application. She started 
buying the houses and lots in 2004, which is behavior that started six years ago. The 
failure to pay the mortgages occurred in 2009, which is recent. Additionally, the debts 
are considered recent because the houses have only recently gone to short sales and 
the lender has not accepted the DIL requests on the six lots. Such conduct is unlikely to 
recur. She will not be buying Florida real estate in the future.  
 
The conditions listed in AG & 20(b) apply. The financial problems were largely 
beyond her control. She and her spouse carefully considered the real estate venture 
before entering it. She could not have anticipated the drastic change in the real estate 
market. As of December 2009, she owed approximately $5,700,000 on property worth 
$4,000,000. The real estate markets nationwide, and especially in Florida, suffered 
greatly. It was a factor beyond her control. Once she realized the problem, she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. She lowered the home prices to 60% of their 
former asking price, she attempted to sell the homes and lots at auction, but found no 
buyers. She did what she could to sell the property. Her efforts were unsuccessful. 
Starting in 2006, she has called the creditor weekly to renegotiate the loans and do 
what she could to address the problem. Short loans and DIL requests were made.  
 
6 
The mitigating conditions of AG ¶ 20(c) have limited application. Although there 
is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling, there is some indication her 
financial problems are being resolved. The three homes have been sold. The creditor 
has yet to act on her DIL requests to surrender the lots. As to the lots, it is too soon to 
find a clear indication that the problem is being resolved or is under control. Considering 
how she has pursued the short sales of the three homes it can be assumed her pursuit 
of the DIL requests will be just as aggressive. Except for the real estate, there has been 
no showing Applicant has experienced a problem with any other lender or account. 
None of her other accounts are delinquent.  
 
Under AG & 20(d), Applicant has made a $50,000 payment at the sale of one 
home, $24,000 at the sale of a second home, and the third home was sold at a price 
where she was not required to submit additional funds. She has submitted DIL requests 
for the lots, acknowledges she may have to make some type of payment at the time the 
lots sell, and is willing to make the payments. Having made $74,000 worth of payments 
when the two homes sold, it is likely she will carry through on her promise to make 
payments required on the sale of the lots. AG & 20(d) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
The issue is whether Applicant’s financial circumstances raise concerns about 
her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a) (1).) I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. The debts were not incurred on luxuries. Although not 
experienced in the real estate market, Applicant and her husband did not go into this 
venture blindly. They knew there were risks involved in real estate purchase and 
development. However, the dramatic loss in fair market value of the property could not 
have been foreseen in 2004, when they started purchasing property. The downturn of 
 
7 
 
8 
the real estate market nationwide was beyond their control. They realized the problem 
and did all they could to limit their losses. However, everyone else in the real estate 
market was attempting to do likewise.  
 
The three houses have now gone to short sale and her financial liability as to the 
house has been addressed. The six lots remain unsold and the DIL requests yet to be 
accepted. Her past conduct in getting the houses to sale indicates she will be just as 
aggressive in attempting to have the DIL requests accepted. There is no showing of 
Applicant being unable to address her other financial obligations in a timely manner.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1. h:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
