 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-08108 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 24, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) for Applicant. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 1, 2010. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on May 21, 2010. The case was assigned to me on May 28, 
 
2 
 
 
2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 2, 2010, scheduling the hearing for 
June 23, 2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until July 2, 2010, to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE D through K, which 
were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 
30, 2010. The record closed on July 2, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.d., and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c. His 
answers are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old infrastructure generalist, who has worked for a 
defense contractor since February 2008. He seeks to renew his top secret security 
clearance. Applicant previously held a security clearance while he was on active duty 
in the U.S. Navy, discussed infra. He has never had a security violation on active duty 
or as a civilian employee. (GE 1, Tr. 17-, 23-24.)  
 
Applicant was home-schooled and was awarded his high school diploma in 
August 1996. (Tr. 20.) He has been attending a technical university since April 2008 
and is “four classes away from [his] associate’s [degree].” He also attended various 
Navy service schools and job-related training courses. (GE 1, Tr. 21-22.) 
 
Applicant served in the Navy from January 1997 to December 2006, and was 
honorably discharged as an Information Systems Technician First Class (Surface 
Warfare) (pay grade E-6). He was assigned to sea duty approximately seven out of 
the almost ten years he served in the Navy. (GE 1, Tr. 18-20.) 
 
Applicant was previously married from June 1998 to August 2001. That 
marriage ended by divorce. He remarried in February 2002. Applicant has five children 
– an 11-year-old daughter born during his first marriage, a 10-year-old son he adopted 
from his second wife’s previous marriage, and three sons born during his second 
marriage, ages 7, 6, and 4. All five children live with him and his second wife, including 
his 11-year-old daughter from his first marriage. Applicant’s wife does not work outside 
the home. Applicant is solely responsible for supporting his wife and five children. (GE 
1, Tr. 13-17, 24-25.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his August 2009 e-QIP; his February 2010 Responses to DOHA 
Interrogatories;  as well as his April 2004, August 2009, March 2010, and April 2010 
credit reports. Applicant’s SOR identified four separate debts totaling $37,933. (GE 1 – 
6; SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.d.) 
 
Applicant has settled, paid, or attempted to resolve in good faith the four debts 
alleged. A brief summary of each debt follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. is a charged-off account for a $12,000 line of credit loan that 
Applicant secured to bridge his income gap, discussed infra. In July 2009, Applicant 
enrolled this debt with a debt consolidation firm (DCF) and was making monthly 
payments until April 2010. He was no longer able to afford the $400 monthly payments 
and accompanying fees required by the DCF and disenrolled from the program. He 
has sought alternative professional help and continues in his attempts to resolve this 
debt. (Response to SOR, Tr. 32-33, 35-36.);  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b. is a $16,000 past-due balance on a home mortgage loan. This 
account was satisfied following the proceeds netted in a foreclosure sale in March 
2010. (Response to SOR, Tr. 30-31, 56-58, AE C.); 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c. is a charged-off credit card account for $4,711. This debt had also 
been enrolled with the DCF. However, Applicant settled and paid this account in 
December 2009. (Response to SOR, Tr. 34-35, 55-56, AE B.); and 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d. is the balance of $5,222 owed on a vehicle repossession. Applicant 
negotiated a settlement through the DCF and was making monthly payments with the 
creditor. The final payment was due in October 2010. (Response to SOR, Tr. 39-40.) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to a job change that resulted in a 
substantial income reduction, a cross-country move, and the costs associated with 
maintaining two households following his cross-country move. Specifically, when 
Applicant left the Navy in 2006, he was making approximately $55,000 per year. After 
leaving the Navy in December 2006, he made approximately $170,000 per year 
working for a subcontractor. In February 2008, he left his subcontractor because of 
long working hours and lengthy separation from his family, and began working for his 
current employer. His change of employment also resulted in his salary being reduced 
to approximately $120,000 per year, which was later reduced to $58,000 per year 
when he left a shipboard working environment. In September 2008, he accepted a 
cross-country transfer. He was unable to sell his home after being transferred and was 
unable to afford maintaining two homes in two locations. (Tr. 25-28, 42-52.) 
 
To address his indebtedness, Applicant enrolled his debts with a DCF, 
borrowed against his 401k, refinanced his vehicle, worked overtime at every 
 
4 
 
 
opportunity, and consulted a bankruptcy attorney. He has kept his Facility Security 
Officer apprised of his situation. (Tr. 38-41, 45-46, AE A, AE B, AE J.) 
 
Applicant’s budget, although strained, reflects that he maintains a modest 
lifestyle and is able to “keep his head above water.” He has little discretionary income 
left over after paying all the monthly expenses associated with supporting a spouse 
and five children. Applicant envisions his career with his company as upwardly mobile. 
(GE 2, Tr. 51-53, 60.) 
 
In conclusion, Applicant has paid, settled, made a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors, or resolved or intends to resolve all debts alleged. Given his resources, it 
appears Applicant is doing as well as can be expected and has addressed the majority 
of his debts. He remains current on the rest of his monthly bills.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted 11 award citations from his Navy service and civilian 
employment. These awards document significant events or exceptional service. One 
commendatory award spoke of his service as a member of the Multi-National Force 
boarding teams while deployed to the Mideast. He participated in 25 boardings in 
August 1999, was placed in harm’s way, and while participating in these boardings 
conducted himself with “impeccable attention to detail” and served with distinction. 
The remainder of the awards are equally complimentary. (AE D.) Applicant also 
submitted his 2008 and 2009 employee evaluations. They document above-average 
performance and his contribution to the defense industry. (AE E.) Applicant’s enlisted 
performance evaluations are equally complimentary and also document his ten years 
of sustained honorable service. (AE F.) 
 
Lastly, Applicant submitted four work-related reference e-mails, two from 
supervisory personnel and two from co-workers. All four individuals describe Applicant 
as trustworthy and support his being granted a clearance. (AE G, AE H, AE I, AE K.)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to 
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that a relevant security concern exists under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial 
problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. to 1.d., he had four delinquent debts 
totaling $37,933 that had been in various states of delinquency for at least several 
years. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 
(e) are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. 
Therefore, his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). He receives partial credit under 
AG ¶ 20(a) because the debt “occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.”  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), he receives credit because his reduction in income and 
subsequent work-related move and costs associated with his move were largely 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
beyond his control and he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Even though he 
did not have the funds for full repayment, he did remain in contact with his creditors 
during this timeframe.1  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not seek financial 
counseling. He has, however, produced evidence that reflects he is living within his 
means and is on the road to regaining financial solvency. Furthermore, there is 
sufficient information to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).2 Applicant has paid, 
is paying, or attempting to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable because 
Applicant did not dispute the validity of any of his debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists four 
debts totalling $37,933 that were at one time or another in various states of 
delinquency. For several years, he failed to keep his accounts current or negotiate 
lesser payments, showing financial irresponsibility and lack of judgment. His lack of 
success in resolving delinquent debt until recently raises sufficient security concerns 
to merit further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of ten years of honorable military service, family involvement, and 
good employment with a defense contractor weighs in his favor. There is no evidence 
of any security violation during the time Applicant held a security clearance, which 
includes his Navy service and employment with a defense contractor. He is a law-
abiding citizen. Although he is not debt-free, there is sufficient evidence that he is 
putting forth his best effort given the resources available to him. I did not detect any 
recalcitrance or reluctance on his part to address his past debts. On the contrary, 
Applicant views this process seriously and recognizes his failure to regain financial 
responsibility can adversely affect his future employment. His monthly expenses are 
current. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis 
in financial cases, stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
 
9 
 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
Applicant is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His company 
fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. He made mistakes, 
and debts became delinquent. There is, however, simply no reason not to trust him. 
He has put forth a noteworthy effort to resolve his debts and has established a 
“meaningful track record” of debt payments. These factors show responsibility, 
rehabilitation, and mitigation. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I 
conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.d.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
