1 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 09-00212 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations trustworthiness 
concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, 
as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 3, 2010. The case was assigned 
to me on June 29, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 12, 2010, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on August 3, 2010. The Government offered 
2 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were received without objection. An index for the 
government exhibits and a demonstrative exhibit were marked Hearing Exhibits (HE) I 
and II. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through 
Q which were received without objection. Applicant’s exhibit list was marked as HE III. I 
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted AE R-W (note: these exhibits were originally marked as AE L-Q, 
however, those letters had previously been assigned to exhibits) which were admitted 
without objection. Appellant’s post-hearing correspondence and supplemental exhibit 
list were marked as HE IV, V, and VI, and Department Counsel’s memo is marked HE 
VII. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 10, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a government contractor. She has worked 
for her current employer since 2008. She was divorced in 2002 and remarried in 2003. 
She has three children from her first marriage, ages 19, 16, and 9. She does not receive 
any child support from the children’s father who is currently incarcerated. Her yearly 
salary is currently $92,000 and her husband’s is $50,000.1 
 
 The SOR lists 36 delinquent debts (including one duplicative debt) totaling about 
$85,651. Applicant admitted that she owed the delinquent debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.c. 
1.n, 1.x, 1.cc, 1.hh, and 1.ii, but denied the rest of the listed debts.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial troubles began back in 2002, when she divorced her first 
husband. Several of the larger balance debts were from joint accounts during their 
marriage. She did not receive child support from her husband and had to provide for her 
three children on her own. As of May 2009, she was owed about $32,000 in child 
support. During this time she worked low-paying jobs and experienced periods of 
unemployment. Consequently, she was unable to make payments on her debts. She 
attempted to resolve her debts with the assistance of a debt consolidation agency that 
she hired in April 2009. She stopped making payments under this plan after a few 
months because she was dissatisfied with the results.3  
 
 In July 2010, Applicant purchased an internet financial plan from a nationally 
known financial advisor to assist her in paying off these delinquent debts. Under the 
plan, Applicant is to make monthly payments of $1,280 for almost five years and then 
she will be debt free. The plan does not cover the $33,442 foreclosure deficiency listed 
at SOR ¶ 1.n. Applicant has not made any payments under this plan.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 28-30, 45; GE 1. 
 
2 Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
3 Tr. at 30-32, 69-71; GE 8. 
 
4 AE K; Tr. at 86-87. 
 
3 
 The status of the debts is described in the table below and all the debts are listed 
in credit reports dated November 24, 2009, January 20, 2009, and May 1, 2008.5  
 
DEBT SOR ¶ AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE 
1.a  $105 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 1. 
1.b  $475 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 1. 
1.c. $207 
 
Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 1. 
1.d $50 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 1. 
1.e $626 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 1. 
1.f $237 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 2. 
1.g $25 Applicant claims paid off, but no 
documentation supporting claim. 
GE 2 at 2. 
1.h $87 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 2. 
1.i $7,836 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 2. 
1.j $489 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 2. 
1.k $25 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 2;  
GE 4 at 7. 
1.l $395 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 2. 
1.m $6,045 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 2 at 3. 
1.n $33,442 Unresolved GE 3 at 1; 
GE 5 
1.o $315 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 3 at 1. 
1.p $686 Included in internet payment plan. 
Payment of $172 on Aug 17, 2009. 
GE 3 at 1. 
AE R. 
1.q $1,435 Applicant claims paid off, but no 
documentation supporting claim. 
GE 3 at 1. 
1.r $458 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 3 at 2. 
1.s $444 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 3 at 2. 
1.t $41 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 3 at 2. 
                                                          
5 GE 2-4. 
 
4 
DEBT SOR ¶ AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE 
1.u $33,442 Duplicate debt (1.n)  
1.v $689 Disputes, but admits it was a joint 
debt with ex-husband 
GE 4 at 4. 
1.w $7,342 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 4 at 12; 
GE 8 at 42. 
1.x $3,092 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 4 at 13. 
1.y $499 Included in internet payment plan. 
Payment of $40 on April 6, 2010. 
GE 4 at 13. 
AE T. 
1.z $409 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 4 at 14. 
1.aa $403 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 4 at 14. 
1.bb $200 Paid AE U. 
1.cc $167 Proposed payment plan or  
settlement. Unresolved 
GE 4 at 15. 
1.dd $130 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 4 at 16. 
1.ee $14,623 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 9 at 4. 
1.ff $85 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 9 at 9. 
1.gg $81 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 9 at 9. 
1.hh 
 
$1,670 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 6. 
1.ii 
 
$2,831 Included in internet payment plan. 
No payments made so far. 
GE 7. 
 
 Applicant sent letters to several creditors offering to pay a small monthly 
payments or alternatively to make a lump sum settlement of the debt. Applicant offered 
no responses to these letters into the record. Applicant made partial payments on two 
debts (1.p and1.y) and one total payment (1.bb). All of the debts are delinquent and 
Applicant has made no other payments.6  
 
 Applicant submitted numerous favourable character letters. Additionally she had 
two character witnesses testify. She is praised by all for her complete honesty, integrity, 
and trustworthiness. She also received certificates of achievement for taking courses in, 
“Setting financial goals and creating a budget” and “Your banking relationship”.7 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 AE Q, S, V.  
7 AE A-H, J, K, L, M; Tr. at 18-26. 
 
5 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
6 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG ¶ 18:   
   
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c).  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20(a) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
7 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Although some of Applicant’s debts occurred several years ago, they are still 
owed and they are numerous. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable at this time.  
 
 Applicant’s divorce, failure to receive child support, and periods of unemployment 
contributed to her financial distress. Those are conditions that were largely beyond her 
control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant failed to act timely dealing with her 
debts. Even though she contacted a debt consolidation service in April 2009 and bought 
a self-help debt relief program, no substantive debt reduction has happened. AG ¶ 20 
(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant did take some financial management courses, but there is no indication 
her debts are being resolved or under control. Applicant receives partial consideration 
under AG 20(c). Her actions do not qualify as a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8 AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. Her disputed joint 
debts with her ex-husband are not supported by any documented proof absolving her of 
liability. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
8 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
8 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 39 
years old. She is well thought of in her community and at work. She is considered an 
honest and trustworthy person. She and her current husband make a combined annual 
income of over $140,000. Applicant struggled during and after her divorce from her first 
husband, particularly since he failed to pay child support. Despite those circumstances, 
Applicant has had sufficient time to develop a plan of action to deal with her debts, yet 
she failed to do so. Applicant’s financial track record does not persuade me that she will 
satisfy the delinquent debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.t:  AGAINST Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.v-1.aa:  AGAINST Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.bb:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.cc-1.ii:  AGAINST Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
