 
 
1
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
 .        )   ISCR Case No. 09-08090   
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esquire 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under the 
guidelines for drug involvement and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) signed on July 2, 2009. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
 
 
2
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
 On April 6, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference), E (Personal Conduct), and H (Drug 
Involvement) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 
 
Applicant submitted an undated Answer, received by DOHA on April 30, 2010, in 
which he admitted the allegations under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. Department 
Counsel subsequently amended the SOR on May 17, 2010, by adding Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. Applicant answered the amendment on May 24, 2010, denying the 
new allegation.  
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 17, 2010, and the case was assigned to me 
on May 27, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 2, 2010. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on June 17, 2010. I admitted four exhibits offered by the 
Government (GE 1 through 4). Applicant and four witnesses testified. He offered six 
exhibits, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F. DOHA received the 
transcript on June 25, 2010. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Prior to the hearing, by memoranda dated May 17 2010, the Government 
amended the SOR by adding paragraph 2, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, containing 
one subparagraph, as follows: 
 
a. You falsified material facts on a Standard Form 86 – Questionnaire for 
Sensitive Positions, that you signed on March 24, 2005, on which you 
were required to answer the following question: 24. Your Use of Illegal 
Drugs and Drug Activity. The following questions pertain to the illegal use 
of drugs or drug activity. You are required to answer the questions fully 
and truthful, and your failure to do so could be grounds for an adverse 
employment decision or action against you, but neither your truthful 
responses nor information derived from your responses will be used as 
evidence against you in any subsequent criminal proceeding. A. Since the 
age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented by the Department 
of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
3
used any controlled substances, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack 
cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) 
amphetamines, depressants, (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.) OR prescription drugs?” to which 
you responded “No,” whereas in truth, you deliberately failed to disclose 
your use of marijuana in 2004. 
 
At the hearing, Applicant objected to the Government’s amendment. Under Enclosure 
3 of Directive 5220.6, ¶ E3.1.13, each party must serve one another with documents to 
be submitted at the hearing. Department Counsel served Applicant with notice of the 
SOR amendment by letter dated May 17, 2010, more than one month before the 
hearing. Applicant answered the new allegation on May 24, 2010. He had sufficient 
notice and opportunity to respond and admitted at the hearing that he was not 
prejudiced by the amendment. Applicant also objected that Department Counsel does 
not have the authority to amend the SOR. Under ¶ E3.1.17 of the Directive, the 
Administrative Judge, Department Counsel, or Applicant can move to amend the SOR 
at the hearing “to render it in conformity with the evidence admitted, or for other good 
cause.” The non-amending party can be granted additional time to respond to such an 
amendment, if requested. The Appeal Board has described the Directive’s language as 
to SOR amendments as “permissive.” (See ISCR Case No. 08-02404 at 5 (App. Bd. 
June 5, 2009). I overruled Applicant's objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings and the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings. 
 
Applicant, 24 years old, was single at the time of the hearing, and does not have 
children. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2009 in wireless engineering and 
mathematics. He participated in co-op programs while in college, during which he 
worked for federal agencies. They occurred from May to August 2005, and from 
January to May 2006. He required a security clearance for these positions, and 
completed a security clearance application in March 2005. (Tr. 62) He was granted a 
security clearance in June 2006. He participated in co-op program at a federal agency 
from August to November 2006. He began his present full-time position as a software 
engineer with a defense contractor in July 2009, although he held a part-time position 
with the same company from January 2009, while completing his degrees. (GE 1, 3, 4; 
Tr. 61-64) 
 
Applicant attended college from 2004 to 2009. He used marijuana while he was 
in college. When he completed his security clearance application in March 2005, he did 
not indicate he had used marijuana. When he completed a second security clearance 
application in July 2009, he disclosed that he had used marijuana recreationally in 
 
 
4
October 2004; November 2004; twice in December 2004; twice in September 2005; and 
in July 2008. In his interrogatory response of March 2010, he reported his first use of 
marijuana as October 2004, and his last use as July 2008. (GE 1, 2) 
 
In August 2009, Applicant met with an investigator for a security interview. He 
stated he used marijuana between October 2004 and July 2008. He usually used it at 
parties, and with college acquaintances in dorms, homes, or apartments. He used 
marijuana either in cigarette form, when he would inhale once, or with a pipe, when he 
would inhale twice. He never bought or sold marijuana. He stated he has had no contact 
with these acquaintances since college. (GE 3; Tr. 67-68) 
 
In the interview, Applicant also admitted that he used marijuana in July 2008, 
when he held a security clearance. This use was the only time he used it after obtaining 
a clearance. He told the investigator that he had received all the instructions regarding 
holding a security clearance. At the time of his security interview, no one knew that 
Applicant had used marijuana while holding a security clearance. He also told the 
investigator that he had no intent to use marijuana in the future. When DOHA sent him a 
copy of the interview report in March 2010, he reviewed it, corrected some entries made 
by the investigator, then noted that “Everything else is accurate.” He did not correct any 
of the information concerning his marijuana use. He also typed in his first use of 
marijuana as “October 2004.” He signed a notarized certification that the interview was 
accurate, as corrected, and that his responses to the interrogatory were true. (GE 3) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he first used marijuana in the fall of 2005, 
not 2004. He used it about six times in 2005, before he received his security clearance 
in June 2006. He also admitted the July 2008 use, which occurred after receiving his 
security clearance. Applicant testified that he made a mistake on his 2009 security 
clearance application. When he completed it, he estimated that he had done his first 
application in September 2004; he knew he did not use marijuana before that date, so 
he entered that he started smoking marijuana in October 2004. After receiving the SOR 
amendment alleging a falsification, he reviewed the dates and realized that, since he 
actually completed his first application in March 2005, and he did not use marijuana until 
after he completed his application, his first marijuana use occurred in October 2005, not 
October 2004. He stated that there is no doubt in his mind that he began using 
marijuana after completing the 2005 application, not before. He knew that disclosing he 
used marijuana after obtaining his security clearance might jeopardize the clearance, 
but wanted to be honest about his drug use. (Tr. 67, 70-75) 
 
On cross-examination, Applicant admitted that he was unsure about the actual 
dates of his use, and that the dates he gave were not precise, but only to the best of his 
knowledge. He listed the specific number of times each month only to indicate the 
infrequency of his marijuana use, rather than the exact dates or number of times. He 
testified that the maximum number of times he used marijuana was seven; that he first 
used it in September 2005; that he most likely used marijuana in October and 
 
 
5
November 2005; and that it was possible he used it more than once in those months. 
He also testified that he did not use it with a pipe or with any other paraphernalia. He 
knew when he used it that it was illegal. (Tr. 77-84) 
 
Applicant has never been treated for his drug use. Other than his fiancée, he no 
longer associates with the friends with whom he used marijuana in the past. His fiancée 
testified that she no longer uses illegal drugs. Applicant has no intent to use marijuana 
in the future, as it is inconsistent with his career goals. He attached to his Answer to the 
SOR a signed, notarized statement of intent not to use marijuana or other illegal drugs 
in the future, with revocation of his security clearance if he reneges. (Answer; Tr. 68-69) 
 
The employment evaluation Applicant submitted for September 2009 to May 
2010 shows that he either exceeded standards or performed exceptionally in all 
categories. Several long-standing friends and college roommates submitted character 
references, which describe Applicant as having strong character, as well as being 
reliable, trustworthy, and a hard worker. Several were familiar with Applicant's marijuana 
use, and opined that it is a thing of the past, and that Applicant is not easily influenced 
by others. (AE A-F) 
 
Applicant's current Technical Lead testified. He has functioned as Applicant's 
daily supervisor since the fall of 2009. He testified that Applicant is reliable and 
exercises good judgment. Applicant told the witness about his marijuana use, and that 
he has no intent to use it again, as it is counter-productive to his career goals. He does 
not believe Applicant would knowingly falsify his security clearance application. (Tr. 22-
30) 
 
Applicant's fiancée testified. She and Applicant met in 2005. They started dating 
in 2007, and have had daily contact since then. He told her he used marijuana about six 
times in fall of 2005. In July 2008, she and Applicant were at a party. An acquaintance 
had marijuana, and she and Applicant shared the joint with several other friends. They 
do not associate now with the people with whom they used it at the party. In October 
2008, Applicant's fiancée used marijuana again for the last time. Applicant has told her 
he will not use it again. She does not believe he deliberately falsified his 2005 security 
clearance application. (Tr. 31-44) 
 
A coworker, who has known Applicant for one year and has had daily interaction 
with him, testified he finds Applicant to have mature judgment, and to be trustworthy 
and reliable. In early 2010, Applicant told him that after completing the security 
clearance application in March 2005, he used marijuana in the later months of 2005 
“…on once or twice a month basis” for a total of about six times. (Tr. 45-52) Another 
friend, who has known Applicant for eight years, testified that Applicant told him he used 
marijuana a few times very early in his college career. The witness stated that, since he 
himself started college in 2005, Applicant would have started in 2004. Applicant also 
told the witness that he had used marijuana in 2008. (Tr. 53-60)  
 
 
6
                                                
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).3 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement  
 
 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7
 The security concern about drug involvement is that 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24. 
 
 The evidence raises three potentially disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
Applicant used marijuana six or seven times while in college between 2004 and 2005. 
He used it at parties and at friends’ houses. He sometimes used in the form of a 
cigarette, and he sometimes used it with a pipe. In June 2006, he was granted a 
security clearance. Nevertheless, he used marijuana again in 2008. At that point, he 
not only knowingly engaged in illegal conduct, but did so while he carried the additional 
obligations imposed on those who hold security clearances. AG ¶¶ 25(a), (c), and (g) 
apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the potential mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26, 
especially the following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 
 
8
 Applicant’s uses of marijuana in 2004 and 2005 were not recent, having 
occurred five to six years ago. However, his 2008 use was more recent. Applicant’s 
drug use did not occur under unusual circumstances, as he used marijuana at parties, 
with friends, and his fiancée. Moreover, as recently as 2008, the fact that he held a 
security clearance did not prevent him from engaging in this illegal conduct. His 
behavior raises doubts about his judgment. Mitigation under AG ¶ 26(a) applies in part, 
only in regard to his early marijuana use. 
 
 As to AG ¶ 26(b)(4), Applicant testified that he has no plans to use marijuana in 
the future, and submitted a notarized statement to that effect. However, Applicant's 
failure to disclose his 2004 marijuana use on his first application undermines the 
reliability of this statement. Applicant no longer associates with the friends with whom 
he used marijuana in college. However, AG ¶ 26(b)(1) cannot be applied in complete 
mitigation because he has an ongoing relationship with his fiancée, with whom he used 
marijuana in July 2008. Although she no longer uses marijuana and has no intent to 
use in the future, she testified that she again used marijuana in October 2008, after the 
July use with Applicant. Only partial mitigation is available under AG ¶ 26(b)(1). 
 
 As of the date of the hearing, Applicant had not used marijuana in two years. 
There is no bright line defining an appropriate period of reform and rehabilitation. In 
some cases, two years could be interpreted as a sufficient period of abstinence. 
However, the fact that Applicant knowingly used an illegal drug after he was granted a 
security clearance, and the poor judgment shown by this conduct, weighs against a 
conclusion that sufficient time has passed. The partial mitigation under AG ¶ 26 does 
not overcome the gravity of the fact that Applicant chose to use marijuana while he 
held a security clearance.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegation implicates the following disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
 
 
9
 
The government alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his security 
clearance application in 2005 when he failed to disclose his 2004 marijuana use. He 
provided, in his 2009 application, seven dates when he used marijuana between 
October 2004 and September 2005, and then in July 2008. He confirmed these dates 
when he met with the security investigator in 2009. In March 2010, when he received a 
copy of the investigator’s report to review for accuracy, he did not change the dates he 
had provided. Only when the Government alleged that he falsified his first application 
did he revise the dates, claiming that he started using marijuana in 2005, not 2004. I 
conclude, based on his repeated confirmation of the initial set of dates he provided, 
that he deliberately failed to disclose his 2004 uses on his 2005 application. Moreover, 
during his security interview, he admitted using a pipe to smoke marijuana, but at the 
hearing, he denied ever using a pipe. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 Guideline E contains the following relevant mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant's falsification is unmitigated. Falsification of information provided to the 
Government cannot be considered minor. Although Applicant disclosed his drug use 
when he completed his 2009 application, the record contains no evidence that he 
sought to correct the falsification promptly after completing the 2005 application. His 
conduct reflects negatively on his trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 
17(c) do not apply.   
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
10
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Weighing in Applicant's favor are several positive factors: he has earned a 
college degree, and performed successfully at work. His supervisor, as well as friends 
and co-workers, opined that he is reliable and a hard worker. He maintained a stable 
relationship, and expected to marry a few months after the hearing. He abstained from 
marijuana use for two years.  
 
 However, other facts raise security concerns. Applicant used marijuana up to 
seven times between 2004 and 2005. He used marijuana in the fall of 2005, even 
though he had completed a security clearance application that put him on notice that 
illegal drug use was a security concern. Then in 2008, he again engaged in criminal 
conduct and disregarded the obligations of security clearance holders, when he used 
an illegal drug after he had been granted a clearance in 2006. His conduct indicates a 
lack of judgment and trustworthiness, and raises doubts as to whether he understands 
what is required of those who hold security clearances. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.   Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
