KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline F
DIGEST: The nature of an op-ed piece runs contrary to the types of material appropriate for
administrative notice.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-03114.a1
DATE: 10/22/2010
DATE: October 22, 2010
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-03114
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
1The Judge entered formal findings in favor of Applicant under Guideline F.  Those findings are not at issue
on appeal.
2“[C]ontact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that
it could create a risk for foreign influence of exploitation.”
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 22, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992,
as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 15, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Marc E. Curry denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether the Judge erred by finding that
Applicant had four siblings residing in Syria, and (2) whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance
decision was arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms
the Judge’s unfavorable decision.1 
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: The State
Department has designated Syria as a state sponsor of terrorism.  A number of the terrorist groups
that have offices in Syria oppose U.S. policies in the Middle East, and have the ability and intent to
undermine American interests.  Syria has a poor human rights record, including severe restrictions
on civil liberties.  Syrian security forces have at times monitored its citizens’ telephone
conversations, fax transmissions, and mail addressed to both citizens and foreign residents.
Applicant was born in Syria.  He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1989 and has lived in this
country since then.  Applicant’s family returned to Syria after Applicant moved to the United States.
His father is deceased.  His mother is a citizen and resident of Syria.  Applicant talks to her
approximately once a month.  Applicant has four sisters.  All of them are Syrian citizens, and all
except one are Syrian residents.  Applicant has two brothers.  One is a Syrian citizen and resident,
and the other a dual Syrian/U.S. citizen.  Applicant has not traveled to Syria in 15 years.  He has not
seen any of his relatives since then, and he has not talked to any of his siblings in 10 to 15 years.
He does occasionally share e-mails with his sister, who is a salesperson, once every few months. 
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(c)2 serves to
mitigate the government’s security concerns regarding Applicant’s relationship with his siblings.
Although Applicant has not seen his mother in 15 years, the fact that he talks to her about once a
month makes ¶ 8(c) inapplicable.  Despite Applicant’s connections with the U.S., the combination
of Syria’s disregard for human rights, its sponsorship of terrorism, and its antipathy to U.S. regional
interests make the other pertinent mitigating factors inapplicable.
Applicant asserts that the Judge erred in making a factual finding that, with one exception,
his siblings reside in Syria.  He states that the record shows he indicated at the hearing that he did
3
not know whether his siblings reside in Syria.  The record consists of Applicant’s answer to the SOR
wherein he admits that three of his sisters are citizens and residents of Syria, and he admits that one
of his brothers is a citizen and resident of Syria.  In his hearing testimony, Applicant specifically
indicated that two of his sisters were in Syria and that a third worked in Syria.  He indicated that one
of his brothers was in Syria.  Considering the record as a whole, there is sufficient evidence to
support the Judge’s findings regarding the residency status of Applicant’s siblings.  Moreover, the
Judge concluded that Applicant’s relationship with his siblings was attenuated to the point where
the government’s security concerns were mitigated.  Thus, any errors in the Judge’s findings in this
area would be harmless.
Applicant argues that those in the Syrian government do not know where he works, and if
they do, they do not know what he does or what information he has access to.  He gave similar
testimony at the hearing below.  Applicant’s assertions are nonspecific and lack any significant
probative value.  They are insufficient to establish error on the part of the Judge.  The Judge noted
the specific circumstances of Syria’s posture as a state sponsor of terrorism and its inhospitable
posture toward human rights.  These facts, together with Applicant’s frequent contacts with his
mother, who resides in Syria, provide a sufficient basis for the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant
failed to mitigate the foreign influence security concern.
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the seriousness
of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant conditions and
factors.  He adequately discussed why the disqualifying conduct established under Guideline B was
not mitigated.
Applicant takes issue with the Judge’s decision not to take administrative notice of Hearing
Exhibit XII.  The proffered exhibit is an opinion piece by a journalist.  The Judge’s decision not to
consider the document was an appropriate recognition of the limits of judicial and administrative
notice.  See ISCR Case No. 02-06478 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2003)(the very nature of an op-ed
piece runs contrary to the kinds of matters that traditionally have been deemed appropriate subjects
for taking administrative notice). 
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
4
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan             
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                  
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                    
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
