                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-05662 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: J. Edward Foley, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 16, 2009, Applicant submitted her electronic security clearance 
application (e-QIP) (SF 86). On December 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 16, 2009. She 
answered the SOR in writing through counsel on December 31, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on January 7, 2010, and I received the case assignment on January 29, 2010. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on January 29, 2010, for a hearing to be conducted on 
February 23, 2010. On February 22, 2010, Applicant’s attorney requested a 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
continuance because he fell and injured himself. I granted the continuance. DOHA 
issued a second Notice of Hearing on April 9, 2010, for a hearing on May 5, 2010. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on that date. The Government offered Exhibits 1 
through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Exhibits A through H, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on May 17, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 13 factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a 
to 1.g, 1.q to 1.t, 1.v, and 1.w of the SOR, with explanations. She denied the 10 factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.h to 1.p and 1.u of the SOR. She also provided additional information 
to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 60 years old and married to her third husband. Her husband is 
disabled and cannot work. She has one adult child. She worked 30 years (1967 to 
2001) for a major industrial company until she retired during a reduction in force in the 
company. She receives an $18,000 pension annually. Her last year’s salary was 
$75,000. She withdrew $132,000 from her company Section 401(k) deferred 
compensation plan in 2001 and put the money in a bank account. She used all of it over 
the past nine years to pay bills and college tuition. The tax laws treated these 
withdrawals as taxable events from the Section 401(k) plan because Applicant was 
younger than 59.5 years old. Applicant did not realize she was incurring state and local 
income tax when she made the withdrawals. After she retired, Applicant spent money at 
the same rate as she did when employed. Later she realized that she had to reduce her 
expenditures. (Tr. 24, 38, 40-47, 51-53, 80, 88-91; Exhibit1) 
 
 After her retirement, Applicant worked part-time at a fitness club. In November 
2004, she started work with her current employer and has a Section 401(k) plan. Her 
base pay is about $35,000. Since 2005, she has held a secret security clearance. 
Applicant earned $53,800 in 2008. In 2009 after she changed from the second shift 
where she could earn more money, her total income, including her pension, dropped to 
$47,000. (Tr. 35, 46, 47, 66, 67; Exhibit G) 
 
 Applicant earned a college degree in 2005 after starting classes in 1971 and 
working on them part-time over 34 years. The company from which she retired gave her 
$5,000 for tuition. She also took out student loans totaling $20,755. Those loans were 
listed in the SOR as Paragraphs 1.q to 1.t. (Tr. 18, 39, 88; Exhibits 6 and B) 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2008. The total liabilities listed in the 
bankruptcy are $148,162.11. However, her income at that time exceeded the amount 
allowed under the U.S. Bankruptcy Act for the filing of a Chapter 7 petition. She 
converted the bankruptcy to a Chapter 13 with the consent of the U.S. Trustee in 
Bankruptcy. That action was dismissed when Applicant’s income dropped in 2009 and 
she filed another Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. Applicant listed all her debts, including 
 
3 
 
 
her education loans and tax debts to the state and federal governments, in her 
bankruptcy petition. The Bankruptcy Court discharged Applicant on January 5, 2010, of 
liability for the credit card and mortgage deficiency debts, along with some of the tax 
debts. (Any tax debt older than three years is unenforceable under the Bankruptcy Act.) 
Those taxes may include the state income taxes from 2002 to 2009, although 
Applicant’s attorney will verify the status of the state tax liability with the state revenue 
department. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) released their tax liens for the 2001, 
2002, and 2005 income tax years. The release is dated April 21, 2010. Applicant paid 
the IRS $400 monthly for 24 months on an offer in compromise until she filed her 
bankruptcy. Applicant’s education loans are not dischargeable in bankruptcy and she 
paid $275 monthly on them until May 2009 when the payments were reduced to $186 
monthly. (Tr. 18, 36, 65, 66; Exhibits 2, 6, A, B, C, D) 
 
 The SOR alleged 23 delinquent debts. Those debts total $79,509. The non-
education delinquent debts listed in the SOR and their current status is:  
 
 Paragraphs 1.a to 1.f are state tax liens from 2002 to 2009 totaling 
 $7,828. They were resolved through the bankruptcy proceeding. 
 (Tr. 53-56) 
 
 Paragraph 1.g. is a federal tax lien for $14,702. It was resolved by 
 the bankruptcy and the release of the lien by the IRS. (Tr. 57; 
 Exhibits 1-6, D) 
 
 Paragraphs 1.h to 1.p, and 1.u are debts on credit cards, her 
 mortgage balance, a judgment, a medical debt, a cell phone debt, 
 and a cash advance loan, all of which debts total $36,324 were 
 discharged in the Chapter 7 bankruptcy action. The house 
 Applicant purchased in 2002 she deeded back to the lender in 
 August 2006. (Tr. 59-64; Exhibits 1-6, A-E) 
 
 Applicant sought financial assistance when her mortgage became delinquent. 
She went to consumer counseling and hired an attorney. She attended a foreclosure 
seminar she learned about through her employer’s employee assistance program. 
Applicant has no delinquent debt now and her income taxes are current. She has no 
credit cards now. Applicant refinanced her house in 2005 in an attempt to reduce her 
payments. She admitted she was naïve about financial matters and thought the 
refinancing was a second mortgage or a home equity loan, but it was not. Applicant 
presented her budget comparison between May 2009 and May 2010. She reduced her 
monthly expenditures by $529. This reduction occurred because her rent, car payment, 
and student loan payments decreased, in addition to smaller decreases in her utility 
payments. Her boat payment ceased because the bankruptcy took the boat from her.  
(Tr. 34, 37, 68-70, 85, 103, 104; Exhibits 1-6, A-H)   
 
 Applicant received a verbal warning in March 2009 from her employer for a 
verbal altercation with another employee. Her manager and human resources 
 
4 
 
 
representative thought Applicant was under influence of an unknown substance. She is 
now required to undergo three years of random drug testing. Applicant was on short-
term disability at the time of the hearing for an ear infection. Her income was reduced by 
20% while on disability. (Tr. 93, 94, 100, 101; Exhibits 6, 7)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by an applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Four conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
 excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income 
 ratio, and/or other financial analysis; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or  
the fraudulent filing of same. 
 
Applicant accumulated $148,162.11 in delinquent debt from 2001 to the time that 
it was included in Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. Applicant has 23 delinquent 
debts listed in the SOR. The SOR lists $79,509 of delinquent debts. AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c) 
apply. 
 
Applicant admitted that she continued spending money at the level she did in 
2001 and beyond after she retired while she earned far less than her previous $75,000 
annual income. She accumulated debt in 2002 consisting of her house mortgage, car, 
and boat purchase. She earns about $35,000 annually in her present job in addition to 
her $18,000 annual pension. AG ¶ 19 (e) applies to that situation between 2001 and 
2010. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant did not file the appropriate federal and state income tax returns 
showing her Section 401(k) distributions were taxable. She should have rolled the 
money over from her former employer’s pension plan to another Section 401(k) account 
to avoid tax consequences. AG ¶ 19 (g) applies to that series of events. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Four conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
 such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
 individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
 person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
 medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted 
 responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
 and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
 under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
 otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s withdrawal and spending of her Section 401(k) funds occurred eight 
to nine years ago. The failure to pay taxes on this early distribution of retirement funds 
will not occur again because Applicant is now over 59.5 years old. Her mortgage debt 
problem will not recur because Applicant acknowledged her lack of financial 
sophistication and misunderstanding of the home financing mortgages she signed. She 
now rents her apartment. She keeps better track of her finances and actively worked in 
the past year to reduce her expenditures. In view of her revised financial practices, 
those previous actions do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems over the past decade were caused by her 
employer induced early retirement and subsequent substantial decreased income. She 
realized she could not continue to live at the same level of spending as she had when 
she was earning $75,000 annually and started to make adjustments in her financial life. 
She became responsible for her financial mistakes in 2004 when she got another full-
time job, though at half the income she made previously. She sought professional 
assistance through credit counseling and her employer’s assistance program to resolve 
her financial problems and save her home. AG ¶ 20 (b) applies.  
 
Applicant sought help from the consumer credit counseling agency in her area in 
2005 and 2006. She hired an attorney who helped her file bankruptcy and negotiate 
with her creditors. Applicant admitted her lack of financial knowledge and perspective 
 
7 
 
 
caused her problems. She has now resolved all the delinquent debts listed in the SOR 
and some other debts through the Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  AG ¶ 20 (c) applies.  
 
Applicant filed bankruptcy after trying to negotiate her debt problems with her 
creditors. Bankruptcy is a legal method to resolve debts, provided for under federal law. 
AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts, including her bankruptcy, 
to repay her delinquent debts.  
 
Applicant resolved the SOR allegations and lives on a budget now. She reduced 
her expenses to match her income. She is now financially stable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(b) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred delinquent debts 
when she spent beyond her financial ability to repay the debts from 2001 to 2008. She 
subsequently sought professional assistance to resolve the debts. She found it and 
eventually filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She reduced her spending by decreasing her 
monthly expenses by $529. Since 2009 Applicant has acted maturely and proactively in 
seeking ways to resolve her delinquent debts. She changed her behavior to extricate 
herself from the debt problems. Because of her actions over the past two years, there is 
no likelihood of recurrence of the same types of action, particularly as Applicant 
approaches retirement in five years. There is no reasonable potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress because Applicant’s debt problems were resolved.  
 
I examined the personnel altercation problem Applicant had with another 
employee at her current company. I concluded it had no bearing or effect on Applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
current trustworthiness, reliability, or good judgment. In nearly 40 years of her 
employment, this incident is the only one mentioned at the hearing. It appears on the 
evidence to be more of an interpersonal situation between Applicant and another 
employee than a determining factor in granting or denying her a security clearance. I 
gave it no weight in my consideration of the financial considerations or “whole-person” 
concept conditions.  
   
Applicant is not sophisticated in the area of finance. She made mistakes, and 
debts became delinquent. There is, however, simply no reason not to trust her. She has 
a record of trustworthy and responsible employment for four decades. She has paid her 
debts. Furthermore, she has established a “meaningful track record” of debt payments. 
These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.w:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
