                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-03910
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On January 11, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 26, 2010, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on June 3, 2010, and did not respond with any information within the
30 days permitted.  The case was assigned to me on August 16, 2010.   Based upon a
review of the case file,  pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
 Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have accumulated 16 delinquent
debts, exceeding $47,000 as follows: creditor 1.a ($98); creditor 1.b ($200); creditor 1.c
($355); creditor 1.d ($78); creditor 1.e ($726); creditor 1.f ($427); creditor 1.g ($734);
creditor 1.h ($884); creditor 1.I ($938); creditor 1.j ($38,900); creditor 1.k ($1,293);
creditor 1.l ($522); creditor 1.m ($402); creditor 1.n ($254); creditor 1.o ($153); and
creditor 1.p ($2,108).
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the alleged debts.  She
claimed she is in the process of making payment arrangements to satisfy some of the
creditors (subparagraphs 1.h through 1.k), and is retaining an attorney to address the
others. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 40-year-old lead fuels technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant married in 1990, and has no children from her marriage. (Item 5) She
divorced her husband in 1997. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in 1988 and
served four years of active duty. (Item 5) She currently receives $356 a month in VA
disability compensation. She received a Bachelor of Arts degree in business
administration in August 2007 (Item 5). 
Following her Air Force discharge in 1992, Applicant worked several jobs. (Item
5) She encountered serious financial problems in early 2008 after she was laid off from
her position. Her layoff cost her $2,000 a month in income. (Items 6 and 7)  Her
finances improved somewhat during the balance of 2008 after she obtained a position
with a local company. (Items 6 and 7)  
Between June 2006 and January 2009, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts
exceeding $47,000. (Items 6 through 9)  Most of these delinquent debts were accrued
following her 2008 layoff, but some were accumulated during periods of
underemployment spanning 2006 and 2008. (Items 6 and 7) Applicant has not received
any financial counseling and has made no payments on any of her delinquent debts
(Items 6 through 9).
 In Applicant’s personal financial statement, she listed monthly expenses of $310
(student loans), $784 (car loan), and $350 on a personal loan debt. (Item 6)  She
provided no documentary proof of efforts to negotiate any settlements, reduce
payments, or engage any credit counseling agent to assist her in addressing her debts. 
                           
Applicant provided no endorsements or documentation of community activities
and awards. Nor did she provide any performance evaluations or military service
records. 
3
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), and many of the
"[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole-person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole-person. The adjudicative process is designed to
examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
4
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865, that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts (to include a delinquent
student loan debt) during recurrent periods of unemployment and underemployment
between 2006 and 2008. Her accumulation of delinquent debts and her past inability
and unwillingness to address these debts warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the financial guideline: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to her inability to find well-paying work
following her discharge from the U.S. Air Force in 1992, and during a difficult stretch
for her between 2006 and early 2008. Her largest debt is a student loan deficiency
that has not been addressed.  Collectively, her remaining delinquent debts exceed
$12,000, and have not been addressed to date.    
5
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay or otherwise resolve her
debts.  Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in
the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly.” Without more information from
Applicant on the steps she has taken to date to resolve her debts, there is insufficient
evidence in this record to credit her with responsible corrective measures.  Hence, this
mitigating condition has only partial application to Applicant’s situation.
Moreover, some judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s unexplained
delinquencies and her failure to demonstrate she acted responsibly in addressing her
listed debts once the unemployment and underemployment conditions that
contributed to the delinquencies had passed or eased, and her finances had
improved. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004).  Not only are her
listed debt delinquencies ongoing, but she has failed to address them in any tangible
way.  Mitigation credit is not available to Applicant based on the evidence developed
in this record.         
                                          
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business. See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980).
Failure of the applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve his debts when
able to do so raises security-significant concerns about whether the applicant has
demonstrated the trust and judgment necessary to safeguard classified information.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts. Since her return
to work following her 2008 layoff, she has not shown any manifest effort in addressing
any of her covered debts to mitigate her still delinquent accounts. Resolution of her
delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to her regaining control of her  finances.
While unemployment and underemployment conditions might have played a
considerable role in her accumulation of so many debts over a relatively short period,
Applicant failed to provide any explanatory material for consideration.  Endorsements
and performance evaluations might have been helpful, too, in making a whole-person
assessment of her overall clearance eligibility, but were not provided. Overall,
clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited amount of
information available for consideration in this record does not enable her to establish
judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of her
accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, her lack of any probative explanations for her debt
6
accruals, and her failure to provide any proof of corrective actions taken to address
her old debts, it is still too soon to make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s
ability to repay her debts and restore her finances to stable levels commensurate with
the minimum requirements for holding a security clearance.  Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p. 
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors enumerated in paragraph 2(a) of the AGs.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.p:            Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
