                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00765 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s lengthy history of substance abuse, treatment, and relapses, raise 
serious doubts about his rehabilitation and whether he has made permanent behavioral 
changes. His past behavior shows he does not have the ability or willingness to comply 
with the law, rules, and regulations. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 20, 2008. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, on December 4, 2009, 
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to 
make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as Error! Main 
Document Only.revised. 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
On September 1, 2006, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision - security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2  
 
On December 21, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
May 6, 2010, to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on May 21, 2010. The hearing was convened as scheduled 
on June 11, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 17, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant and one witness testified. Post-hearing, he 
submitted Exhibit (AE) 1, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 18, 2010.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government conceded, and the evidence shows, that SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 
1.f are related to the same course of conduct. (Tr. 40) The misconduct alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b resulted in the administrative and rehabilitative actions in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. Thus, 
these allegations will be merged into one allegation under SOR ¶ 1.b. Favorable 
findings will be entered with respect to SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.f, 
with explanations. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old senior field technician (information technology). He has 
worked for the same government contractor since April 1999, and requires a security 
clearance to continue his job. He completed an associate’s degree in the mid-1980s. 
Applicant married his wife in 1980, and they have three grown children of this marriage, 
ages 36, 27, and 26.  
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from 1978 until his retirement in 1998. His 
service was characterized as honorable. His Veterans Administration disability rating is 
70%, because he suffered a work-related back injury. He possessed secret and top 
secret security clearances during most of his Navy career. After his Navy retirement, 
Applicant’s access to classified information was continued until the day of his hearing, 
because of his job with a government contractor.  
 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
Applicant started consuming alcohol and marijuana at age 20. He illegally 
smoked marijuana daily from 1974 until 1987.3 In January 1987, he took 30 days leave 
and while on leave, he attended a party hosted by his sister. At the party, he was 
drinking heavily and smoked marijuana. (GE 7) Upon his return to his unit, he tested 
positive for marijuana during a random drug test. At the time of his illegal use of 
marijuana, he was serving in the Navy on active duty, held the grade of E-6, and 
possessed a top secret security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI). In February 1987, Applicant received non-judicial punishment under 
Article 15, UCMJ, for his illegal use of marijuana. His punishment included forfeiture of 
$576 pay per month for two months, reduction to the grade of E-5, and 45 days extra 
duties. (GE 3) Because of his alcohol and marijuana use, in July 1987, he was required 
to attend a Navy Level II drug and alcohol treatment program. Because of his use of 
marijuana, in May 1988, the Naval Security Group denied Applicant access to SCI, and 
he was reclassified to another rate. (GE 4)  
 
In January 1988, Applicant resumed his alcohol consumption. Under pressure 
from his wife, in May-June 1988, he underwent a six week, state-sponsored Level III 
alcohol program (impatient detoxification). He attended Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) for 
six months as part of his aftercare treatment. In August 1989, Applicant resumed his 
alcohol consumption. In November 1992, Applicant received non-judicial punishment 
because he reported for duty while intoxicated. He was required to attend a second six 
week Level III alcohol recovery program in a Navy medical facility. During the alcohol 
rehabilitation program, Applicant was diagnosed with “ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE IN 
REMISSION AND CANNABIS DEPENDENCE IN REMISSION BY HISTORY.” (GE 6) 
During his alcohol treatment, Applicant admitted that he illegally smoked marijuana daily 
from 1974 until 1987. (GE 6)4 Upon his discharge, Applicant’s progress in the program 
was considered “good,” and he was discharged to full duty. He was instructed to abstain 
from the use of alcohol and drugs, to attend AA four times a week for one year, and to 
participate in a supervised aftercare program. (Id.) 
 
In 1995, the Department of the Navy Central Adjudication Facility (DON CAF) 
issued Applicant a statement of reasons indicating its intent to revoke his security 
clearance. In November 1995, the DON CAF conditionally granted Applicant access to 
classified information on the condition that he continue to abstain from alcohol and 
illegal drugs, and continue to participate in AA. (GE 8-11) 
 
In 1995-1996, Applicant resumed his consumption of alcohol. In December 2000, 
he became depressed over his inability to stop consuming alcohol and cough syrup and 
 
3 GE 6, p. 1-2. In his answer to the SOR and at his hearing, Applicant claimed he used marijuana 
only once in 1974, 1987, and 2008. Considering his statements to medical personnel, his history of failing 
to disclose material information in several security clearance applications, and his demeanor, I find his 
claims and testimony lack credibility  
 
4 In his October 1993 sworn statement (re-sworn in April 1994) to a government investigator, 
Applicant claimed his use of drug was sporadic. He averred he used marijuana once in 1974; speed and 
morphine once each in 1977; and marijuana once in 1986. 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
attempted suicide. (GE 14) He voluntarily attended outpatient addictions treatment at an 
Air Force’s Intensive Addictions Service from April 2001 to May 2001. He was 
diagnosed with SUBSTANCE DEPENDENCE.  
 
In December 2001, Applicant relapsed again, drove while intoxicated, and was 
convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI). He continued to participate in substance 
abuse aftercare treatment until February 2002. At the time of his discharge from the 
program, he was considered to be doing well and abstinent. At his hearing, Applicant 
claimed he has been abstinent from alcohol since 2001. 
 
In his November 2002 security clearance application, Applicant answered “NO” 
to questions that asked him whether he was ever charged with a felony offense, 
whether he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offense related to alcohol or 
drugs, and whether he ever had illegally used drugs while possessing a security 
clearance. He disclosed he received alcohol-related treatment in 2000, and his 2001 
DWI. Applicant failed to disclose; however, that he used marijuana daily from 1974 until 
1987, his February 1987 non-judicial punishment for illegal use of marijuana, and his 
1992 non-judicial punishment for being drunk on duty.5 
 
In his August 2008 security clearance application, and at his hearing, Applicant 
admitted he used marijuana one time in August 2008. He claimed he used marijuana 
with a stranger to whom he gave a ride home.6 He had seen the stranger numerous 
times while riding the bus, but claimed he was not a friend of the stranger and did not 
know him. During the ride, Applicant was commenting about his back pain and the 
stranger offered him a marijuana cigarette to relieve the pain. Applicant illegally smoked 
the marijuana with the stranger to alleviate his back pain. Additionally, Applicant 
disclosed his 2001 DWI and subsequent alcohol treatment, his 1992 non-judicial 
punishment for being drunk on duty, and his 1987 non-judicial punishment for use of 
marijuana. 
 
 
5 The SOR did not allege security concerns under the guidelines for criminal conduct, personal 
conduct, and alcohol consumption. As such, disqualifying information under those guidelines cannot be 
used to deny Applicant’s security clearance. Notwithstanding, I can consider any behavior not alleged in 
the SOR to: assess his credibility; evaluate his evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; assess his possible rehabilitation; determine the applicability of the AGs; and conduct the 
whole-person analysis. I have limited my consideration of non-SOR misconduct in accordance with ISCR 
Case No. 03-20327 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).  
 
6 Applicant admitted his August 2008 use of marijuana, but gave conflicting versions of the 
circumstances. He told a government investigator in October 2008 that he pulled a back muscle in August 
2008, while cutting wood. Two young men, visiting his neighbor, offered him a marijuana cigarette. 
Applicant stated he was in so much pain he took two puffs of the marijuana cigarette. (GE 17) In his 
response to DOHA interrogatories, and at his hearing, Applicant denied he made the above statements. 
He claimed the marijuana he smoked in August 2008 was provided to him by the stranger to whom he 
gave a ride home.(Id.) 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s doctor submitted a statement on his behalf indicating that “to the best 
of my ability, my patient (Applicant), has no condition that could impair his judgment or 
reliability in the context of safeguarding classified information.” (GE 18) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant averred he only used marijuana three times over a 
period of 34 years, the last two times while possessing a security clearance. He noted 
that the only reason the government was aware of his August 2008 use of marijuana 
was because he was truthful and disclose it in his August 2008 security clearance 
application. He disclosed his use of marijuana because he believes it is important for 
him to tell the truth, and to avoid any possible basis for blackmail. He testified he told his 
supervisor about his August 2008 use of marijuana approximately 18 months ago. 
 
Applicant testified he is an active member of Narcotics Anonymous (NA) and AA. 
He said he attends two to three meetings every week to help him abstain from the use 
of any drugs and alcohol. He claimed he has abstained from the use of any illegal drugs 
since August 2008, and that he has abstained from alcohol since 2001. After his 
hearing, Applicant submitted a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any “abuse of drugs or alcohol.” (AE 1) 
 
Applicant acknowledged he has an addictive personality, that he is alcohol 
dependent, and that he has a lifelong struggle to continue his abstinence. This 
knowledge has made him more determined to continue with his NA and AA aftercare 
treatment. He averred that he has made lifestyle changes to control his alcohol 
dependence because he wants to provide a good example for his children.  
 
 At his hearing, Applicant presented the testimony of one character witness, a co-
worker who is a consulting engineer. He retired from the Navy after 30 years of service. 
He has held access to classified information during most of his life and understands the 
importance of protecting the nation’s secrets. He considers Applicant to be a dedicated 
family man and a loyal American. As a whole, Applicant’s character reference lauded his 
competence and his service to the United States. He would trust Applicant with his life. 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any expressed or implied determination as to Applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Four drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case: AG ¶ 
25(a): “any drug abuse;”7 AG ¶ 25(b): “testing positive for illegal drug use;” AG ¶ 25(d): 
“diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, 
or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;” and AG ¶ 25(g): “any illegal drug 
use after being granted a security clearance.” 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana daily from 1974 until 1987. He tested positive 
for marijuana after a random drug test in 1987. He again used marijuana in 2008. He 
has possessed a security clearance since around 1978 to present. Applicant has been 
diagnosed as suffering from “alcohol dependence and cannabis dependence in 
remission by history.”  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 
7  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled 
Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, 
and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
8 
 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
I find that none of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
illegal use of marijuana spans a lengthy period of time – from 1974, until at least August 
2008. Considering the totality of the circumstances I find his use of marijuana is recent. 
Applicant has an addictive personality. He used marijuana in a daily basis from 1974 
until 1987. He received non-judicial punishment in 1987, for his use of marijuana when 
he was on active duty in the Navy, and while holding a security clearance. His access to 
SCI was terminated in 1988 because of his drug use. In 1995, he was given access to 
classified information conditioned on his abstinence from alcohol and drugs. He again 
used marijuana in 2008. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose his drug use when he enlisted and he failed to 
disclose the full extent of his drug use and alcohol-related behavior until 2008. Applicant 
knew from the beginning of his Navy career that his illegal drug use and alcohol-related 
behavior would adversely impact his ability to enlist and later to serve in the Navy. 
Applicant participated in numerous substance abuse rehabilitation programs and was 
diagnosed with alcohol dependence and cannabis dependence in remission by history. 
During his treatment, Applicant promised to abstain from alcohol and drugs. After his 
mandatory treatment ran its course, Applicant started using alcohol again and continued 
his alcohol-related misconduct. Moreover, he used marijuana again in 2008, knowing full 
well about the Government’s security concerns regarding his use of drugs and the 
serious potential consequences of his actions with respect to his continued access to 
classified information. 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies because he submitted a signed statement of intent 
with automatic revocation of clearance for any “abuse of drugs or alcohol.” It applies in 
part, and does not fully mitigate the security concerns, because, considering the record 
as a whole, his drug use is recent and sufficient time has not passed for Applicant to 
establish his ability and willingness to stop using illegal drugs. Applicant has a history of 
relapsing after undergoing extensive counseling and rehabilitation treatment. Not 
enough time has passes for Applicant to establish his reliability, trustworthiness, and his 
ability and willingness to comply with laws and regulations. Applicant’s favorable 
evidence, at this time, is not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served honorably in the 
Navy, retired with disability, and has worked for a government contractor since 1999. He 
is a good husband and dedicated father. He held access to classified information at 
different levels, for most of his 33 years of government service. There is no evidence 
that he has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
Applicant’s character reference recommended without reservation that his access to 
classified information be granted. These factors show some responsibility, good 
judgment, and mitigation. 
 
On the other hand, the factors against granting Applicant’s security clearance are 
more substantial. Applicant’s lengthy history of substance abuse, treatment, and 
relapses, creates serious doubts on his rehabilitation and whether he has made 
permanent behavioral changes. Moreover, his reliability and trustworthiness is in 
question because he failed to disclose the full extent of his drug and alcohol related 
problems in several security clearance applications. Applicant made inconsistent 
statements about his marijuana consumption, and I did not find his statements at his 
hearing to be credible. His past behavior shows he does not have the ability or 
willingness to comply with the law, rules, and regulations. Overall, the record evidence 
fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
