1
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-08465
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
October 28, 2010
Decision
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On May 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant (Item 2). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, on May 7, 2010. (Item 4.)
She requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On
August 2, 2010, Department Counsel submitted the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered nine documentary exhibits (Items 1-9). Applicant
2
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on September 10, 2010. Applicant did
submit additional evidence, which has been marked collectively as Item A. The case
was assigned to this Administrative Judge on September 23, 2010.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access
to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including the
FORM, Applicant's RSOR and the other admitted documents, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 44 years old. She works for a defense contractor, and she seeks a
DoD security clearance in connection with her employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F- Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 11 allegations (1.a. through 1.k.) regarding overdue debts under
Adjudicative Guideline F. All of the allegations will be discussed in the same order as
they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $6,196, for a
judgment filed against Applicant. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR (Item 4), and
no evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved. I find
that this debt has not been paid. 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $7,168, for a
judgment filed against Applicant. Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR (Item 4), and
no evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved. I find
that this debt has not been paid. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $125.  Applicant
admitted this debt in her RSOR (Item 4), and no evidence has been introduced to
establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $349 for medical
account number 114157569 . Applicant admitted this debt in her RSOR (Item 4), and no
evidence has been introduced to establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that
this debt has not been paid. 
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $349 for medical
account number 10955576. Applicant denied this debt in her RSOR (Item 4), and wrote
that it was a duplicate of 1.d., above. Both of these debts are listed separately with
different account numbers on Item 7, the credit report of March 1, 2010.  However,
3
since they are both medical debts, with the exact same amount owed, 1.e. may be a
duplicate of 1.d.
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $315.  Applicant
admitted this debt in her RSOR (Item 4), and no evidence has been introduced to
establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $451.  This debt was
not addressed in the RSOR.  However, Item 7 states that this debt was a charged off
account and closed  by the creditor. I find that this debt has not been paid.
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $11,421. Applicant
denied this debt in her RSOR (Item 4), and wrote that it was a duplicate of 1.a., above.
Both 1.a. and 1.h. list the same named creditor. Item 7 shows the amount owed to this
creditor is $11,421.
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $550. Applicant
admitted this debt in her RSOR (Item 4), and no evidence has been introduced to
establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $5,552.  Applicant
admitted this debt in her RSOR (Item 4), and no evidence has been introduced to
establish that this debt has been resolved. I find that this debt has not been paid. 
1.k. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $349.  Applicant
denied this debt in her RSOR (Item 4), and wrote that it was a duplicate of 1.d., above.
Both 1.k. and 1.d. list the same amount owed. Item 7 cites only debt 1.d., and Item 8, a
credit report dated September 24, 2009, only lists 1.k., so it appears that 1.k. is a
duplicate of 1.d.
In her RSOR, Applicant stated, 
I have been living with one income for some time and my husband has
been in and out of work for the last six years. He has currently been
unemployed since 2008 but just recently finished his driving school to
attain his CDL license and has been looking for work but has not been
able to find any. 
I have 2 children as well that I am supporting as well, we make payments
on what is necessary, jurors, electricity, water and other utilities. We have
cut back on all expenses such as cell phones and cable but we still have
car payments that need to be made as well. (sic)
We do receive assistance from our families when it is needed which is most of the time.
4
Applicant submitted a cover letter and additional documents in response to the
FORM. (Item A.)  She reiterated that her husband and she have struggled with their
finances for some time, and both of them lost their jobs. She did not state when this
occurred. She had been earning $51,000 a year, and her husband was making less
than $19,000 a year. Her new job pays her considerably less, and her husband is
unemployed. 
Applicant does not own credit cards. She filed bankruptcy 15 years ago, and she
does not want to do it again. She states that her husband is consistently seeking
employment. Her mother-in-law has assisted them by paying some of their larger bills
such as car insurance and other bills. Finally, Applicant submitted some receipts in Item
1 to establish that they have paid the bills for their vehicles. 
 Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
5
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties: Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted in
the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As noted
above, Applicant indicated that her financial problems resulted from her unemployment
and that of her husband. However, since no evidence was introduced to establish that
she has repaid or resolved any of her considerable overdue debt, I cannot find that she
has acted responsibly. Therefore, I do not find that this potentially mitigating condition is
a factor for consideration in this case. 
I conclude that until Applicant is able to significantly reduce her overdue debt,
and show that she can maintain more financial stability, she has not mitigated the
financial concerns of the Government.
6
Whole-Person Concept
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply  and no Mitigating Condition applies,
I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g., and 1.i.: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.e., 1.h., and 1.k.: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
