 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ADP Case No. 09-05709 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for assignment to a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) on 
July 24, 2008. On April 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing its trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F. DOHA acted under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 16, 2010; answered it on April 30, 2010; and 
requested a determination without a hearing. DOHA received her response on May 4, 
2010.  
 
 2
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on June 14, 2010. 
On June 15, 2010, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to 
Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on 
June 23, 2010, but she did not respond. The case was assigned to me on September 
21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a contractor providing health services for 
the Department of Defense. She married in April 1984, and she has two children, ages 
21 and 11. She has worked for her current employer since October 2006. She has 
never held a public trust position or received a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s spouse accumulated medical bills starting in 1992. She and her 
spouse received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in September 1999. (Item 8 at 3.) 
The record contains virtually no information about the circumstances surrounding the 
bankruptcy. The bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 Applicant incurred medical bills starting in 2000. The record contains no details 
about the circumstances giving rise to her medical bills. Her spouse was unemployed 
from May to November 2002, but has been continuously employed since November 
2002. (Item 6 at 5.)  
 
The evidence concerning Applicant’s employment history is conflicting. Her SF 
85P reflects that she was unemployed from July 2002 to March 2003, but it also reflects 
that she was employed as a pharmacy technician from April 2001 to July 2003, and was 
employed at another pharmacy from March 2003 to October 2006, when she began her 
current job. (Item 5 at 3-4.) In May 2009, she told a security investigator she was 
unemployed from July 2003 to March 2004. (Item 6 at 5.)  
 
Applicant and her husband purchased a home in 2004, and borrowed about 
$110,000 to finance the purchase, with monthly payments of about $1,100. They 
refinanced their home with an adjustable rate mortgage in 2006, borrowed about 
$211,000, used their equity to pay debts, and increased their monthly payments to 
about $2,000. They could not afford the increased payments. They obtained the 
lender’s approval for a short sale, and sold the home in July 2007 for about $90,000. 
(Item 6 at 5.) The defaulted mortgage and short sale are not alleged in the SOR. 
 
As of the date of the SOR, Applicant had sixteen delinquent debts totaling more 
than $18,000. She claimed that she was making payments on the two debts alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b and 1.q, and that she had satisfied the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but 
she offered no documentary evidence to show payments or payment plans. She 
disputed the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o, but she provided no documentary evidence 
substantiating the basis for the dispute. She admitted that the thirteen remaining debts 
were unresolved. 
 
 3
 
During an interview with a security investigator in May 2009, Applicant disclosed 
that she and her spouse have a net family income of $3,850, expenses of $3,395, and 
debt payments of $645, leaving a shortfall of about $190 per month. The debt payments 
do not include the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. (Item 6 at 10.) 
 
 Applicant and her spouse used a debt consolidation company in 1999, but they 
terminated their contract with the company after learning that no money had yet been 
paid to their creditors. They also received financial counseling from a state agency in 
2003. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction an evaluation of the whole 
person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government must present substantial evidence to establish controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a 
disqualifying condition by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. An applicant has the 
 
 4
ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to 
grant or continue eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern under this guideline is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s financial history raises two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG 
& 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG & 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations@), shifting the burden to her to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating condition is not 
established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing, numerous, and not the 
result of circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established.  
 
Applicant’s spouse incurred medical bills in 1992, but these bills would likely 
have been discharged in the 1999 bankruptcy. Applicant incurred medical expenses in 
2000. Both she and her spouse experienced periods of unemployment, but her husband 
returned to the workforce in November 2002, and she returned in March 2003 or March 
2004, whichever evidence is accurate. However, they have not acted responsibly since 
returning to the workforce. They refinanced their home, took out equity to pay debts, 
and could not afford the increased payments. They have done little to adjust their 
lifestyle to their income or address their delinquent debts, in spite of having two incomes 
for at least six years. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. 
 
 5
 Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
and her spouse have received financial counseling, but this mitigating condition is not 
established because their financial problems are not under control. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual initiated a 
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). 
Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant claimed she paid one debt and was making payments on 
two others, but she presented no documentary evidence to support her claim. She 
admitted that the remaining debts are unresolved. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
established. 
 
 Finally, trustworthiness concerns may be mitigated if “the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant disputed the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o, but this mitigating condition is not established because she 
has not articulated or documented the basis for the dispute. 
 
 The defaulted mortgage and short sale of Applicant’s home in 2007 are not 
alleged in the SOR. Conduct not alleged in the SOR may not be considered as an 
independent basis for denying a clearance, but it may be considered to assess an 
applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; 
to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-
person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations 
omitted). I have considered the evidence of the delinquent mortgage and short sale for 
these limited purposes. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 6
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I conclude she 
has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security to grant eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
