 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07795 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esq. 
 
 
October 13, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to 10 creditors in the approximate amount of $24,971. Applicant has mitigated 
the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 23, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 28, 2010. DOHA issued 
 
2 
 
a notice of hearing on June 7, 2010, scheduling the hearing for July 21, 2010. Applicant, 
through his counsel, requested a continuance, and on July 20, 2010, the hearing was 
rescheduled for August 30, 2010, based upon good cause. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted 
without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A through LL, which were all 
admitted despite Department Counsel’s objection to AE Z and AE JJ. Applicant called 
two witnesses, and testified on his own behalf. Applicant also presented California Code 
of Civil Procedure § 580, for administrative notice. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on September 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.e., 1.f., 1.h., 1.i., and 
1.j. He denies allegations 1.d. and 1.g. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
Marine Corps for 21 years and achieved the rank of Gunnery Sergeant (E-7). He was 
married from 1996-2009, divorcing in December 2009. He has one biological child, age 
13. (GE 1; Tr. 73-74.) 
 
As stated in the SOR, Applicant is alleged to be indebted to 10 creditors in the 
approximate amount of $24,971. He attributes his financial problems to his ex-wife 
mishandling their bills while he was deployed to Iraq in approximately 2005, and their 
subsequent divorce in 2009. On July 13, 2010, Applicant hired Century Negotiations, 
Inc. (Century) to handle some of his delinquent accounts. Century is a debt 
management company that will negotiate Applicant’s delinquent accounts. Applicant will 
pay Century $200 per month and eventually, Century will pay off Applicant’s creditors in 
lump sum payments. Applicant has made one payment, on August 15, 2010, of $200 to 
Century under this agreement. (GE 2-5, 7; AE J; Tr. 76-83, 94-98, 150-151.) His debts 
are as follows: 
 
Applicant is indebted on a medical account in the approximate amount of $275, 
as alleged in allegation 1.a. Applicant presented a letter from the collections agent for 
this creditor, with the same account number, which showed Applicant has made 
payments of $412.50 on this debt. According to the statement, he still owes $137.50 on 
this debt; however, he also presented a printout of a canceled check from his banking 
account that showed on August 17, 2010, the remainder of $137.50 had been paid. This 
debt is now satisfied. (AE D; Tr. 94, 120.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $231, 
as alleged in allegation 1.b. Applicant presented documentation from this creditor 
establishing that Applicant paid $211.78 to settle this debt. This debt is now satisfied. 
(AE E; Tr. 94-95, 125.) 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$1,112, as alleged in allegation 1.c. Applicant has enrolled this debt with Century. (AE J; 
Tr. 97, 125.)  
 
Applicant is indebted on a past due mortgage in the approximate amount of 
$4,228, as alleged in allegation 1.d. Applicant purchased his house in July 2002, with 
his ex-wife. This mortgage represents the purchase money mortgage and Applicant has 
not refinanced this loan. Applicant and his ex-wife were current on their mortgage during 
the course of their marriage. They separated in approximately December 2008, and 
Applicant moved out of the house. His ex-wife remained in the home until December 
2009, and his step-son occupied the house for two to three months after that. From 
December 2008 to approximately March 2010, Applicant would send his ex-wife money 
for the mortgage, however, at least one month, she failed to pay it. This put Applicant 
behind in payments approximately 30 days. In April 2010, Applicant’s step-son moved 
out of the house and left it damaged. Applicant missed his April 2010 payment in order 
to pay for the home to be cleaned up for re-sale. He has made payments on his 
mortgage in May through July 2010, although he has not paid off the deficient amount. 
He made his August 2010 payment, but the bank returned it to him. He hired a realtor to 
sell the home in approximately April 2010. Currently, there is an offer on the house that 
would result in a short sale of the home. He tried to sell the home for more than or equal 
to the amount of his mortgage, but there were no offers. Applicant owes $220,000 on 
the mortgage and the offer is for $180,000. Applicant is working with the bank to 
complete the transaction. (AE A; Tr. 76-92, 113-116, 127-128,151-158.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$6,566, as alleged in allegation 1.e. Applicant has enrolled this debt with Century. (AE 
J; Tr. 97-98, 128-129.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $680, 
as alleged in allegation 1.f. Applicant presented documentation that he has an 
agreement with this creditor to pay $21.27 per month, for 24 months, in order to satisfy 
this debt. He presented evidence that he has made two payments under this 
agreement. (AE F, Tr. 99, 129.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$1,713, as alleged in allegation 1.g. This account was settled with the creditor on March 
23, 2010, for the amount of $257.01. He presented documentation from this creditor as 
evidence that the account is now satisfied. (AE C; Tr. 103, 130.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$1,382, as alleged in allegation 1.h. In August 2010, Applicant reached a written 
agreement to satisfy this debt with the creditor for the amount $553.20. Applicant 
presented a receipt from his bank account showing that this amount had been debited 
from Applicant’s account. (AE B; Tr. 102-103, 130.) 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of $765, 
as alleged in allegation 1.i. Applicant presented a letter from this creditor that shows this 
debt paid in full in February 2007. (AE G; Tr. 100, 130.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a collection account in the approximate amount of 
$8,019, as alleged in allegation 1.j. Applicant credibly averred that this debt is a 
duplicate of allegation 1.e. and Applicant has enrolled this debt with Century. (AE H; Tr. 
101-102130-131.) 
 
In addition to the debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant is delinquent on his child-
support payments and on two utility accounts. Applicant is paying off his child-support 
delinquency by paying extra payments of approximately $150 per month. He credibly 
averred that he was unaware of the utility bill delinquencies prior to the hearing and 
pledged to dispute these debts as invalid debts as he had shut off the utilities to the 
house. (Tr. 140-143, 146.) 
 
Applicant is well respected by his supervisors and colleagues. Applicant called 
two witnesses, who testified to his trustworthiness and sound judgment. He also 
presented letters from supervisors, colleagues, and co-workers that noted Applicant 
holds himself to high moral standards and recommend him for a clearance. During his 
21 years of military service, Applicant has been awarded numerous medals and awards, 
including the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal; the Naval Achievement 
Medal; a Combat Action Ribbon; and seven Navy and Marine Corps Good Conduct 
Medals. (AE K – LL.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has approximately 10 delinquent accounts, which have been past due 
for a significant period of time. Applicant and his ex-wife accumulated these delinquent 
accounts and have been unable to pay these obligations. His financial problems have 
 
6 
 
been ongoing since 2005. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 Two Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are directly attributable to his ex-wife’s 
mismanagement of their funds while he was deployed in Iraq and their subsequent 
divorce. Further, he is making a good-faith effort to repay his over due creditors. Since 
their divorce, he has been working on restoring his credit by repaying his creditors. He 
has fully satisfied five of his delinquent accounts listed in allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.g., 1.h., 
and 1.i. Of his remaining accounts, he reached payment agreements with the creditor in 
1.f. and has made two payments under that plan. Two of his debts, 1.c. and 1.e., are 
being addressed through his debt management plan with Century. While he has only 
made one payment to date with Century, he credibly testified that he will continue to 
work on these delinquent accounts. Allegation 1.j. is a duplicate of 1.e. and is being 
addressed. Finally, Applicant is acting responsibly and in good faith with respect to his 
mortgage, alleged in 1.d. Applicant has done everything he could to satisfy this debt. 
Even though he is behind on his loan due to unforeseen circumstances, like his wife 
misappropriating the funds that were to be used for the mortgage and the destruction 
caused by his step-son, he has continued to make payments on this house. The 
Appeals Board has noted:  
 
. . . an applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for 
paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is 
that an applicant act responsibly given his circumstances and develop a 
reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” 
that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.1 
 
 Applicant has demonstrated he has a reasonable plan for resolving each of his 
delinquent accounts, including those not listed in the SOR. He has acted responsibly 
given his limited resources by resolving the debts he could and making payments on his 
other debts. He enlisted the help of Century for his remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 
20(d) apply. 
 
 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. October 29, 2009.) 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by his supervisor and colleagues. He has served the 
U.S. honorably for 21 years. Those who know him best report that he has sound 
judgment and high moral standards. His standards are reflected in the numerous 
awards he received during his military service. His integrity, as attested to by his 
supervisor and colleagues, show that his promises to continue to pay his delinquent 
accounts are credible.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
