 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03831 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence and 
personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance or access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2002, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Personnel Security Questionnaire (EPSQ) version of a Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86).1 On subsequent unspecified dates in 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) furnished him two separate sets of interrogatories. He 
responded to the first set of interrogatories on August 4, 2009,2 and to the second set 
on September 4, 2009.3 On November 20, 2009, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons 
1 Item 4 (SF 86), dated August 15, 2002. 
 
2 Item 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated August 4, 2009). 
 
3 Item 7 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 4, 2009).  
 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
(SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and B 
(Foreign Influence), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 25, 2009. In a sworn, 
written statement, dated December 7, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant on March 2, 2010, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 
days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on March 11, 2010, and 
submitted a letter to Department Counsel on April 7, 2010. The case was assigned to 
me on April 23, 2010. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take Administrative Notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Republic of China (Taiwan), appearing in a written 
request.  Facts are proper for Administrative Notice when they are easily verifiable by 
an authorized source and relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the source 
information relied upon by the Government was publications of the Department of 
State;4 the Congressional Research Service;5 the Centre for Counterintelligence and 
Security Studies;6 the National Counterintelligence Center, now known as the Office of 
the National Counterintelligence Executive;7 six press releases from the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security;8 court documents 
4 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs, Background Note: Taiwan, dated 
October 2009; U.S. Department of State, Taiwan: Specific Information, dated November 9, 2009. 
 
5 Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Taiwan-U.S. Relations: Developments and Policy 
Implications, dated August 21, 2009. 
 
6 Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Center for Counterintelligence and Security Studies, Intelligence Threat 
Handbook, excerpts, dated June 2004. 
 
7 National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage, dated 2000; National Counterintelligence Center, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, dated 2007. 
 
8 U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release, California Exporter Fined 
in Connection with Attempted Taiwan Export, dated September 30, 1999; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of 
Industry and Security, Press Release, Commerce Department Imposes Civil Penalty on Minnesota Firm in Settlement 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
pertaining to a case in the U.S. District Court, Southern District of Florida;9 a press 
release from the U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of 
Virginia;10 and records of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia.11 
 
With regard to the 2000 National Counterintelligence Center Report, I note that it 
is 10 years old, and the cited facts are based upon a “private survey” of “nearly a dozen 
selected Fortune 500 companies.” The report does not indicate how the companies 
were selected, what companies were selected, or how they decided upon their input to 
the survey. The survey results do not indicate whether the collection of economic 
information was accomplished through “open” methods, such as reading a newspaper, 
that raise no security issues under the relevant criteria, or more covert methods that 
might raise security concerns. Furthermore, as the selected companies are unidentified, 
it is impossible to assess possible bias or determine if there is an existing anti-Taiwan 
economic or political agenda. For these reasons, I conclude the factual matters 
asserted by Department Counsel, as demonstrated by the proffered report, should be 
given less weight than information from a more authoritative source.  
 
The six press releases of the U.S. Department of Commerce were presented 
apparently to substantiate that Taiwan actively pursues collection of U.S. economic and 
propriety information, and therefore, Applicant’s relationship with family members in 
Taiwan raises suspicion of him. None of the cases involves Applicant personally or 
involved espionage through any familial relationship. There is no indication of any 
government sponsorship, approval, or involvement encouraging the Taiwanese 
company‘s attempt to acquire sensitive commercial information for competitive 
advantage.  Likewise, there is no evidence that Taiwan’s government was involved in, 
or sanctioned, the criminal activity. 
 
The Eastern District of Virginia press release and the court records set forth the 
facts and sentencing of a former U.S. State Department official for unauthorized 
possession of classified information, making false statements to the government 
concerning his relationship with a female Taiwanese intelligence officer, and by not 
reporting that he had traveled to Taiwan where he met with the foreign intelligence 
 
of Export Violations, dated December 20, 2001; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, 
Press Release, Connecticut Company Settles Charges Concerning Unlicensed Pump Exports to China, Taiwan, 
Israel, and Saudi Arabia, dated July 28, 2003; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press 
Release, Emcore Corporation Settles Charges of Export Control Violations, dated January 26, 2004; U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release, Parker Hannifin Corp. Settles Charges 
Pertaining To Illegal Exports To Taiwan And China, dated November 17, 2005; U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release, Defendants Indicted On Charges Of Conspiracy To Export 
Controlled Items, dated August 19, 2005. 
 
9 U.S. District Court Southern District of Florida, Criminal Case No. 05-60218-CR-Seitz, U.S. v. Ching Kan 
Wang and Robin Chang, Superseding Indictment, filed October 6, 2005; Certificate of Trial Attorney, undated; 
Penalty Sheet, undated; Judgment in a Criminal Case, dated March 7, 2006. 
 
10 U.S. Department of Justice, U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of Virginia, Press Release: Former State 
Department Official Sentenced for Mishandling Classified Material, dated Jan. 22, 2007. 
 
11 U.S. District Court Eastern District of Virginia, Criminal Case No. 1:05CR43, U.S. v. Donald W. Keyser, 
Statement of Facts, dated Dec. 12, 2005. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
officer. The criminal wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens is of decreased relevance to an 
assessment of Applicant’s security suitability, especially where there is no evidence that 
Applicant, nor any member of his family, was ever involved in any aspect of the case or 
ever targeted by any Taiwanese intelligence official. 
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,12 as set 
forth below under the Taiwan subsection. However, the inference that somehow 
Applicant and/or his family participated in criminal activity was not argued and is not 
accepted.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.c., 
and 2.a. through 2.g. of the SOR. He denied the factual allegations under ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 
and 1.d. of the SOR. 
 
Applicant is a 66-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
chief scientist.13 He was previously granted a SECRET security clearance in 1993,14 
but his continued access to classified information was “disapproved” by another 
government agency in 2006.15 It is unclear if Applicant was offered an opportunity to 
appeal that decision under Executive Order 10865 and the Directive, as the 
“disapproval” letter only advised him of an opportunity to “review” the determination.16 In 
March 2008, his security clearance was suspended by the Defense Security Service 
(DSS), based upon the notification provided by the other government agency that his 
access to classified information had been denied.17  
 
12 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 
802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to 
notice facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 
25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice 
may utilize authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 126 S.Ct. 2749 
(2006) (citing internet sources for numerous documents).   
 
13 Item 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
14 Id. at 8. 
 
15 Letter from another government agency senior adjudication officer, dated May 24, 2006, attached to Item 
6, supra note 2. 
 
16 Id. at 2. 
 
17 Letter from DSS, dated March 28, 2008, attached to Item 6, supra note 2. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in mainland China in 1944, and resided there with his family 
until they fled to Taiwan in 1948, during the Communist revolution.18  His father was a 
retired bank clerk and his mother, a housewife and homemaker. Both are now 
deceased.19 Applicant had four older brothers (two are deceased) and two older sisters 
(one is deceased).20 Two of his siblings are retired (one an accountant and the other, a 
chemist), naturalized U.S. citizens, now residing in the United States.21 One brother, a 
retired hotel manager, who attended a military accounting school, is a Taiwanese 
citizen, residing in Taiwan.22 Applicant attended primary and secondary schools in 
Taiwan, and received a B.S. degree in Physics from a Taiwanese university in 1968.23 
In order to complete his military commitment, he served as a reserve second lieutenant 
in the Taiwanese Army Signal Corps during 1968-1969.24 He came to the United States 
in January 1970 on a student visa, and attended a major U.S. university on a full 
scholarship and later as a student assistant, while earning a M.S. degree in Physics, in 
1971, and a Ph.D. in Physics, in 1976.25 Applicant was married in 1972,26 and became 
a U.S. resident alien in about 1974.27 He and his wife have one child, a son born in 
1981.28 Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 1985.29  
 
Applicant’s wife was born in mainland China in 1948, and subsequently raised 
and educated in Taiwan.30 She received a degree in Chinese Literature from a 
Taiwanese university.31 She came to the United States in 1970, worked for a U.S. 
airline, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1975.32 
18 Item 4, supra note 1, at 1; Item 5 (Statement of Subject, dated May 2, 2003), at 10.  
  
19 Id. Item 5, at 3. 
 
20 Id. at 4-6. 
 
21 Id. at 4-5. 
 
22 Id. at 6-7, 13; Item 3 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated December 7, 2009), at 1. It should be noted 
that two items were erroneously marked as item 2, although the FORM properly identified them. I have remarked this 
item to comport to the numbering set forth in the FORM. 
 
23 Item 5, supra note 18, at 11. 
 
24 Id. at 12. 
 
25 Id. at 13. 
 
26 Id. at 7, 14. 
 
27 Id. at 13. 
 
28 Id. at 14. 
 
29 Item 4, supra note 1, at 1. 
 
30 Item 5, supra note 18, at 7, 14. 
 
31 Id. at 16. 
 
32 Id. at 7, 14-16. 
 
6 
                                      
 
ly 95 years old.  
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
Applicant’s father-in-law was born and raised in mainland China, attended 
Chinese schools where he received a degree in Education, and received a Ph.D. from a 
major U.S. university.33 He served as a high school principal in Taiwan,34 and after 
completing his studies in the United States, decided to remain here. He became a U.S. 
resident alien in 1968, brought his family to the United States in 1970, and became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in about 1972.35 He retired in the early 1980s, after working as 
an assistant to the Cultural Attaché at the Taiwanese Embassy.36 He returned to 
Taiwan in 1992, and currently resides in a nursing home in Taiwan.37 He is 
approximate 38
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law (deceased) was born, raised, and educated in 
mainland China. She was a writer.39 
 
Applicant’s wife had two older brothers (one is a deceased engineer) who were 
born and raised in mainland China. Her surviving brother is a Taiwanese citizen and 
resident of Taiwan who is a professor at a private Taiwanese college.40  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
In April 2003, Applicant was interviewed by a special agent of DSS who prepared 
a “rough draft” of a statement regarding Applicant’s family background, the background 
of his wife and in-laws, his foreign travel, and foreign connections.41 Applicant made a 
few insignificant changes to the draft and, on May 2, 2003, signed the lengthy sworn, 
written statement.42 In his statement, Applicant discussed his family’s military 
involvement in Taiwan. He acknowledged serving as a reserve second lieutenant in the 
Taiwanese Army Signal Corps for one year, and indicated he believed it to be the 
equivalent of an ROTC program in the United States. He also stated that one of his 
brothers had “attended a military accounting school in Taiwan, but was never actually in 
the infantry.”43 That statement is at odds with his subsequent admission that his 
 
 
33 Id. at 15-16. 
 
34 Id. at 15. 
 
35 Id. at 17. 
 
36 Id. 
 
37 Id. at 7-8, 17. 
 
38 Id. at 7. 
 
39 Id. at 15-16. 
 
40 Id. at 8-9. 
 
41 Item 3 (Draft Statement of Subject, undated), attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
42 Item 5, supra note 18. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
 20-30 years ago.”   
                                                                                                                                                                                          
“brother is retired from the Taiwanese Army.”44 It is also at odds with an admission 
purportedly made during his “security testing sessions in October 2003,”45 after 
supposedly denying the allegation. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant further 
confused the situation by denying that his brother is retired from the Taiwanese Army 
and explaining that the brother had “retired from the military (he attended a military 
accounting school as [previously reported]) 46
 
Based on the totality of the evidence before me, I conclude that the confusion 
was caused by miscommunication and misinterpretation, and that Applicant’s brother 
attended a military school, and may have briefly served in the Taiwanese Army, but did 
not actually retire from such military service. There is no evidence that Applicant 
deliberately provided false information regarding his brother’s relationship with the 
Taiwanese military. 
 
It is alleged that during a June 2003 interview with a security representative, not 
further identified, Applicant falsified material facts pertaining to foreign contacts and 
foreign connections. He purportedly failed to disclose that he had nine foreign contacts, 
including four former classmates and a brother-in-law, all of whom were citizens and 
residents of Taiwan.47 Applicant denied the allegation.48 In his May 2003 statement, 
Applicant listed his brother as his sole personal foreign connection, and his wife’s father 
and brother as her foreign connections.49 He also referred to foreign business travel 
where he attended technical conferences.50 He contends that during the interview in 
question, four people in his contact list were people he met at conferences and one had 
visited his company. The other four individuals were former classmates in Taiwan. They 
occasionally visited the United States and he would join them for small reunion dinners. 
Since he never initiated the contacts, and business was never discussed, he was not 
aware that they should have been reported as foreign contacts.51  
 
Based on the totality of the evidence before me, I conclude that the confusion 
was caused by a combination of insufficient security training, miscommunication, or 
misinterpretation, and that Applicant’s listing of individuals and circumstances which 
 
43 Id. at 12. 
 
44 Item 3, supra note 22, at 1; see SOR ¶ 2.e. 
 
45 Letter from another government agency senior adjudication officer, supra note 15, at 1. It should ne noted 
that there is nothing in evidence to support the conclusion that Applicant ever actually made that statement. 
 
46 Item 3, supra note 22, at 1. 
 
47 See SOR ¶ 1.a. It should be noted that there is nothing in evidence to support the conclusion that 
Applicant ever actually made that statement. 
 
48 Item 3, supra note 22, at 1. 
 
49 Item 5, supra note 18, at 21. 
 
50 Id. at 18-19. 
 
51 Item 3, supra note 22, at 1. 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
predated the interviews, supports his contentions. There is no evidence that Applicant 
deliberately provided false information or deliberately omitted or concealed relevant 
information regarding his foreign contacts. 
 
It is also alleged that during what was characterized as his “security testing 
sessions” in October 2003, Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that his brother-in-
law is a “former Taiwanese Government employee.”52 Applicant has admitted that his 
brother-in-law is a former Taiwanese Government employee,53 but steadfastly denied 
that the omission was deliberate.54 While there may be an allegation regarding the 
brother-in-law, there is no evidence that Applicant deliberately omitted or concealed 
relevant information regarding his brother-in-law’s former employment. 
 
It is also alleged that during a July 2007 interview with an OPM investigator, 
Applicant falsified material facts when he stated that his last contact with his Taiwanese 
brother occurred 15 years ago when Applicant visited Taiwan, and that he deliberately 
failed to disclose his contact with his brother in at least 2005.55 In his May 2003 
statement, Applicant stated that he maintained yearly telephone contact with his brother 
from 1970 to the date of the statement, and that they had personal contact during his 
brother’s visit to the United States in approximately 1994 or 1995.56 Applicant confused 
the situation in his Answer to the SOR when he reversed the facts to indicate the 
personal contact occurred in Taiwan when he visited his brother.57  
 
The July 2007 unsworn declaration, prepared by the OPM investigator, with 
Applicant’s corrections, contained two separate references to Applicant’s brother. In one 
section, it states that they last had an “in person” contact about 15 years earlier,58 and 
in another section it states they had contact “1 time per 15 years to include when 
[Applicant] last had an in person visit.”59 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant contended 
that the issue was “probably a miscommunication.” He noted that he had listed his 
brother as a foreign connection in his May 2003 statement, and indicated he spoke with 
him on an annual basis at around the New Year.60  
 
 
52 See SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
53 Item 3, supra note 22, at 1. 
 
54 Id. 
 
55 See SOR ¶ 1.d.; Personal Subject Interview, at 1, attached to Item 7, supra note 3. 
 
56 Item 5, supra note 18, at 21. 
 
57 Item 3, supra note 22, at 2.  
 
58 Personal Subject Interview, at 1, attached to Item 7, supra note 3. 
 
59 Id. at 5. 
 
60 Item 3, supra note 22, at 2. 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
Based on the totality of the evidence before me, I conclude that the confusion 
was caused by a combination of miscommunication or erroneous interpretation, and 
that Applicant’s references to his brother and the circumstances of their contacts, some 
of which predated the interview, supports his contentions. There is no evidence that 
Applicant deliberately provided false information or deliberately omitted or concealed 
relevant information regarding his relationship with his brother. During the Fall of 2007, 
after Applicant’s interview, his brother and sister-in-law visited him in the United 
States.61 
 
Neither Applicant nor his wife is a dual citizen.62 They have only loyalty, 
allegiance, and preference for the United States.63 He and his family would bear arms 
against any enemy of the United States.64 They have no interests in foreign businesses, 
bank accounts, foreign stocks, or foreign property, and have no foreign inheritance 
rights.65 Other than his brief period with the Taiwanese Army, neither he nor his family 
has ever worked for or been associated with any foreign government or intelligence 
agency.66 
 
Taiwan 
 
In 1949, a large number of Chinese refugees fled from the civil war in mainland 
China and immigrated to the off-shore Island of Formosa.  The Communists in mainland 
China established the Peoples Republic of China (PRC), and Chiang Kai-shek, the 
leader of the Kuomintang on mainland China, established a provisional government and 
capital in Taipei, Taiwan.  The PRC refuses to recognize Taiwan’s independence, and 
insists that there is only “one China.”  After recognizing Taiwan for nearly 30 years, on 
January 1, 1979, the United States formally recognized the government of the PRC as 
the sole legitimate government of China.  The United States does not support 
independence for Taiwan and, under the Taiwan Relations Act, signed into law on April 
10, 1979, is committed to a “one-China policy.” Nevertheless, the United States has 
been also been committed to maintaining cultural, commercial and other nonofficial 
relations with Taiwan, and continues to provide arms in support of Taiwan’s security and 
region stability. 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy with a strong economy, with significant 
economic contacts with both the PRC and the United States.  Taiwan’s own national 
security remains under constant threat from the PRC since PRC has not renounced the 
 
61 Id. at 1. 
 
62 Item 4, supra note 1, at 1-2; Item 5, supra note 18, at 17. 
 
63 Id. Item 5, at 21. 
 
64 Id. 
 
65 Id. at 22. 
 
66 Id. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
use of force against Taiwan, and this has led to Taiwan’s large military establishment. 
Taiwan’s armed forces are equipped with weapons obtained primarily from the United 
States, but Taiwan has stressed military self-reliance in recent years that has resulted in 
the growth of indigenous military production. 
 
Taiwan is believed to be an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence and 
proprietary information. There is no evidence that Taiwan uses coercive measures to 
gain access to such information. While there have been a number of incidents involving 
individuals, companies, and Taiwanese intelligence officers improperly acquiring U.S. 
economic intelligence and proprietary information, there is no direct or indirect 
connection to, or involvement with, Applicant.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”67 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”68   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”69 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
67 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
68 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
69 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.70  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”71 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”72 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
70 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
71 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
72 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
                                                          
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.73 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion@ is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), Aconnections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information@ may raise security concerns. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case.  
However, the security significance of these identified conditions requires further 
examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with his family members (a brother) 
and extended family members (a brother-in-law) who remain Taiwanese citizen-
residents to determine the degree of “heightened risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.@ Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows Athere is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.@ Also, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
73 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
13 
                                      
 
                                                          
Applicant’s relationship with his brother and brother-in-law is diverse. His 
relationship with his brother was, for the most part, extremely limited since Applicant left 
Taiwan in 1970. The annual telephone call between them and two visits in the period of 
40 years does not drastically alter this minimal relationship. Likewise, he has had an 
even lesser relationship with his brother-in-law. While his wife’s relationship with her 
brother is much closer, involving several visits and routine telephone calls, Applicant’s 
one visit and rare telephone contacts during a period of nearly 35 years, renders the 
contact and relationship with his brother-in-law as casual and infrequent.  
 
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, and the 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government, within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.74  In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”75 Nevertheless, the 
relationship between a foreign government and the U.S. may be relevant in determining 
whether a foreign government or an entity it controls is likely to attempt to exploit a 
resident or citizen to take action against the U.S. through the Applicant.  It is reasonable 
to presume that a friendly relationship, or the existence of a democratic government, is 
not determinative, but it may make it less likely that a foreign government would attempt 
to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or associates in that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, the United States and Taiwan have a history of friendly relations 
making it less likely that the Taiwanese Government would attempt coercive means to 
obtain sensitive information.  However, it does not eliminate the possibility that a foreign 
power would employ some non-coercive measures in an attempt to exploit his relatives.  
While Applicant has a brother and brother-in-law still residing in Taiwan, there may be 
speculation as to “some risk,” but that speculation, in the abstract, does not, without 
substantially more, establish evidence of a “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
As to Applicant’s relationship with his brother and brother-in-law, there is a very 
low potential of forcing him to choose between the interests of United States and those 
of either Taiwan or those two family members. He has met his burden of showing there 
is little likelihood that those relationships could create a risk for foreign influence of 
exploitation. I find AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) partially apply in this case and 8(b) fully applies. 
Applicant has been a resident of the United States since 1970, and a naturalized U.S. 
citizen since 1985. He attended two U.S. universities for his higher education.  His wife 
came to the United States in 1970, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1975. Their 
74 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
75 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
14 
                                      
 
                                                          
child is a native-born U.S. citizen. Two of his three surviving siblings are U.S. citizens, 
residing in the United States. His 95-year old father-in-law is a U.S. citizen, currently 
residing in a nursing home in Taiwan. Applicant and his wife have no foreign financial 
interests, and their relationships and loyalties in the United States are of such depth and 
longstanding nature that Applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant 
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other 
official government representative,” may raise security concerns.  
 
During interviews and security testing sessions in 2003 and 2007, Applicant was 
questioned about his family background, the background of his wife and in-laws, his 
foreign travel, and foreign connections. He furnished extensive information for each of 
the topics covered, and it appears that some of his responses were either garbled or 
misconstrued. The Government contends that his responses constituted deliberately 
providing false information, or omitting and concealing relevant information, during the 
security clearance process. While Applicant may have given garbled or inconsistent 
responses, there is no evidence that his responses were deliberate attempts to provide 
false or misleading information. From an extensive review of the evidence, it looks as 
though Applicant was attempting to be thorough, even though inconsistencies did 
appear, sometimes within the same document(s). However, I can find no evidence of a 
deliberate falsification or concealment. There is only some confusion over the meanings 
of some words such as “retired” and “contacts.” I find Applicant’s explanations are 
credible in his denial of deliberate falsification.76 AG ¶ 16(b) has not been established.  
 
76 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s 
intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the 
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally 
permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case 
under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
15 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has resided in the United 
States since 1970, and became a U.S. citizen in 1985.  He married in the United States, 
and his closest family members are his wife and child, both of whom are U.S. citizens, 
and reside in the United States. Two of his three surviving siblings are U.S. citizens and 
they too reside in the United States. As such, they are not vulnerable to direct coercion 
or exploitation, and the realistic possibility of pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress 
with regard to them is low. He has one brother and brother-in-law who are both citizens 
and residents of Taiwan, but his relationship with them is minimal. His 95-year old 
father-in-law is a naturalized U.S. citizen, residing in a Taiwanese nursing home.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the foreign influence and personal conduct security concerns.  (See AG ¶¶ 2(a)(1) 
through 2(a)(9).)  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence 
and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
 
16 
                                      
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
