 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07072 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 14, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Preference security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
C, Foreign Preference and B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 28, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 28, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 23, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
August 31, 2010. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 through 2, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A through E and testified 
on his own behalf. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information until September 10, 2010. Applicant submitted AE F through Q, which were 
admitted without objection, post hearing. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on September 15, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In the SOR, DOHA alleges under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, that Applicant’s 
wife is a dual citizen of the United States and Country A, and is employed as the Deputy 
Trade Commissioner for Investment and Trade of a state in Country A (SOR ¶1.a.); that 
his parents (SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.), sister (SOR ¶1.d.), parents-in-law (SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 
1.f.), and two sisters-in-law (SOR ¶1.g.) are citizens of and reside in Country A; and that 
Applicant travels to Country A approximately every year (SOR ¶1.h.). DOHA alleges 
under Guideline C that Applicant possesses a valid Country A passport, issued on 
December 8, 2006, and that after becoming a United States citizen on July 1, 2005, he 
applied for reinstatement of his Country A citizenship on October 4, 2006. Applicant 
admitted to all of the subparagraphs as stated in the SOR. After considering the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Country A is an ally of the U.S. and is a member of the European Union. Its 
government is a parliamentary democracy under a constitutional monarchy. Country A 
is divided politically and geographically into three regions. The regional and community 
governments have jurisdiction over transportation, public works, water policy, cultural 
matters, education, public health, environment, housing, zoning, economic and 
industrial policy, agriculture, foreign trade, and oversight of local governments. Each 
has autonomy in courting potential foreign investors. Country A has assisted in U.S. 
lead operations in Iraq and the State Department has noted that “Bilaterally, there are 
few points of friction with the U.S.” (AE B; AE F; AE G.)  
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a government contractor. He has worked 
for his employer since March 2005. He is married and has a six-month-old daughter, 
who is a natural born citizen of the U.S. (GE 1; Tr. 28, 71-72.) 
 
 Applicant was born in Country A. In the early 1990’s his parents entered the U.S. 
Green Card Lottery. His mother was eventually selected, and while his family 
vacationed in Colorado, they obtained green cards to enter the U.S. in approximately 
1996. After graduating with his master’s degree from a school in Country B, in 1999, he 
moved to the U.S. to attend a Ph.D. program. He earned his Ph.D. in 2004. (GE 1; Tr. 
28-29, 47-54.) 
 
 After living in the U.S. for five years, Applicant became eligible to apply for U.S. 
citizenship and did so at the first available opportunity. He became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen on July 1, 2005. At that time, the law in Country A forbid dual citizenship and 
Applicant relinquished his Country A citizenship by becoming a U.S. citizen. However, in 
2007, the law in Country A changed to permit dual citizenship. Applicant requested to 
 
3 
 
become a Country A citizen again, largely because he wanted to be able to act as 
power of attorney for his parents and parents-in-law, who are citizens and residents in 
Country A, as addressed below. To reacquire his Country A citizenship, Applicant had 
an interview with the Country A Consulate General who sent a recommendation to a 
Judge in Country A. The Judge then was required to make a ruling based upon that 
interview whether to admit the Applicant. Applicant regained his Country A citizenship 
on October 4, 2006. Subsequently, he was issued a Country A passport, dated 
December 8, 2006. His passport was valid through December 7, 2011. Applicant has 
never used his Country A passport. He has invalidated it by writing “annulled” on each 
page of that passport and clipping the corner of the passport. Additionally, he has 
surrendered his Country A passport to his facility security officer. He also signed a letter 
acknowledging, “I am willing to renounce my [Country A] dual citizenship if required by 
the United States of America.” (GE 1; GE 2; AE A; AE P; AE Q; Tr. 28-34, 47-54.) 
 
 In 2004, Applicant met his wife at a New Year’s Eve party in Country A. They 
married in August 2005. His wife was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in February 2008, 
and maintains dual citizenship with Country A. She works as a contract employee to a 
trade commissioner for a state-like region in Country A. Her contract is held by a U.S. 
company, which provides her payroll and benefits, but she is outsourced to the foreign 
state’s Investment and Trade Company. The primary purpose of the Investment and 
Trade Company is to “promote sustainable international business in the interests of both 
[foreign region]-based companies and foreign enterprises. . .” Applicant describes his 
wife’s position as an administrative assistant to a Trade Commissioner who is 
responsible for exports. Her office is located in the building next to the Consulate, but is 
not part of the Consulate of Country A. (GE 1; GE 2; AE C; AE H; AE I; AE J; Tr. 37-40, 
51, 63-65.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother, father, sister, mother-in-law, father-in-law, and two sisters-in-
law are citizens and resident in Country A. Applicant’s father is a 60-year-old dentist. 
His mother, age 59, and sister, age 30, are both homemakers. His father-in-law is a 59-
year-old technician for a private company. His mother-in-law is a 63-year-old retired 
nurse. Applicant’s sisters-in-laws, ages 23 and 35, work as an installation technician 
and a container importer dispatcher, respectively. Applicant speaks to his parents and 
parents-in-law on a weekly basis for about an hour each week. He visits Country A on 
an average of once per year. His most recent visit occurred two weeks prior to the 
hearing. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 35-36, 55-56, 66-74.) 
 
 Applicant has not voted in any foreign elections since becoming a U.S. citizen. All 
of his assets are located in the United States and total approximately $320,000. He has 
no bank accounts or financial interests in Country A. He votes in the U.S. and he reports 
all foreign travel and foreign contacts to his facility security officer. In 2003, he 
volunteered for the Civil Air Patrol, an Auxiliary of the United States Air Force. (AE D; 
AE E; Tr. 40, 44.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by his supervisors and colleagues. He was classified 
as a “man of great integrity and honesty” by his Program Manager. He is also credited 
 
4 
 
with a strong work ethic and is trusted by his colleagues and supervisors. (AE K; AE L; 
AE M; AE N; AE O.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in AG ¶ 
9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 In 2005, Applicant chose to become a United States citizen. In doing so, he 
renounced his citizenship in Country A. However, in 2006, he reacquired his citizenship 
in Country A by actively petitioning for dual citizenship. It was granted and he then 
obtained a passport, issued by Country A in December 2006. These actions, taken after 
becoming a U.S. citizen, show Applicant’s allegiance to Country A. AG ¶ 10(a), 10(b), 
and 10(d) are disqualifying. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s dual citizenship is based upon his deliberate act of petitioning the 
Government of Country A, not solely on his parent’s citizenship or his birth in Country A. 
He chose to reacquire citizenship in Country A because he wanted to be able to have 
power of attorney for his parents and in-laws, apparently a right only available to 
citizens of Country A. While he has expressed a willingness to renounce his dual 
citizenship with Country A, he has qualified his willingness with the statement “if 
required.” Applicant clearly wishes to continue to maintain his dual citizenship with 
Country A, to take care of his aging parents and parents-in-law. While he has 
invalidated and surrendered his foreign passport, that act alone does not mitigate 
Applicant’s strong ties with Country A. Nor does the surrender of the passport mitigate 
the concern created by his conscious decision to reacquire citizenship with Country A, 
after becoming a U.S. citizen.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 The guideline notes nine conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 The Government raised concerns over possible foreign influence because of 
Applicant's close ties of affection to Country A as his mother, father, sister, mother-in-
law, father-in-law and two sisters-in-law are residents of Country A. Applicant travels 
annually to visit his family there. The Government also expressed concerned about 
Applicant’s wife, who is a dual citizen of Country A and was alleged to work for Country 
A. With respect to Applicant’s family members living in Country A, no heightened risk 
 
7 
 
has been established. Neither Applicant’s mother, father, sister, mother-in-law, father-in-
law, or two sisters-in-law work for Country A. Country A is an ally of the U.S.  
 
Further, no heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion exists with respect to Applicant’s wife. She is directly employed by a U.S. 
company, and works with representatives of a region of Country A, not Country A itself, 
promoting trade with that region. There is no relationship directly between Applicant’s 
wife and Country A, other than her dual national status. The nature of U.S. relations with 
Country A creates no concerns. Therefore, AG ¶ 7 is not disqualifying.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s letters of support show he is a valued employee. However, his 
choices, with respect to his decision to reacquire citizenship with Country A, do not 
demonstrate the judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness needed to hold a security 
clearance. He has not demonstrated he is unequivocally willing to renounce his dual 
citizenship. There are significant unresolved concerns about Applicant’s Foreign 
Preference. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Foreign Preference security concerns.  
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.g.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.h.:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
