1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-06197
SSN: --------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
Applicant was involved in an incident with his then wife in January 2009 that resulted in
his arrest. A misdemeanor charge of assault and battery on a family member was
resolved in state court in March 2009, when Applicant received a deferred adjudication
of guilt. Applicant completed probation in March 2010. Provided his good behavior, the
case will be dismissed in March 2011. Applicant’s wife left him on the day of the
incident, he has seen her once since, and he is unaware of her whereabouts. The
marriage ended in divorce several months after the incident. Applicant presented
sufficient evidence to mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns. Accordingly, as
explained in further detail below, this case is decided for Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 See Exhibits A, D, and E; Tr. 38–48; 89–90.  2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on May 21, 2010,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline J for criminal conduct. The SOR also recommended that the case
be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s
security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me August 10, 2010. The hearing took place September 30,
2010. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received October 9, 2010.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He began his current
job as a consultant in 2005. His educational background includes a bachelor’s degree in
accounting and a master’s degree in telecommunications engineering. He is enjoying
success in his chosen field and he is well regarded at work and at his place of worship.2
He is seeking to maintain a security clearance previously granted to him by the Defense
Department. 
A native of India, Applicant has lived here for about the last 14 years. He
became a U.S. citizen in 2002. In 2007, he acceded to his family’s wishes for an
arranged marriage; he married an Indian woman he had met twice before the marriage.
In hindsight, Applicant now considers the marriage a mistake as it appears that he and
his spouse were not a good match for each other.
In January 2009, a little more than one year into their marriage, Applicant and his
wife were quarreling over a pending visit from his wife’s family from India. At some point
in the argument, Applicant grabbed the telephone from his wife when she was about to
call her father. Their argument took place at their home in the presence of his parents.
Their argument continued and shortly thereafter the police arrived at the home to
investigate. The result was Applicant was arrested and charged with the misdemeanor
offense of assault and battery on a family member. Applicant was released about four
 Exhibit C. 3
 Exhibit B. 4
 Exhibits F and G. 5
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a6
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.7
3
hours later and came home to find that his wife had taken her things along with one of
their cars and departed. Applicant reported his arrest to the company’s facility security
officer within a few days of the incident. 
The misdemeanor charge was heard via a bench trial in state court in March
2009. Upon presentation of the evidence, the judge determined the facts were sufficient
to find Applicant guilty, but deferred adjudication of guilt until March 2011. The court
ordered Applicant to pay a fine of $1,500, sentenced him to 180 days in county jail,
which was suspended for two years upon good behavior. Also, Applicant was placed on
probation for one year and ordered to complete a domestic-violence program. 
Applicant completed the domestic-violence program in September 2009.  He3
completed probation in March 2010.  The case will be closed and the charge dismissed4
in March 2011 if there are no violations of the law.   
Applicant has had essentially no contact with his wife since the day of the
January 2009 incident. She left the marital home that day and he has seen her once
since (in court in March 2009). His efforts at reconciliation were met with no reply. The
marriage ended in divorce in December 2009.  Applicant is now unaware of his ex-5
wife’s whereabouts. 
 
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As6
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt7
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 14
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).15
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.16
4
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An8
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  9
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting10
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An11
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate12
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme13
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.14
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.15
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it16
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 30, 31, and 32 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 17
 AG ¶ 30. 18
 AG ¶ 31(c).19
 AG ¶ 31(d).20
 AG ¶ 32(a). 21
5
Analysis
Under Guideline J,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into17
doubt when that applicant has a criminal history record regardless of whether the
criminal conduct at issue has been subject to prosecution and adjudication in a court of
law. The overall concern under Guideline J is that:
Criminal activity creates doubts about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  18
The January 2009 incident and the misdemeanor charge in state court are
sufficient to raise security concerns for criminal conduct.  In addition, although he19
completed probation in March 2010, he remains under the state court’s supervision via
the suspended sentence until March 2011, when the charge will be dismissed provided
his good behavior. This is not parole or probation, but it is akin to it and is a concern as
well.  20
In mitigation, the incident happened under the unusual circumstances of an
arranged marriage that ended nearly as quickly as it began. Applicant has had
essentially no contact with his ex-wife since the incident, the marriage ended in divorce,
and Applicant is now unaware of his ex-wife’s whereabouts. These facts and
circumstances suggest that the incident was situational in origin and that similar criminal
conduct is unlikely to recur.  In addition, there is evidence of successful reform and21
rehabilitation, to include Applicant’s good employment record as well as successfully
completing the one-year period of probation and complying with the other requirements
imposed by the state court. 
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding the whole affair do not
justify current doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It was
an isolated event and Applicant is otherwise a law-abiding citizen. Now divorced, the
turmoil or discord in his life due to a problematic marriage is a thing of the past. Looking
forward, it is most probable that he will avoid similar problems in the future. Based on
the evidence as a whole, I have no doubts or concerns about Applicant’s security
suitability or fitness. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
6
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
