                                                              
 
 
 
 
 
1
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-01979 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 2, 2009, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On May 17, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant submitted an undated answer. Applicant requested that his case be 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On July 20, 2010, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
2
on that date. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on August 16, 2010. 
Applicant filed a Response to the FORM on August 25, 2010, within the 30 day time 
allowed that would have expired on September 15, 2010. Department Counsel did not 
object to the additional information that Applicant submitted. I received the case 
assignment on August 31, 2010. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations contained in the SOR. He submitted 
additional information in support of his request for a security clearance.  
 
Applicant is 32 years old and married to his third wife. He has a child from each 
of his first two marriages. He works for a defense contractor on an air base as a truck 
driver. (Item 5, FORM Response) 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in December 2000. The Bankruptcy Court 
granted him a discharge in May 2001. Applicant stated he intends to file bankruptcy 
again when he has saved enough money to pay his attorney. His attorney told him “not 
to pay any of the debt that will be discharged.” Applicant did not submit a copy of any 
current bankruptcy petition with proof of filing. (Answer; Items 5 to 10) 
 
Applicant has 17 delinquent debts as listed in the SOR. The amount owed is 
$16,878. Eight of these debts are $100 or less each. Another six debts are less than 
$1,000 each. He has a utility bill (Paragraph 1.c) in the amount of $2,767. His 
delinquent mortgage account is past due $11,727 on a balance of $130,000. He 
surrendered the house to the lending bank. The earliest of these debts is dated 2002. 
Applicant did not submit any documentation specifically showing that he was paying any 
of these 17 debts. He did submit in his Response documents from his online checking 
account showing that he paid other debts: including one owed to a city, a financial 
company, a utility company (at least $123 monthly since September 2009 with varying 
payment amounts and dates until July 2010), and a wireless telephone company. An 
examination of the debts listed in the SOR and Applicant’s payment documents 
revealed no readily evident correlation between them. This information, coupled with his 
statement that his bankruptcy attorney told him not to pay any debts, shows Applicant 
ceased all payments to the four creditors in his Response documents in July 2010 
pursuant to that instruction. No debts have been paid since then, including payments on 
the SOR-listed debts. (Items 4-9, Answer, FORM Response) 
 
Applicant submitted two character statements. Both writers state Applicant is 
honest and has a “sound character.” (FORM Response) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2002 to the present, Applicant accumulated 17 delinquent debts totaling 
$16,878 that remain unpaid or unresolved. Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2000 
and was discharged in May 2001. Since then he purchased a house that he 
surrendered to the lending bank. He has a pattern of incurring debt and not being able 
to repay the money. This history of not meeting his financial obligations spans back to 
2000 when he filed bankruptcy.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I considered all of them. None of them apply. 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant’s financial behavior is current and continuous from 2000 to the present 
time. He has had financial problems for a decade because he cannot manage his 
money. He clearly lacks good financial judgment. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. 
 
The financial problems that surround Applicant were not due to conditions 
beyond his control. He presented no persuasive evidence his two divorces caused his 
problems. All his financial delinquencies were within his control. He should have been 
more careful about his spending habits after his 2000 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. AG ¶ 20 
(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not submit any evidence of seeking or receiving financial 
counseling. AG ¶ 20 (c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant tried to pay four debts not listed in the SOR. He did not submit any 
evidence that the SOR-listed debts were paid or that he made any good-faith efforts to 
pay them. AG ¶ 20 (d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not dispute any the delinquent debts listed in the SOR. He admitted 
he owed all of them. There is no evidence of any affluence in Applicant’s life. Therefore, 
neither AG ¶ 20 (e) nor (f) applies.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
 
 
 
6
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  He exhibited a continued lack of 
appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his SOR-listed delinquent 
debts during the past decade. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.q:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
  
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
