 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00973 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 3, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 30, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on August 18, 2010, as amended on August 19, 2010. The 
 
2 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled on September 14, 2010. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through DD, which were received without objection. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted 
documents that were marked AE EE through GG and admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served on active 
duty in the United States military from 1984 until he was honorably discharged in the 
pay grade E-4 in 1987. He served in the inactive reserves from 1987 through 1990. He 
seeks to retain a security clearance he has held since about 1989. He attended college 
for a period but did not earn a degree. He was married and divorced four times. He has 
been separated from his common-law wife since 2006. He is unclear if he is required to 
go through a divorce to end that marriage. He has two children, ages 25 and 17.1 
 
 Applicant was laid off from his job in about November 2002. He was unemployed 
until he was rehired by his employer in about July 2003, but at a different geographic 
location and at a smaller salary. A number of debts became delinquent. He was able to 
transfer back to his original location in 2006, with a promotion and a higher salary.2 
 
 DOHA issued an SOR to Applicant in January 2007, detailing Financial 
Considerations security concerns. Applicant had a hearing before an administrative 
judge in April 2007. He explained his financial situation and testified about his 
delinquent debts. He stated that he had contracted with a credit counseling service to 
pay three large debts of $8,284, $5,530, and $4,439. He also received financial 
counseling from the company. He agreed to pay the credit counseling service $434 a 
month until the debts were satisfied. There were two additional debts of about $6,700 
and $5,700 that were incurred in the mid-1990s. These debts were not legally 
enforceable due to his state’s statute of limitations. The administrative judge granted 
Applicant’s continued eligibility for a security clearance in May 2007.3 
 
 Applicant did not continue with the credit counseling service after his hearing. 
Instead, he borrowed from his parents and paid or settled his debts in a lump sum. He 
settled the $8,284 debt for $4,971 in May 2007. He settled the $5,530 debt with three 
payments of $1,335 in July through September 2009. Applicant thought he was settling 
the $4,439 debt from the original SOR. Instead, he mistakenly settled one of the debts 
from the original SOR that was barred from collection by his state’s statute of limitations. 
He settled that debt with a $4,007 payment in May 2007.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14, 38, 43, 46-50; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 43-44, Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3.  
 
3 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6, 7.  
 
4 Tr. at 14, 53-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE GG. 
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $4,439 debt to a bank. This is the debt from the original 
SOR that Applicant thought he settled, but did not. Applicant settled this debt for $2,200 
in July 2010.5 
 
 The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a $34,827 tax lien against Applicant and 
his common-law wife in 2009 for unpaid taxes from tax year 2006. His wife received a 
large sum of money. She decided she no longer wanted to be married, and they 
separated in mid-2006. She earned a large income from the money but did not tell 
Applicant. When they filed joint tax returns for 2006, they did not report the income. The 
IRS determined they owed more than $34,000 in tax, interest, and penalties. Applicant 
filed an IRS Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief. The IRS granted his 
petition, relieved him of a tax liability of $30,426, and determined that he still owed 
$881. Applicant paid his part of the IRS debt. In August 2010, the IRS released the tax 
lien as to him, but not his former common-law spouse. The IRS certified that Applicant 
“had satisfied the taxes listed below and all statutory additions.”6 
 
 The current SOR alleges an additional seven delinquent debts totaling about 
$1,392. Applicant submitted documentary proof that he has satisfied all the debts. The 
$568 debt and the $162 debt, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f, were paid in 2007.7 The 
$42 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i was paid in 2009.8 The remaining debts were paid in July 
and August 2010.9  
 
 Applicant’s other debts are current. He earns a good salary and has assets in 
excess of $100,000. He has a modest lifestyle, and he earns more than he spends each 
month. He owns an older car and a motorcycle outright. He bought his house more than 
20 years ago. The mortgage is less than $30,000, and the mortgage payment is less 
than $400 a month. In March 2008, Applicant notified his facility security officer that he 
discovered two additional delinquent debts on his credit report. Both debts have been 
resolved.10 
 
 Applicant submitted several letters attesting to his outstanding job performance, 
impeccable character, strong work ethic, honesty, reliability, dedication, responsibility, 
honor, leadership, loyalty, and integrity.11 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 53-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6, 7; AE G-I. 
 
6 Tr. at 14, 37-42, 46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3; AE A, C, D. 
 
7 Tr. at 59-60; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE E, F, O, P, GG. 
 
8 Tr. at 51-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B, W-Z. 
 
9 Tr. at 51, 58-62; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE J-N, Q-V. 
 
10 Tr. at 16-18, 37, 50-51, 62-70; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3; AE AA, DD. 
 
11 AE BB. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
6 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial issues started when he was laid off from his job in about 
November 2002. He was unemployed until he was rehired by his employer in about July 
2003, but at a different geographic location and at a smaller salary. Those events 
qualify as conditions that were outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) 
also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. The IRS 
absolved him of his tax liability, and he paid or settled the remaining debts alleged in the 
SOR. He acted responsibly under the circumstances by making a good-faith effort to 
repay his overdue creditors. He has received financial counseling, and his financial 
problems have been resolved. His past financial problems are unlikely to recur and do 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 
20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are all applicable. AG ¶ 20(e) is also applicable to the IRS 
debt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s strong character evidence. Applicant’s finances suffered 
when he was unemployed and when he accepted a position at another geographic 
location for less pay. It has taken time, but he has resolved all his financial problems. 
He is currently living within his means and not accruing new delinquent debt. His 
finances do not constitute a security concern.  
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
