  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00100 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has paid or is making payment on six debts listed in the Statement of 
Reasons (SOR). He is attempting to locate the current holder of his student loan 
obligation. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under financial 
considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 6, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On April 29, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
June 4, 2010, I was assigned the case. On June 7, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on June 28, 2010.  
 
 The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A and B, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. Three additional witnesses testified on 
Applicant’s behalf. The record was held open to allow additional information from 
Applicant. On July 7, 2010, additional material was submitted. Department Counsel had 
no objection to the material, which was admitted into the record as Ex. C. On July 7, 
2010, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.c 
and 1.d of the SOR. He denied the remaining factual allegations. Applicant’s admissions 
are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old help-desk specialist who has worked for a defense 
contractor since September 2009, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. From 
August 1978 to August 1981, Applicant was on active duty with the United States 
Marine Corps. The individual in charge of quality assurance at Applicant’s job stated 
Applicant is a quiet person who has done a good job in all tasks asked of him. (Tr. 24) 
Applicant’s supervisor, the contracting officer’s technical representative, states 
Applicant does everything above the call of duty for Information technology (IT) support. 
(Tr. 27) His supervisor has full confidence Applicant will do the right thing and states 
Applicant is a really good worker. (Tr. 29, 30) Applicant’s division superintendent, who is 
also an alternate security manager, states he has heard many good comments about 
Applicant. Applicant is the “go-to guy” for telephone issues. (Tr. 33)  
 
In January 2002, Applicant was living in a United States territory and was laid off 
from his job of 15 years due to lack of work. (Tr. 40) He had worked in warehouse 
inventory control. (Tr. 44) In February 2002, he moved to Chicago with his family, to 
attend a technical university. (Tr. 45) From March 2002 to June 2007, he attended 
school, majoring in computer information systems, while maintaining a full-time job as a 
maintenance coordinator. (Tr. 45) After obtaining his degree, he obtained a job earning 
$46,000 annually. His wife was earning $20,000 annually. (Ex. B) 
 
 Applicant incurred a number of student loans: $67,914 (SOR ¶ 1.c), $1,363 (SOR 
¶ 1.e), and $754 (SOR ¶ 1.f). He believes the total amount borrowed was approximately 
$70,000. (Tr. 59) Applicant made all his student loans through Sallie Mae and does not 
recognize the creditor for the last two student loans (SOR ¶ 1.e and 1.f) listed in the 
 
3 
 
                                                          
SOR. (Tr. 58) Applicant contacted the creditor listed for the larger student loan (SOR ¶ 
1.c) and was told it had been sold to another collection agency. When he contacted the 
agency he was told it was sold to another collection agency. (Tr. 56) The collection 
agency has not contacted him about repaying his student loan. His plans to address the 
smaller debts before addressing the student loan debt. (Tr. 42, 56) At the hearing, 
Applicant stated he would obtain documentation about consolidation of his student 
loans and the current status of his student loan obligation. (Tr. 59) 
 
 In February 2009, Applicant became unemployed, his wife left her job, they 
separated2, she returned to the location of her former home, and he moved to another 
state. His income went from an annual household income of more than $60,000 to $700 
per month in unemployment compensation. (Tr. 42) When his sister obtained an 
overseas contract position, he house-sat for her. (Tr. 47) In March 2009, he moved to 
his current location. (Tr. 47) Applicant obtained a job inspecting apartments. When 
called, he would work full time and then be out of work for days. From June through 
August 2009, he worked five weeks total being paid $100 per day when working. (Tr. 
49)  
 
 Applicant’s car was repossessed and sold. He listed the repossession on his 
August 2009, Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Also on 
his e-QIP he listed an account in collection and a credit card account that was 90 days 
past due. Applicant owed $7,462 following the repossession and established a $200 
automatic withdrawal from his account each month to pay the debt. (Ex. 3, Tr. 57) 
Between September 2009 and June 2010, he made ten monthly payments on this 
account paying $1,850. (Ex. C) 
 
 Before moving to Chicago, he incurred a $207 telephone bill (SOR ¶ 1.g), which 
he asserts he paid. The $131 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.c) was incurred while he lived in 
Chicago. As of March 2010, he had contacted the creditor and requested a written 
statement concerning the account. (Ex. 3) Applicant owes a discount department store 
$1,950 on a credit card account (SOR ¶ 1.b), which the creditor offered to settle for 
$1,200. (Ex. 3) In October 2009, the creditor offered to settle this for $1,200, which he 
accepted. (Ex. 3, Tr. 55) Between October 2009 and February 2010, Applicant has paid 
$1,254.85 on this debt. (Ex. C)  
 
 Applicant had a $229 insurance debt placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.i). As of 
March 2010, he had contacted the creditor and requested a written statement 
concerning the account. (Ex. 3) As of the hearing, he had yet to receive a response 
from the creditor. Applicant was 120 days past due on a credit card account ($840, SOR 
¶ 1.a). He agreed to monthly $120 automatic debits of his checking account. (Tr. 53) A 
December 2009 letter from the creditor states, “Thank you for your consistent 
payments. We appreciate your willingness to pay on this account.” (Ex. 3) The debt was 
listed at $4,129 in Applicant’s September 2009 CBR. (Ex. 2, Tr. 54) Between January 
2 They had married in 1988. There were two children of the marriage. Both are deceased. (Tr. 45,46) 
 
4 
 
2010 and May 2010, Applicant had made six monthly payments of $120 each for a total 
of $720. (Ex. C)  
 
 In September 2009, he obtained his current job. He currently maintains two jobs; 
his full-time job with a defense contractor, and a part-time job in which he works 6:00 
p.m. to 1:30 a.m. Friday and Saturday nights at a gasoline convenience store. (Tr. 51, 
52) His monthly net income is $2,500 and his monthly expenses total $1,529. (Ex. A) 
Applicant intends to pay all his delinquent accounts. (Ex. 3) He is not receiving any calls 
or letters from creditors demanding payment on past due obligations. (Tr. 67)  
 
 Applicant makes regular monthly payments on two other accounts. Between 
October 2009 and April 2010, Applicant paid $1,473 on a Honda account, which is now 
paid in full. (Ex. C) Between September 2009 and February 2010, Applicant made six 
monthly payments of $105 each on a furniture account.  
 
A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
 
SOR Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Credit card account 
120 days past due. 
$840 Paying. Between January and May 2010, 
Applicant made six monthly payments of 
$120. (Ex. C) 
b Discount store credit 
card collection 
account.  
$839 
 
Paid. Between October 2009 and 
February 2010, Applicant paid $1,254. 
(Ex. C)  
c Student loan placed 
for collection. 
$67,914 
 
Applicant contacted the creditor who had 
sold the student loan to another collection 
agency. (Tr. 56) He is currently attempting 
to pay off the smaller debts before 
addressing his student loan obligation. (Tr. 
56)  
d Vehicle repossession.  $6,095 Paying. Applicant pays $200 monthly on 
this debt. (Ex. 3) Between September 
2009 and June 2010, Applicant made ten 
monthly payments paying $1,850 on this 
debt. (Ex. C) 
e Student loan account 
more than 120 days 
past due. 
$1,363 The creditor has not contacted Applicant 
about this student loan. (Tr. 59) See c 
above.  
f Student loan account 
more tha 120 days 
past due. 
$754 See c and e above. 
 
5 
 
 
SOR Creditor Amount Current Status 
g Telephone account 
placed for collection. 
$207 Applicant paid this debt. (Tr. 62) 
h Medical account placed 
for collection. 
$131 Applicant had medical insurance which 
should have paid this medical bill. 
(Tr.63) He called the creditor and asked 
the company to send information about 
this debt. He is awaiting the creditor’s 
response. (Tr. 65) 
I Automobile insurance 
account collection. 
$229 Applicant had auto insurance with this 
company, but was never delinquent on 
the account. (Tr. 63)  
 Total debt listed in SOR $78,372 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
6 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination about the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He had nine past due or delinquent 
accounts which totaled approximately $78,000. Three of the past-due accounts were for 
student loans and totaled approximately $70,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
 
7 
 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20(a) have limited applicability. Applicant 
has paid two debts (SOR ¶ 1.b) and is making monthly payments on two other accounts 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d). He has yet to address his student loans obligation. 
 
Applicant=s inability to repay his debts was the result of factors beyond his 
control. In 2002, Applicant was laid off from his job after 15 years of employment. He 
moved to a new location, worked full-time, and attended school full-time. In February 
2009, Applicant became unemployed, his wife left her job, they separated, he moved to 
another state, and his wife returned to another location. His income went from an 
annual household income of more than $60,000 to $700 per month. From June 2009 
through August 2009, he worked five weeks total receiving $100 per day when he 
worked. These factors—unemployment, underemployment, and separation—were 
beyond his control. When he obtained his current job in September 2009, he began 
repaying his delinquent accounts. The mitigating factors listed in AG ¶ 20(b) apply. 
 
Applicant asserted he paid three small debts (SOR & 1.g, $207, & 1.h, $131, and 
& 1.i, $229), but failed to provide any documentation establishing payment. Even 
without documented proof of payment, these three debts total less than $600 and are 
 
8 
 
sufficiently small so as not to raise security concerns about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Of the nine SOR debts of concern, Applicant is making monthly payments on two 
of them, has paid four others, and the three remaining debts are his student loans. 
Applicant is also making regular, routine monthly payments on two additional debts not 
listed in the SOR. He is attempting to locate the collection company which currently 
holds his student loan obligation. He has contacted various collections agencies only to 
be told they have transferred the note to another collection agency. The holder of the 
student loans has yet to contact him. When he knows who currently holds the note, he 
will start repaying his obligation. Most student loan repayment plans require the monthly 
payment of several hundred dollars, which Applicant can afford.  
 
Applicant is living within his means, has been steadily employed since 
September 2009, and has been making routine, monthly payments on the majority of 
his debts since that time. He made a decision to address the smaller debts first, before 
tackling the larger student loan. The mitigating conditions in AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the SOR were 
not incurred on luxuries. The largest and yet—to—be—addressed debt, is his student 
loan. The systematic way Applicant has addressed his other financial obligations since 
obtaining his current job gives positive indication that he will continue to meet his 
 
9 
 
financial obligations and will address his student loan obligations once the smaller 
obligations have been paid and he locates the current holder of the student loan.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) Applicant’s past and present conduct gives assurance he will address his 
student loans. From 2002 to 2007, Applicant worked full-time while he attended school 
full-time. Currently, he works full-time at his contractor job and also works 6:00 p.m. to 
1:30 a.m. Friday and Saturday nights at a gasoline convenience store. Maintaining a 
part-time job while having a full-time job shows a strong desire by Applicant to address 
his financial obligations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
