1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 10-01014
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On June 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG).
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. He admitted the
single allegation in the SOR. DOHA assigned the case to me on July 26, 2010. DOHA
issued a Notice of Hearing on August 16, 2010, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on September 10, 2010. Department Counsel offered seven exhibits, which
were admitted without objection as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-7. Applicant testified
and presented one exhibit, which was admitted without objection as Applicant Exhibit
(AE) A. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 19, 2010. Based upon a review
2
of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 66-year-old employee of a defense contractor. After high school,
he attended a community college, earning an associate’s degree. He served in the
United States Army (USA) from March 1967 until 1969. He held a security clearance
during his military service. He has held a current clearance since 2004. Applicant has
been with his current employer since January 2004. (GE 1)
After his discharge from the Army, Applicant began employment in the
manufacturing field. He also attended college classes. He advanced from a stock clerk
position to Vice President of Operations for four companies. (AE A) As part of his
position responsibilities, he was accountable for millions of dollars in sales and budgets.
Applicant married in 1974. He has two adult children from his marriage. (Tr. 17)
His wife left the family in 2002. They divorced in 2002. Applicant incurred many
expenses as a result of the separation and divorce. Applicant’s wife was awarded
$1,800 a month in alimony based on Applicant’s income at the time. Shortly after that,
his salary was cut due to economic downturns. He was unemployed from February
2003 until September 2003. (GE 1) Applicant used his savings and retirement account
to support himself and pay for his home and the alimony. 
Applicant’s son and daughter moved into the family home in order to pool
resources. Applicant’s daughter and son were gainfully employed, and they contributed
to the house payment. The three of them lived in the family home. The home had been
purchased in 2001 for a price of $240,000. The mortgage payment was $1,200.
Applicant’s daughter would have a share in the future equity of the home in return for
her financial contributions. (Tr. 52)
Applicant refinanced his home in 2006. His daughter, who works for a bank,
decided to purchase her own home. The proceeds from the refinancing loan were used
for her to purchase her own home. She testified at the hearing that the loan was
approximately $400,000, with an adjustable rate. In approximately 2007, the rate
increased such that the mortgage payment increased to $2,500 a month. Applicant was
able to pay the greatly increased mortgage payment until about February 2009. (Tr. 42).
Applicant’s son was still living in the home, but his business failed. He built
custom race and sand cars. The business was profitable until the market turned and
then the market for luxury items disappeared. As a result, Applicant’s son had no
income. He could not afford to help pay the mortgage payment. Applicant had planned
to turn the house over to his son, but his son could not afford the payment.
Also in 2007, Applicant’s parents needed care due to their declining health.
Applicant’s father was diagnosed with cancer and his mother was in final stages of
3
Alzheimer’s disease. His father could no longer work. Applicant helped them financially
and moved in with them to help care for them. When his parents died, Applicant
remained in the home. He and his siblings will eventually sell the home. He will receive
his share of the inheritance. For the current time, he is living in his parent’s home. He is
also paying the rent because the house is still mortgaged.
Applicant found himself in a difficult financial situation. He was helping his son
pay the mortgage on the family home and helping his parents financially. He knew that
the family home needed to be sold. Applicant contacted the bank and asked for a loan
modification. The bank refused.  (AE A)
In June 2009, Applicant, with his daughter’s help, decided to start a process with
the bank for a “short sale” of the family home. The process is a lengthy one. The bank is
slow to process the paper work and some people who have been interested in buying
the home have been discouraged and decided to look for another home to buy.
Applicant testified that at least four different people wanted to buy the house but could
not wait for the process. 
Applicant consulted an attorney who advised him to file for bankruptcy. Applicant
believed that he had a duty to pay his debt. He had lived within his means for 47 years
and had been responsible with his financial affairs. He did not want the stigma.
Applicant has concentrated on expediting the “short sale.” He has done everything he
could possibly do at this time. He is current on his debts. Applicant earns approximately
$50,000 a year. He has about $8,000 in savings. (GE 2) He owes less than $1,000 on
his car note.
The SOR alleges one delinquent debt, a past-due mortgage account for $27,555.
(GE 7) The home has not been foreclosed. Applicant does not know the reason.
Applicant’s state has an anti-deficiency statute. When the home is sold in a short sale,
Applicant is not responsible for any difference or note amount that might remain. (Tr.
38)
Applicant’s current employer describes him as an exemplary employee. Applicant
displays a high level of trust and confidence. He exhibit the highest level of
professionalism. He accomplished his duties in a reliable manner. He recommends
Applicant for retention of his security clearance.
Applicant submitted other letters of reference from colleagues who have known
him for many years. Applicant is described as someone who is flawless in his
responsibilities. He is very conscientious. Applicant takes pride in his work. He is
intelligent and trustworthy. 
At the hearing, Applicant was forthright and candid about his financial situation.
He believes that he has shown that he is trustworthy and has managed his affairs his
entire life in a responsible manner. After his divorce, he incurred unexpected expenses.
He had no idea that his son’s business would fail and that he would not be able to pay a
4
part of the mortgage on the family home. At the same time, Applicant had a duty to help
his elderly parents. He acted responsibly in trying to sell the house. 
In the last month, Applicant has had another set of potential buyers for the “short
sale.” His daughter, who has professional experience in the banking field, is helping
Applicant. Applicant’s daughter testified that the potential buyers made an offer and are
very interested in the home. The bank is helping to expedite the “short sale” given
Applicant’s situation. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
5
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant has approximately $30,000 past due on his mortgage
account. His credit reports confirm the debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns
arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be
mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant has never
had any financial difficulties prior to a divorce, alimony, unemployment, and downturn in
the real estate market which has affected his ability to pay the mortgage. These events
were beyond his control. They are not likely to recur. This mitigating condition  applies.
Under AG & 20(b), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.@ Applicant’s divorce, and separation, as noted above, were
beyond his control. He acted responsibly when his mortgage increased to $2,500 a
month. His son’s business failed and he could no longer help with the payments.
Applicant was unable to sell the house due to the real estate market. He has acted
responsibly by trying to get a loan modification. He is now in the process of a “short
6
sale.” He consistently showed reliability. Applicant consistently acted responsibly in
paying his other debts. His separation and divorce exacerbated any financial difficulties.
He helped his son and daughter and his elderly parents. This mitigating condition
applies.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has not obtained formal financial counseling.
Applicant has a history of good-faith efforts in paying bills until this unusual situation
occurred in 2009. He has sufficient income to pay his current bills. His efforts are
sufficient to carry his burden in this case. I conclude these mitigating conditions partially
apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge must consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are sufficient to
overcome the Government’s case. Applicant is a mature, responsible individual. He
served in the military from 1967 until 1969. He held a security clearance during his
service without incident.  He has held a current clearance since 2004 with his employer.
He is praised by his employer for his exemplary work.
Applicant’s first marriage ended in divorce. He paid $1,800 a month in alimony to
his wife. He has risen in his professional field. He has had unemployment which caused
him to use his savings and retirement account in 2003. He refinanced his home and
found himself unable to pay the huge increase in the monthly mortgage due in part to
7
his son’s failed business. Applicant has been a good father and son. He helped his
elderly parents until they died. At the hearing, Applicant was candid that this has been
the only time in his life that he has an unpaid debt. He believes this is a single, isolated
event. I agree with him. Counsel did not dispute the fact that Applicant acted
responsibly nor that Applicant has made good faith efforts. Applicant expects to
complete a “short sale.” He will also receive money from his inheritance.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts about
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
