1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-00454
SSN: -------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s history of
marijuana use during 2001–2009, along with an equivocal intent to discontinue such
use, raises questions about his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence of reform or changed
circumstances to mitigate the security concerns raised by his drug abuse. Accordingly,
as explained below, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some3
of which are identified as exhibits in this decision.  
 Exhibit 5. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on May 17, 2010,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline H for drug involvement. The SOR also recommended that the case
be submitted to an administrative judge to decide whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s
security clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion. Neither Applicant nor
Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the
written record.2
On or about June 28, 2010, the Agency submitted its written case consisting of
all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called3
file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant and received by him on July 7,
2010. He then had a 30-day period to submit a response setting forth objections,
rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation. He did not reply. The case was
assigned to me September 21, 2010. 
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 27-year-old auditor employed by a financial-services firm. He
earned a bachelor’s degree in May 2006, and began working for the financial-services
firm later that same year. He is not married and has no children. 
Applicant completed a security clearance application in September 2009;  it4
appears this is the first time he has applied for a security clearance. In answering
 Exhibit 6. 5
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a6
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.7
3
Question 23a of the application, he disclosed using illegal drugs within the last seven
years. He reported using marijuana during August 2001 to August 2009. He described
his marijuana usage as recreational use during college and his initial years of
employment. He indicated that smoked marijuana about 30 to 40 times, and that he had
used it about four times since June 2008.  
About a month later in October 2009, Applicant participated in an official
interview in which he stated the following about his use of marijuana:5
1. He admitted using marijuana from August 2001 through August 2009 about 30 to
40 times. 
2. He used marijuana in a water bong or joint form. 
3. He denied using marijuana while school was in session, but used it during the
summers at a frequency of one to two times weekly. 
4. He bought marijuana from friends (names not recalled).
5. He has not sold, manufactured, or distributed marijuana.
6. He stopped using marijuana on his own, and he has never been diagnosed as an
abuser of or addicted to marijuana.
7. He may use marijuana again, but he is not actively pursuing it.
Applicant did not submit any documentary information in response to the FORM.
Likewise, the record is silent concerning Applicant’s good employment record or
constructive community involvement. 
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As6
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 14
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).15
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.16
4
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An8
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  9
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting10
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An11
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate12
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme13
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.14
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.15
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it16
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 24, 25, and 26 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 17
 AG ¶ 24. 18
 AG ¶ 24(b). 19
 AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (h).20
 AG ¶ 26(a) – (d).21
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).22
5
Analysis
Under Guideline H for drug involvement,  the suitability of an applicant may be17
questioned or put into doubt when an applicant has a history of drug abuse or other
illegal drug involvement. The overall concern under Guideline H is that:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.   18
Drug abuse means “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that
deviates from approved medical direction.”19
Applicant’s history of marijuana use raises obvious security concerns. He
engaged in drug abuse by using marijuana over a period of years, to include the initial
years of his employment with the financial-services firm. His most recent marijuana use
occurred in August 2009, about one month before he completed the security clearance
application. He has stated that he may use marijuana again, but he is not actively
pursuing it. Taken together, these circumstances raise concerns under two disqualifying
conditions.  20
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns.  I considered all the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. Although21
his last use of marijuana took place more than one year ago, his future intentions are
equivocal, as he has stated that he may use marijuana again. Given his equivocation,
Applicant failed to demonstrate a clear intention not to use marijuana in the future. In
short, the evidence of reform or changed circumstances at this point is insufficient to
mitigate the security concerns.  
To conclude, Applicant’s history of marijuana use during 2001–2009, with an
equivocal intent to discontinue such use, raises questions about his ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s22
6
favorable evidence. Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
