                                                      
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 10-00503 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
I have carefully reviewed the administrative file, pleadings, and exhibits in this 
case and conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under the 
Personal Conduct adjudicative guideline. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
denied. 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) on July 
17, 2009. She also completed an SF-85P in December 2003. On June 24, 2010, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging trustworthiness concerns under Guideline E for Applicant. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
1 
 
2 
 
 On July 28, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. She requested that her 
case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its File 
of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 3, 2010. The FORM contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 7. Additionally, the Government provided a statute, 
identified as Item 8, for administrative notice. By letter dated September 8, 2010, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on 
October 4, 2010. Her response to the FORM was due on November 3, 2010. Applicant 
complied with the time limitation and filed additional information. Department Counsel 
did not object to Applicant’s submission. The case was assigned to me for a decision on 
October 18, 2010. I marked the information provided by Applicant in response to the 
FORM as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted it to the record.  
 
     Procedural Matters 
 
 As Item 8 of the FORM, the Government provided a copy of 8 U.S.C. § 1324. 
Additionally, the Government provided, in footnote 13 of the FORM, a summary of 
judicial interpretations of the term “harbor,” as used in the statute. The Government 
moved that I take administrative notice of the statute. Applicant did not object, and the 
Government’s motion is granted.   
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR consists of a single allegation that raises trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant admitted the allegation but denied it 
was a   security concern under Guideline E. Applicant’s admission of the allegation is 
entered as a finding of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old, married, and the mother of two young children. She 
has a high school diploma and is employed as an administrative clerk by a government 
contractor. She has worked for her present employer for eight years. (Item 5.) 
 
 On the SF-85P that Applicant completed in 2003, she indicated her background 
had been investigated by the Government, but the record does not show that a 
clearance determination was made at that time. She now seeks access to sensitive 
information. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) on November 18, 2009. On March 5, 2010, in response 
to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant signed a notarized statement affirming that she had 
read the summary of the interview and found it to be true and correct. She made no 
changes, corrections, or revisions to the investigator’s summaries. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant is a native-born citizen of the United States. She and her husband, who 
is unemployed, have been married for nine years. Applicant’s husband was born in 
Mexico, and he is a citizen of Mexico. Applicant’s husband is neither a U.S. registered 
alien nor a naturalized United States citizen. He resides with Applicant in the home they 
3 
 
                                                          
share in the United States. Applicant’s husband has no legal documents that verify or 
permit his residency in the United States.1 (Item 5; Item 7.)  
 
 I take administrative notice of section 1324 of Title 8 of the United States Code, a 
federal statute that makes it a felony crime to harbor an illegal alien. The statute reads, 
in pertinent part: 
 
 Sec. 1324. Bringing in and harboring certain aliens 
 
 (1) (A) Any person who – 
  
(iii) knowing or in reckless disregard of the fact that an alien               
has come to, entered, or remains in the United States in 
violation of law, conceals, harbors, or shields from detection, 
or attempts to conceal, harbor, or shield from detection, such 
alien in any place, including any building or any means of 
transportation;   
 
 shall be punished as provided in subparagraph (B). 
 
(B) A person who violates subparagraph (A) shall, for each alien in respect to 
whom such a violation occurs – 
 
(ii) in the case of a violation of subparagraph (A)(ii), (iii), (iv), or (v)(ll), be fined 
under title 18, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both. 
 
(Item 8.) 
 
 I also take administrative notice of the facts in footnote 13 of the FORM, which 
reads as follows:  
 
Item 8. See, 8 U.S.C. § 1324 (2006). The word “harbor” as used in this 
section is intended to encompass conduct tending to substantially facilitate 
the alien’s remaining in the U.S. illegally, provided the person charged has 
knowledge of the alien’s unlawful status. United States v. Lopez, 521 F. 2d 
437 (2nd Cir. 1975), cert. denied, 423 U.S. 995 (1975). The term “harbor” 
also means to afford shelter to and is not limited to clandestine sheltering. 
United States v. Acosta De Evans, 531 F. 2d 428 (9th Cir. 1976, cert. 
denied, 429 U.S. 836 (1976). 
 
 When she filed her answer to the SOR, Applicant included a letter to the 
administrative judge. Applicant’s letter reads, in pertinent part: 
 
1 When Applicant completed her SF-85P in December 2003, she wrote: “My husband is illegal [and] does 
not have a [Social Security number]. I am soon to start the process of his immigration papers.” In her 
interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant stated that she did not know if her husband intended to 
become a U.S. citizen. (Item 6; Item 7.)  
4 
 
I honestly don’t feel that my husband’s status in this country has affected 
or will affect the way I do my job now or in the future. If you believe so let 
me know how. I am a US citizen of this country and I have proudly and 
honestly served the DOD client. I don’t believe my husband’s status in this 
country should be a reason for revoking my current employment position. I 
have done nothing for the DOD to feel I am not trustworthy. 
 
(Item 4 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant provided three letters of character reference from co-workers and one 
letter of character reference from her supervisor. Her co-workers described Applicant as 
honest, efficient, and compassionate. Her supervisor described Applicant as principled, 
ethical, a hard worker, and a valued member of her office team. (Item 4 at 5-6; AE A.) 
    
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, the administrative judge must apply the guidelines in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
5 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant and her husband have been married for nine years and reside together 
in the United States. The record supports a conclusion that Applicant has known since 
at least 2003 that her husband, a citizen of Mexico, lacks legal documentation for his 
residence in the United States and is an illegal alien. From at least 2003 to the present 
time, Applicant has knowingly sheltered and harbored her husband, who resides with 
her as an illegal alien. Applicant’s actions violate section 1324 of Title 8 of the United 
States Code and raise security concerns under Guideline E.   
   
 Disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 16(d), 16(e), and 16(g) apply to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 16(d) reads: “credible adverse information that is not explicitly 
covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
6 
 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations.” 
 
 Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(e) reads, in pertinent part: “personal conduct, or 
concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
may affect the person’s personal, professional or community standing . . .  .” 
 
 Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(g) reads: “association with persons involved in 
criminal activity.”    
  
  Several mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. Applicant’s 
disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(c) if “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not case doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(e) might apply if 
“the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(g) might apply if “association with 
persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under circumstances that do 
not cast doubt upon the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness 
to comply with rules and regulations.”   
 
Applicant continues to knowingly provide shelter to an illegal alien. Her 
husband’s illegal residence in the United States is an ongoing crime, as is her sheltering 
of him, while knowing that he is in the United States illegally. Nothing in the record 
establishes that Applicant has taken steps to eliminate the vulnerability, manipulation or 
duress that she could be subject to as a result of her husband’s illegal status or her 
harboring of him. After considering all applicable Guideline E mitigating conditions, I 
conclude that none applies.    
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult who has 
been recognized by her co-workers as honest and hard-working. Her supervisor 
considers her to be a valued employee. However, as a U.S. citizen, she has, for many 
years, harbored and provided shelter to her husband, an illegal alien. Applicant’s 
actions raise concerns under 8 U.S.C. §1324, which defines harboring an illegal alien as 
a felony crime. Her actions also raise serious concerns about her reliability and 
trustworthiness. Applicant continues to associate with an individual who is involved in 
criminal activity, and she herself continues to harbor him, thereby raising serious 
security concerns about her willingness to abide by rules, regulations, and laws.  
      
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from her 
personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
___________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
