1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-09036
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Daryle A. Jordan, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A, Administrative Judge:
On January 26, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline
I (Psychological Conditions). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. DOHA assigned
the case to me on November 18, 2011. A notice of hearing was issued on December
19, 2011, and the case was heard on January 24, 2012. Department Counsel offered 12
exhibits, (GE) 1 -12, which were admitted upon stipulation. The Government also
presented an expert witness. Applicant testified and presented the testimony of four
witnesses, including an expert witness. He submitted five exhibits (AE) A-E at the
hearing, which were admitted upon stipulation. DOHA received the hearing transcript on
February 1, 2012. Based on a review of the pleadings, submissions, and exhibits, I find
2
Applicant has met his burden of proof on mitigation regarding the security concerns
raised. Security clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b,
1.d, and 1.e with explanation. He denied SOR allegation ¶ 1.c. Applicant is 42 years old.
He is married. He received his undergraduate degree in 1991, and his first graduate
degree in 1996. Applicant obtained a Master of International Policy and Practice in
2002. He has held a top secret security clearance since 2004. Applicant has been
employed with his current employer since July 2007. (GE 2)
Applicant’s professional career has included employment with various firms and
government contracting organizations. He began his career as a computer programmer.
He received promotions and increasing responsibilities. His current responsibilities
include supervision of several employees. (Tr. 75)    
In 1995, Applicant experienced unusual anxiety and nervousness. According to
Applicant, he was working as a computer programmer and began to believe that he was
being monitored in the workplace. (AE E) He became depressed and worried about
things in the workplace. He believed he was being monitored in some way and that
perhaps the radio was sending messages that referred to him. His work performance
was affected by his anxiety. After talking to his father and seeing a therapist, he
voluntarily admitted himself to a hospital. (Tr. 85) Applicant received treatment in the
hospital for almost two weeks.  He was diagnosed with a delusional disorder,
depression, and anxiety. Applicant followed the mental-health recommendation to
receive outpatient treatment. He was compliant with his treatment and any prescribed
medication. He returned to his employer and earned a bonus for a successful project.
(Tr. 87) He eventually left to join another company, which would allow him to use his
master’s degree in business. 
From 1996, until 2001, Applicant received outpatient treatment from a
psychiatrist (Dr. R) for his delusional disorder. He was treated with anti-psychotic
medications. His psychiatrist noted that from time to time Applicant had exacerbation of
symptoms, which necessitated adjustments in the medication regime. Applicant’s
psychiatrist noted that Applicant’s condition “has the potential to possibly impair his
judgment and reliability, especially during exacerbation of his condition or symptoms.”
This psychiatrist has not seen Applicant since August 2001. (GE 4) Since January 2002,
Applicant has received treatment from Dr. A, a licensed psychiatrist. (GE 8) Dr. A’s
medical opinion, in a January 11, 2010 letter, states that Applicant’s mental health
condition has been readily controlled by his medications and he shows consistent
compliance with his treatment plan. (GE 8) He further states that Applicant’s depression
and anxiety is currently in remission and he has no thought or perceptual disorder.
There have been no exacerbations in the past two years. The prognosis is good. Dr. A
concludes that Applicant has no conditions that may impair his judgment, reliability, or
trustworthiness. (GE 8)
3
When Applicant completed his first security clearance application in 1995 and
again in June 2003, he disclosed his history of medical treatment for depression and
other mental-health issues. He noted the name and address of his therapist. (GE1)
Applicant received his top secret security clearance after the disclosure of his diagnosis
and mental health issues. Applicant has not had any security violations. 
In 2003, Applicant worked for a government contractor. During that time, he was
promoted to the highest professional level within six months. He states that he believed
he experienced a hostile work environment from employees who called him gay. He
voiced his concerns to his employer. (Tr. 95) Applicant and his employer met to discuss
the issues. Applicant also mentioned “computer monitoring.” (Tr. 95) Applicant stated
that a peer approached him and told him he was being monitored. (Tr. 96) Applicant told
his security officer that the verbal exchange with his work peer alarmed him. Sometime
in 2004, Applicant through counsel, filed three discrimination complaints against his
employer. Before the filing, Applicant received good evaluations and promotions and
bonuses. In 2005, Applicant received a letter from his employer answering concerns
about computer monitoring. The letter states that Applicant is subject to the same
monitoring as other employees. It also notes that Applicant’s performance reviews have
been very positive. However, in March 2006, an incident report was written, which
Applicant believes is inaccurate, and also that he had no knowledge. (GE 5) Applicant
believes after the filing of the claims, he received retaliatory treatment from his
employer. (Tr.103) He received a poor performance evaluation. He  eventually left the
company. (AE B) He discussed these issues with his therapist who helped him work
through the issues. (Tr. 128)
Applicant joined another company in August 2006. In January 2007, Applicant
was fired from his employment. Applicant was doing a good job, as noted by the owner,
but needed to work on “communication.” Approximately one week later, he was told that
he would not be needed. Applicant was not certain why he was fired. He had raised an
issue with the employer about possible sexual harassment. Applicant named a few
individuals who asked him inappropriate questions. (GE 9) 
Expert Witness Psychiatric Testimony
On October 23, 2010, a government psychologist, Dr. M,  interviewed Applicant
for approximately one hour. He did not dispute Applicant’s earlier stated diagnosis. He
noted in his report that Applicant displayed partial insight into his symptom history
related to the diagnoses.  Dr. M. also noted that Applicant’s anxiety is well managed at
this time. Dr. M. elaborated in the report that “with regard to his delusional thinking, he
was cognizant that he has had problems related to his past beliefs that he was
“monitored.”  The psychologist noted that Applicant showed progress with regard to the
influence that such concerns have on his life. Applicant told Dr. M that he was better
able to “let go” of his concerns and worries. Applicant noted the antidepressants and
anti-psychotic medications that he takes. Applicant is committed to taking the prescribed
medications. The report stated that Applicant has been fully adherent to his psychiatric
treatment since his hospitalization in 2005 according to his report and available records.
4
Dr. M’s report noted that Applicant described progress and strength in his life in
recent years that help him remain focused. He is recently married and has great social
and family support in his life. He is physically active and uses humor as a coping skill.
He expresses confidence in his work-related activities. Dr. M noted that symptoms
related to the delusional disorder may return at times in Applicant’s life. He countered
that given Applicant’s progress in recent years, the prognosis across the diagnosed
disorders appears to be good at this time. (GE 11 )
 At the hearing, Dr. M testified that he performed a mental status evaluation but
did not describe the process. He also noted that he reviewed records prepared for the
SOR. He stated that the delusional disorder is a paranoid concern of a non-bizarre
nature. (Tr. 21) Dr. M learned from the interview with Applicant that the mental health
issues have been present in varying degrees throughout at least 15 or 16 years of
Applicant’s life. (Tr. 22) From the conversation with Applicant, Dr. M believes that
Applicant has had a difficult time discerning what is really going on and what’s not, – to
the point of driving himself to an acute state in the mid 90s and the mid-2000s. Dr. M
testified that depression has not been the major issue with Applicant lately, and that “he
was actually doing quite well mood wise at the time.” Concerning these diagnosed
conditions, Applicant’s judgment and ability to exercise judgment – symptoms may
fluctuate in his life. (Tr. 24) On cross-examination, Dr. M reiterated that Applicant’s
prognosis is good and that he is doing “really well.” (Tr. 31)  
Applicant’s treating psychiatrist for more than eight years, Dr. A. submitted
documentation that stated Applicant is in full remission. (AE C) She has treated
Applicant since 2002. She notes that Applicant’s disorders were never severe and he
was able to function well. She points to completion of his graduate degree and his
employment. She notes that Applicant never posed a danger to himself or others. In the
time that she has known him, he has not shown any violent tendencies and generally
has managed his condition very well. 
In a December 8, 2011, report, Dr. A states that Applicant has shown
“remarkable improvement in his mental and emotional health in the last few years.” His
major depression, anxiety disorder, an delusional disorder are in full sustained
remission. His medications have been reduced in the last two years. Applicant is
compliant with his treatment plan. He attends pharmacological evaluation sessions with
Dr. A on a consistent basis. Dr. A points to Applicant’s recent marriage as a very close,
loving and supportive relationship, which also contributes positively to his stable mental
health. (AE C) As to prognosis, Dr. A states that Applicant’s prognosis is excellent. She
is not aware of any defect in his judgement, reliability, or trustworthiness related to
depression or anxiety. Applicant does not exhibit any aggressive, antisocial, or
emotionally unstable behavior. She believes there is compelling evidence from his
employer that he is an individual who is functioning at a high level of mental and
emotional fitness. 
Dr. C, Applicant’s expert witness, interviewed Applicant in November and
December 2011. He reviewed Applicant’s medical history, the DOHA documents, the
Government’s 2010 psychological report, and reports from Applicant’s treating
5
psychiatrist from 2002. (AE E) At the hearing, Dr. C. , a seasoned psychiatrist, testified
that Applicant is in very good mental health, and is functioning exceptionally well at his
work. (Tr. 57) He also noted that Applicant has recently married and is happy in his
marriage. His medical opinion is that Applicant has been treated and is in complete
remission. He agreed with the previously stated mental diagnoses by Applicant’s
treating psychiatrist and the government expert witness. (Tr. 59) Dr. C emphasized that
there are problems inherent with labels. He referred to mild, moderate, or severe
conditions. He affirmed that Applicant has been receiving psychiatric treatment for
almost ten years and his condition is in remission and his function level is good at work,
at home, and otherwise. (Tr. 60) Dr. C testified that Applicant’s prognosis is good. He
stated that the illness has been in complete remission for almost nine years, His mental
status is good. (Tr. 60)
When Dr. C interviewed Applicant in November and December 2011, he stated
that Applicant presented as a pleasant and very polite chap. “He spoke logically and [I]
found him to be very candid and direct.” He did note that Applicant always answered
questions with a great deal of detail, maybe more than needed, but referred to his
organized and systematic profile. Dr. C also found Applicant sincere. He acknowledged
that Applicant does not show a great deal of range of emotion. Applicant acknowledged
that as well. 
Concerning Applicant’s insight into his past delusional and paranoid symptoms,
Dr. C stated Applicant has “at least partial insight” into his past behavior. He cited to the
fact that Applicant recognized his anxieties in the mid-90s and he voluntarily sought
help. Dr. C referred to Applicant’s treating physician, Dr. A, who notes that Applicant
has pursued all treatment measures with her since 2002. Applicant takes medication,
and has had therapy sessions. Dr. C again referred to Applicant’s marriage as an
enhancement in Applicant’s life and a stabilizer. As to an ability to safeguard the
nation’s secrets or classified information, Dr. C does not believe it is a great risk.  He
noted that Applicant’s disorder was in the moderate range of delusion in the mid-90s.
He emphasized Applicant’s long history of handling classified information and his
appropriate behavior. Dr. C also praised Applicant for his cooperation and believes if
Applicant became increasingly anxious or suspicious, he would have the tools to reach
out to his physician. (Tr. 63)
Applicant testified that he has always performed well academically. In college, he
received an award for outstanding contribution in leadership to the school and the
community. (Tr. 76) He was also involved in sports, youth groups, and boy scouts. He
describes his family as loving and supportive. He acknowledges that he has always
been “on the quiet side.” He  describes his current mental health as good. He is dealing
with the stress attached to the security clearance investigation. He emphasized that he
has never received a reprimand during his professional career. He also was clear that
he never felt he was a threat to himself or to others. (Tr. 116) in sum, Applicant enjoys
his work, his colleagues, and his clients. He sees his treating psychiatrist on a quarterly
basis. However, if he felt the need, he would go sooner. (Tr. 91)
6
Applicant’s wife testified that she met Applicant in 2004 while playing on a
recreational volleyball team. She knew about his 1995 psychiatric hospitalization before
their marriage. She describes his demeanor as quiet, shy, and kind. He is logical,
patient, reliable, and enjoys sports. They entertain friends. Applicant has an excellent
relationship with his in-laws. (Tr. 142) Applicant and his wife have attended work social
functions and she reports that he seems well liked and respected. They have been
invited to a coworker’s party in the near future.  
Applicant’s employer testified that Applicant has worked for him approximately
four and a half years. Applicant is a valued analyst working on several projects for
clients in the military. On one project, Applicant is the lead on a major program. (Tr.
152) He has daily contact with Applicant. He describes Applicant as a trustworthy
individual who exercises good judgment. He is reliable. Applicant’s manager has
observed him under pressure. He describes Applicant as very steady, very rock solid.
He also communicates well in the business setting. (Tr. 154) Applicant is respected at
work for his attention to detail and his rigor.  Applicant’s job performance is excellent.
He has never received any disciplinary actions. He is aware of the specific issue
concerning Applicant’s mental health, dating back to 1995. He recommends Applicant
for retention of his security clearance. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
      1 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).
      2 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
      3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      4 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
      5 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      6 Id.
7
by Department Counsel. . . .”1 The burden of proof is something less than a
preponderance of evidence.2 The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.3 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”4 “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”5 Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.6 The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline I, Psychological Conditions
AG ¶ 27 expresses the security concern pertaining to psychological conditions:
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist)
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government,
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference
8
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of seeking mental health counseling.
AG ¶ 28 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent,
paranoid, or bizarre behavior;
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and 
(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take
prescribed medication.
Applicant has a diagnosis of delusional disorder, depression, and anxiety
disorder. In 1995, he volunteered to receive hospital observation and treatment for the
anxiety. He believed he was being monitored in the workplace. He has received
psychiatric treatment from that time until the present. AG ¶ ¶ 28(a) and (b) apply.
AG ¶ 29 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the
treatment plan;
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a
duly qualified mental health professional;
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an
individual's previous condition is under control or in remission, and has a
low probability of recurrence or exacerbation;
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one
caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been
resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of emotional
instability; and
(e) there is no indication of a current problem.
9
Applicant has received continuous mental-health treatment since 1996. He has
been compliant with all treatment procedures and medication. In recent reports,
Applicant is described as “in full remission.” His medication has been reduced and he
has been in a stable condition. He sees his treating psychiatrist on a quarterly basis.
Applicant is functioning well at home and in the workplace. He has a supportive and
loving wife. He has a great social and family support. His treating psychiatrist notes that
he is currently showing adaptive behavior and his mood and anxiety symptoms have
improved. He does not have any suicidal or homicidal thoughts. He is currently able to
recognize that his delusions were not based in reality. His prognosis across the three
disorders appears to be good at this time. Applicant has received excellent reviews and
recommendations from his current employer. AG ¶ 28 (a), (b), (c), and (e) apply. I find
that he has mitigated the security concerns under the guideline.  
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 42 years old. He obtained his undergraduate degree, two graduate
degrees, and has worked in a professional capacity since 1995. He is praised by his
current employer. He has worked successfully in handling classified information. He has
held a security clearance since 2004. Applicant married in 2010 and is in a loving,
supportive marriage.
Applicant volunteered for hospital observation and treatment in 1995 after
experiencing unusual anxiety and delusions. He has a diagnosis, which he does not
dispute. He has received treatment since 1996. He has been compliant with his
treatment plan and medications. While it is true that Applicant filed three complaints
against one employer alleging sexual harassment and a hostile work environment, the
10
fact that he did so does not question his current mental health. The events in the 2000s
are noted, but Applicant has refuted them.
 
Applicant’s treating physician and his expert witness, Dr. C, concur that
Applicant’s disorders are in remission. They also concur that the prognosis is good.
Even the government psychologist, Dr. M. Concurred that Applicant has a good
prognosis. 
Applicant has  met his burden in this case. Clearance is granted.
 Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline I: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
