1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-05799
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 29, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
The Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on March 25, 2009.  On April 4, 2011, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline F for the Applicant.  The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of
Defense after September 1, 2006. 
The Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 12, 2011.  He answered
the SOR in writing on May 25, 2011, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge.  Department Counsel issued a Ready to Proceed on August 30, 2011, and I
received the case assignment on September 1, 2011.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing
on November 23, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 12, 2012.
The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 6, which were received without
2
objection.  The Applicant testified on his own behalf, as did his wife.  DOHA received
the transcript of the hearing (TR) on January 20, 2012.  I granted the Applicant’s
requests, one made at his hearing and the other after his hearing, to keep the record
open until January 30, 2012, to submit additional matters.  On January 25, 2011, he
submitted Exhibit (AppX) A, which was received without objection. The record closed on
January 30, 2012.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, the Applicant admitted in part, and denied in part, the
two factual allegations in Subparagraphs 1.a., and 1.b..  He also provided additional
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
1.a.  It is alleged that the Applicant is past due on a satellite TV debt in the
amount of about $70.  This past due debt was an oversight; and has been paid, as
evidenced by the Government’s most recent January 2012 Credit Report (CR).  (TR at
page 44 line 17 to page 45 line 14, and GX 6.)
1.b.  In 2001, the Applicant was injured; and as a result, could not work, which
resulted in a “$40,000 to $50,000" reduction in their family income.  (TR at page 22 line
13 to page 23 line 14.)  Furthermore, the Applicant’s brother had passed away, and his
five children were being cared for by the Applicant’s mother.  (TR at page 23 lines
15~20.)  In 2002, they all joined the Applicant’s household.  (Id.)  Soon thereafter, the
Applicant’s mother-in-law, together with a grandchild she was taking care of, joined the
household.  (TR at page 23 line 20~25.)  When the Applicant’s three children were
added to this equation, there were “12 [people living] in a four-bedroom home.”  (TR at
page 23 line 25 to page 24 line 2.)  This resulted in the extended family purchasing a
larger home.  (TR at page 24 lines 2~8.)  The Applicant’s wife then became unemployed
for three months, which resulted in their getting behind three months on their mortgage
payments.  (TR at page 25 line 18 to page 26 line 15.)
Their mortgage company threatened foreclosure, so the Applicant and his wife
sought the help of a person who represented that he could help them with a loan
modification.  (TR at page 26 line 16 to page 27 line 13.)  They paid this person $1,400
a month for “16 or 18 months,” but he turned out to be a swindler; i.e., he took their
money and did nothing.  (Id.)  As a result, it is alleged that they are past due on their
mortgage in the amount of about $58,000.  They eventually worked out a short sale with
the lender, and their house was sold in April of 2011.  (TR at page 24 line 12 to page 30
line 23, at page 34 line 23 to page 38 line 17, and AppX A at pages 1~3.)  As a result of
the short sale, the Applicant owes nothing to the mortgage holder, as evidenced by the
title company’s Closing Statement.  (AppX A at pages 1~3.)  Furthermore, this debt
does not appear on the Government’s most recent January 2012 CR.  (GX 6.)
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
4
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns, and
that are applicable in this case.  Under Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph
19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise security concerns.
However, the countervailing second and fourth Mitigation Conditions are clearly
applicable here.  The Mitigating Condition found in Subparagraph 20(b) is applicable
where, “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, . . . or a death, . . . ), and the individual acted
responsibly under the circumstances.@  Here, the Applicant’s debts are related to his
and his wife’s reduction of income, and to the untimely death of his brother.  He has
now addressed the two alleged past due debts.  Subparagraph 20(d) is applicable
where, “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts.”  The Applicant owes nothing on the mortgage, and has paid the other
past due debt.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
5
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The record evidence leaves me with no
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising
from his Financial Considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
_________________
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
