  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06931 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sarah M. Kneisel, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Between 1992 and 1995, five state tax warrants were filed against Applicant, 
which totaled approximately $9,500. All the warrants have been paid and released. 
Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under financial considerations. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 5, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
1 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
  On July 6, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
September 30, 2011, I was assigned the case. On October 7, 2011, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing held on October 21, 2011.  
 
 The Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified, as did four witnesses on his behalf, and 
submitted Exhibits A through N, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. On 
November 10, 2011, additional material was submitted. Department Counsel had no 
objection to the material; it was admitted into the record as Exs. O. through T. On 
October 31, 2011, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the state revenue and taxation statutes. (Tr. 14) There being 
no objection the documents were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit I.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in the SOR. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old information technology (IT) specialist who has worked 
for a defense contractor since July 2008. From January 2008 through July 2008, he 
worked as an IT specialist for the Army Corps of Engineers in Afghanistan. (Ex. 3) For 
his work there he received certificates of appreciation and also received the civilian 
combat service pin. (Exs. K, L, M)  
 
Applicant’s co-workers, supervisors, and friends state: Applicant is hard working, 
intelligent, dedicated, compassionate, honest, and trustworthy. He places the value of 
his employer and work assignment at the same level as his personal wants and needs. 
(Exs. C – J, Tr. 32-33, 36, 39, 44, 51-53) Applicant does volunteer work for his church 
and has done church volunteer work in Haiti and Mexico. (Tr. 60)  
 
Applicant owned four businesses including an unsuccessful night club. (Tr. 63, 
67) He regrets ever being involved with the night club. (Tr. 67) He was also president, 
and sole share holder of an electronic service corporation. (Tr. 72) In 1990, he was 
president of a second computer electronics corporation. (Tr. 72) Two or three people 
were involved with these two computer-related corporations that dealt in sales, services, 
and repairing equipment. (Tr. 73, 103) He was also the president of another computer 
electronics corporation, which operated for two or three years until 1992. (Tr. 73, 104) 
None of the businesses are currently operating. He operated the night club for two 
years. (Tr. 99)  
 
 
3 
Approximately 19 years ago, while operating the night club, various taxes were 
not paid, including sales, beverage, tourism, and employee withholding taxes. The club 
was not open daily, but would open periodically as a venue for bands or other events. 
(Tr. 100, 114) The state tax warrants were generated not by returns he had submitted, 
but by assessments made by the state tax commission. (Tr. 68) While the night club 
was in operation, Applicant received numerous letters from the state tax commission. 
(Tr. 77)  
 
In March 1983, the night club, an entertainment business, was incorporated. (Ex. 
N) In November 1991, the past president of the corporation resigned as president, 
secretary, and director of the corporation. (Ex. 7) At the same time, Applicant was 
elected president, secretary, and sole director of the entertainment corporation. All 500 
shares of the corporation were transferred to Applicant. (Tr. 74) In November 1992, 
Applicant applied for a state beer license as president of the corporation.  
 
 In November 2010, five state tax warrants were issued against Applicant. (Ex. 6) 
A $140 tax warrant was issued for withholding tax for July 1991 through December 
1991 against him and an electronics company he owned. The warrant lists tax as “zero” 
with $117 interest and a delinquent penalty of $23. (Ex. 6) The remaining four tax 
warrants related to the club. A $2,004 tax warrant was issued for a mixed beverage tax 
for June 1992 through November 1992 and March 1995. A $2,079 tax warrant was 
issued for unpaid sales tax for March 1992 through November 1992. A $120 tax warrant 
was issued club for unpaid tourism tax for August 1992 through December 1992 and 
January 1993 through December 1993. A $5,059 tax warrant was issued for unpaid 
mixed beverage tax for March 1992 through November 1992. The total amount owed on 
the four night club related tax warrants was approximately $9,300 of which $2,500 was 
actual taxes owed, $5,500 in interest, and $1,300 for delinquent penalty.  
 
 Applicant had numerous talks with the state tax commission trying to establish 
the amount owed with interest on the tax warrants. (Tr. 62) At various times, he 
arranged to make payments and did make payments on the warrants. (Tr. 84) Also his 
income tax refunds would be intercepted to address the warrants. (Tr. 92) In June 2009, 
he hired a CPA firm to investigate the tax warrants and assist him in determining how 
much he owed for taxes on the night club. (Ex. 3, Tr. 63, 82)  
 
Applicant had the opportunity to work for a contractor in Afghanistan with an 
annual salary of approximately $150,000. (Tr. 64, 107) He knew his tax refunds were 
being intercepted by the state tax commission and he chose to increase the amount 
being withheld from his pay for taxes so that the past-due taxes would be paid sooner. 
(Tr. 64) In November 2010, he wrote a large check to the tax commission to address 
past due taxes. He has paid approximately $30,000 on tax warrants. (Tr. 65, 80, 86)  
 
 He was told by the state tax commission that all the past due taxes had been 
satisfied. Under the state law, all delinquent taxes must be paid before one can buy a 
home, which Applicant did. (Tr. 66) Until he received the SOR, he believed that all 
delinquent taxes had been paid. (Tr. 68)  
 
4 
 
 In October 2011, Applicant paid the state tax commission $7,120. (Ex. O) All of 
the tax, interest, and penalties associated with the five tax warrants listed in the SOR 
was resolved. (Ex. P through T) 
 
 As of November 2010, Applicant’s net monthly income was $3,104, his monthly 
expenses were $1,395, and his net monthly remainder was $1,709. (Ex. 3)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
5 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. The state tax commission filed five 
tax warrants against Applicant that totaled approximately $9,500. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
In the early 1990s, Applicant was president of four corporations, which are no 
longer in business. During the two or three years the corporations were required to pay 
employee tax, tourism tax, beverage tax, and sales tax. Some of the taxes were paid, 
some were not. The state tax commission issued five tax warrants against Applicant: 
one in 1992, three in 1994, and one in 1995. The amount of actual tax owed was 
approximately $2,500, but with interest and delinquent penalty the five warrants totaled 
approximately $9,500. The tax owed is not personal income tax, but corporate tax. 
Except for these five warrants listed in the SOR there was no indication Applicant had 
other financial problems. 
 
Over the next 15 or so years, Applicant had contact with the state tax 
commission, made payments on the delinquent taxes, and his tax refunds were 
intercepted to address the tax debt. In June 2009, he hired a CPA firm to investigate the 
tax warrants and assist him in determining the amount of tax owed. In November 2010, 
he wrote a large check to the tax commission, which he believed paid all past due tax 
obligations. This was six months before the SOR was issued. He later learned more tax 
was yet due. In October 2011, he made a $7,120 payment and all the tax warrants were 
released.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were related to a night club and another 
corporation, both of which went out of business in the mid-1990’s. He owed $2,500 in 
various taxes. He is no longer the president of any operating corporations and the 
circumstances related to corporate taxes are unlikely to recur. Since the tax warrants 
have been paid and released, the debts do not cast doubt on the individual's current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
The corporations all went out of business, which was a factor beyond his control. 
He maintained contact with the state tax commission, made payments on the delinquent 
taxes, and has now paid all of the warrants. He has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
In November 2010, Applicant thought he had paid all of the tax warrants. When 
he discovered not all the tax had been paid, he paid them in October 2011. He made a 
 
7 
good-faith effort to repay the overdue tax. There is clear indication that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control. AG & 20 (c) and & 20 (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a hard-working 
employee who volunteers his time with the church and was employed in Afghanistan, 
which earned him the civilian combat service pin. The unpaid corporate taxes were not 
the type of debts that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The only debts in 
question are the five tax warrants, which have now been paid. Applicant was president 
of a number of corporations. He tried unsuccessfully to address these taxes with the 
state tax commission for a number of years and thought all were paid in 2010, six 
months before the SOR was issued.  
 
When he learned corporate taxes were still owed, he paid them. Since they are 
now paid they cannot be a source of improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue 
is not simply whether all his debts are paid – they are – it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2 (a)(1)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
8 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
