  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07118 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
In 2005, Applicant received a punitive letter of reprimand under non-judicial 
punishment while serving in the U.S. Navy. He tendered his resignation in lieu of 
administrative separation and received a general discharge under honorable conditions 
for “misconduct serious offense.” On a 2006 declaration for federal employment and on 
a 2008 security clearance questionnaire, he failed to indicate he had left a job by mutual 
agreement because of specific problems, following misconduct or unsatisfactory 
performance, or that he had been the subject of disciplinary proceedings under the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice including non-judicial punishment. He failed to rebut or 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. He rebutted or mitigated the 
information technology and financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
                                                          
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 24, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E, personal conduct, Guideline M, information technology, and Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
  
 On June 5, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
August 3, 2011, I was assigned the case. On November 23, 2011, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing held on December 6, 2011. The Government offered 
exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 14, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through X, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection.  
 
The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. On 
December 28, 2011, additional material, consisting of six documents, was submitted. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the material; it was admitted into the record as 
Ex. Y through Ex. DD. On December 28, 2011, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR, with explanation. His admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old engineer who has worked for a defense contractor 
since October 2008. (Tr. 131) He served 15 years and 6 months in the U.S. Navy. From 
April 1990 until October 1994, he was an enlisted member in the U.S. Navy, at which 
time he was commissioned in the U.S. Navy. (Ex. 1, 2) In February 2006, Applicant – 
then a lieutenant commander (0-4) – left the U.S. Navy with a general discharge under 
honorable conditions. (Ex. 13) While in the Navy, he was commanding officer of two 
ships, among other duties. (Tr. 116) After leaving the Navy and before his current 
employment, he was employed as a design engineer for the Department of the Army at 
an Army depot. (Ex. 4, Tr. 23)  
 
Applicant’s Fitness Report and Counseling Record, RCS BUPERS 1610-1, dated 
mid-November 2004, rated him as “Greatly Exceeds Standards” and his commander 
gave him his “strongest possible recommendation for early promotion and selection for” 
command. (Exs. 13, BB-1) All of the fitness reports submitted indicated he was 
outstanding. (Ex. DD) He submitted numerous letters for recognition of outstanding 
achievement for work while in the Navy and with his current employer. (Exs. B, I, J, 13) 
 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s co-workers and supervisors state: Applicant is hard working, capable, 
dedicated, compassionate, honest, loyal, selfless, and trustworthy. (Ex, A, B, D, E, F, G, 
and BB-2) Applicant’s job evaluations rate his job performance as “exceptional 
performance.” (Exs. H, 13) Manager’s comments indicated: Applicant has a positive, 
proactive attitude, is very punctual and organized, highly dependable, demonstrates 
excellent work habits, a can-do spirit, and has excellent rapport with customers. (Exs. H, 
13)  
Illegal Drug Use: 
 In September 1990, Applicant completed a Personnel Security Questionnaire, 
DD Form 398 (Ex. 1) in which he indicated he had never used marijuana or any 
narcotic, depressant, stimulant, or hallucinogen. However, from 1983 to April 1987, 
Applicant used marijuana and cocaine with varying frequencies. In February 1991, he 
made a signed, sworn statement stating he was at a fraternity party in 1983 where he 
asserted he tried, but failed, to inhale from a marijuana cigarette and tried to inhale 
cocaine off a mirror. (Ex. 7) He stated he had not been around illegal drugs since that 
party. He asserts his recruiter advised him not to mention his drug use when he joined 
the Navy. (Tr. 55)  
In May 1991, he made a signed, sworn statement stating he had used marijuana 
once at the previously described fraternity party. (Ex. (9) He stated he had used cocaine 
at the party as previously described and last used cocaine at a party in the spring of 
1987. He stated he had used cocaine once or twice a year when offered at parties. (Ex. 
9) In 1988, he was denied employment with the FBI after admitting he had used 
marijuana and cocaine until 1987. Applicant stated in his May 1991 sworn statement:  
I did not reflect this on my PSQ nor did I fully acknowledge it in his 
previous statement because I had originally put the matter behind me and 
was afraid of the consequences of my mistakes. When I made my 
statement, I was surprised and made my comments in a manner to 
attempt to protect myself. I was afraid of the consequences and realized I 
should have been truthful from the start. (Ex. 9)  
On his April 1997 Questionnaire for National Security Positions, Standard Form (SF) 86, 
he indicated he had used cocaine six times and marijuana once between April 1983 and 
June 1987. (Ex. 2) 
 
Financial: 
 
 Applicant stated that while a student from September 1984 to May 1988, he “ran 
up a lot of bills.” (Ex. 8) He stated that even after graduation, he continued to live and 
spend beyond his means, acting in an immature and irresponsible manner. (Ex. 8, Tr. 
46) In January 1990, he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection and approximately 
$23,000 in debt was discharged in May 1990. (Exs. 5, 8) He had $5,400 in assets and 
$21,554 in debts.  
 
4 
 
 
Between 2003 and 2007, Applicant acquired five rental properties. (Tr. 101) He 
purchased the first in 2003. In 2005, he purchased two rental houses, one of which was 
to be rented to his sister-in-law. In 2006, he purchased another rental and in 2007, the 
final residence was purchased. All of the properties went to foreclosure. He asserts he 
has received IRS Form 1099-Cs on all the properties indicating the debts on those 
properties have been cancelled. (Tr. 102, 105) The forgiveness on some of the rental 
property he owned that went to foreclosure was taxable income that resulted in him 
owing additional taxes. (Tr. 107) Between August 2011 and December 2011, he made 
five payments to the IRS of $910 each. (Exs. R, Z) 
 
The lack of tenants, the decline in the real estate market, his financial 
irresponsibility, and his spouse’s spending resulted in financial problems. Although his 
then wife was a licensed massage therapist, a licensed cosmetologist, and a licensed 
surgical technician, she was not working. (Tr. 127-128) In April 2011, they divorced. (Tr. 
111) He was also involved in a multilevel sales plan that sold benefit packages. (Tr. 
128) In the second year of his involvement with the plan, it added an additional ten 
percent to his income. (Tr. 128) He was unemployed from July 2008 through September 
2008. (Ex. 4)  
 
In September 2008, he complied with pre-bankruptcy consumer-credit 
counseling. (Exs. P, 12) In October 2008, he filed for Chapter 13, Wage Earners’ Plan, 
bankruptcy protection listing assets of $819,000 and liabilities of $935,000. (Exs. 13, 14) 
The plan requires $750 monthly payments and continues until 2013. (Exs. 13, 14, Tr. 
109) In November 2009, he started making his required monthly payments to the plan. 
(Tr. 108) As of December 2, 2011, $323 is being deducted every two weeks for “Tax-
Garn.” (Ex. Q) As of that time, the amount of year-to-date garnishment was $7,753.92. 
Applicant asserts this is not a tax garnishment, but is the amount being paid to his 
Chapter 13 Wage Earner’s Plan. (Tr. 35, 48)  
 
Applicant’s 2008 federal tax return shows his adjusted income as an 
approximately $10,500 loss, which included an approximate $18,000 business loss, 
approximately $21,000 in loss on the sale of business property, and an approximate 
$17,000 loss on rental income for two rental homes subtracted from his approximate 
$47,000 salary. (Ex. AA-3) His 2009 federal tax return shows approximately $69,000 in 
adjusted income, which included a $1,000 business loss, approximately $2,500 in loss 
on the sale of business property, and an approximate $10,000 net operating loss. (Ex. 
AA-2) His 2010 federal tax return shows $93,000 in adjusted income, which included 
approximately a $4,000 loss on one rental property. (Ex. AA-1) 
 
Applicant’s child support obligation is and has always been current. (Tr. 49) He 
lives within his means, has no car loan or credit cards, and all of his accounts are in 
good standing. He has recently moved into a smaller, less expensive home. (Tr. 49) He 
has obtained a second part-time job working 15 hours weekly at a university, which 
generated $8,000 each the semester. (Tr. 49, 130) His 2003 BMW is not currently 
 
5 
 
working due to transmission problems. (Tr. 111) He has two motorcycles. His current 
annual income is in the mid $90,000’s. (Tr. 129) 
 
Misconduct: 
 
In March 1992, Applicant was charged with “Annoying Phone Call Obscene 
Threat.” (Ex. 11) He obtained a psychiatric evaluation by the U.S. Navy and asserts the 
evaluation found him fully fit for duty. (Ex. 2) The charges were dismissed after he 
complied with conditions for court diversion. In August 1992, he was arrested for Driving 
Under the Influence (DUI) of Alcohol and was found guilty of the lesser included charge 
of “Wet and Reckless.’ (Ex. 6) He paid a fine and his driver’s license was suspended. 
Neither conduct has been repeated.  
 
In August 2004, he was on an Air Mobility Command flight from Virginia to Italy, 
acting in his capacity as commanding officer during a crew swap deployment, when he 
was intoxicated and contributed to the intoxication of junior enlisted Sailors under his 
command as well as an under-age civilian by supplying alcohol to them. (Ex. 10) 
Approximately 90 members of his crew were on the aircraft along with other 
passengers. (Tr. 117) His crew had completed 32 weeks of training in 19 weeks when 
they were told they would not do the normal state-side deployment, but would be 
deployed to the Gulf for six months. (Tr. 54) They had six weeks notice to get ready and 
transfer to the new ship. (Tr. 114) Applicant was not allowed to attend command 
leadership school prior to taking command nor did his senior enlisted advisor receive 
training. (Ex. Y) On the flight overseas, he allowed the crew to “cut-loose a little bit.” (Tr. 
55) He asserts he did not purchase alcohol for them, but did encourage them to “cut-
loose.” (Tr. 81) He realizes he was in command and realizes his error. He asserts he did 
not know the civilian was under age. (Tr. 55) 
 
Between August 2004 and February 2005, he placed nude photographs of 
himself on a government computer in violation of DoD Directive 500.7-R Section 2-
301B. The conduct resulted in one specification of failure to obey lawful general order 
and dereliction of duty in violation of UCMJ Article 92. The photos were taken by him, 
on his camera, on board ship. Those pictures were transferred with his other 
photographs onto a government computer on board the ship. The photos were placed in 
a file with personal information, tax returns, commanding officer documents, and 
photographs. (Tr. 123) No personal computers are allowed on the ship. (Tr. 52) At that 
time, the Navy allowed portable media to be put on the ship’s unclassified computer 
network. He was unable to view the files to be transferred before they were transferred 
from his camera to the computer. (Tr. 71) He also moved folders from a CD-ROM he 
had burned from his home computer onto the government computer. (Tr. 70) The photo 
were never distributed or sent to anyone. He was unaware of the nude photos being on 
the ships’ computer until being referenced in the Article 15. (Tr. 73).  
 
In February 2005, Applicant was relieved of his command. In April 2005, he 
received non-judicial punishment under Article 15, Uniformed Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ) for: failure to obey a lawful general order and five specifications of dereliction of 
 
6 
 
duty (UCMJ Article 92); a false official statement that had occurred in February 2005 
which involved falsely back-dating his signature and comments on a Command Climate 
Survey (UCMJ Article 107); and for conduct unbecoming an officer (UCMJ Article 133). 
As commanding officer of the ship’s crew at a time the vessel was embarked, he was 
not entitled to demand trial by court-martial in lieu of non-judicial punishment. (Ex. 10, 
Tr. 78)  
 
The specifications for the failure to obey lawful general orders and dereliction of 
duty were: 1. violation of a lawful general order by wrongfully placing nude photographs 
of himself on a government computer; 2. he was derelict in failing to follow proper 
procedure to ensure that his personnel were cleared through transit quarters before 
obtaining hotel reservations; 3. he was derelict in performance of his duties by 
extending the liberty/curfew hours of enlisted members without authority; 4. he failed to 
coordinate his hotel room reservations with the USO as required; and 5. as 
commanding officer, he failed to notify his commander that he intended to remain 
ashore overnight. (Ex. 10) He was found guilty of each charge and specification. (Ex. 
10) In April 2005, he received a punitive letter of reprimand, was removed from any 
promotion list, and was removed from the Commander select list. (Ex. 10) He 
acknowledges that as commanding officer, he was ultimately responsible for all that 
happened. (Tr. 121-122)  
 
It was determined there was sufficient evidence to require Applicant to show 
cause for retention in the Navy. (Ex. 13, Tr. 79) He was given the opportunity to tender 
a qualified resignation in lieu of administrative separation. (Tr. 80) In October 2005, he 
tendered a resignation. His military service ended in February 2006 after having served 
15 years in the Navy. (Tr. 86) His DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or Discharge 
from Active Duty, lists the character of service as “General Under Honorable 
Conditions.” (Ex. 13) The reason for separation lists “Misconduct Serious Offense.”  
 
Falsification: 
In January 2006, Applicant completed a Declaration for Federal Employment, 
Optional Form 306. (Ex. 4) He knew he was resigning from the Navy due to the 
circumstances that formed the basis of the Article 15. (Tr. 88) In response to question 
12, asking if he had been fired from a job, quit after being told he would be fired, left a 
job by mutual agreement because of specific problems, he responded “no.” He asserts 
he was not technically “fired,” but could have gone to a board of inquiry to refute or 
mitigate the non-judicial punishment. (Tr. 60) He acknowledges he should have 
answered “yes” to the question. (Tr. 89)  
 
 In October 2008, he completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). He answered “no” to questions in section 22 of that form related to 
his employment record. The question asked if he had left a job by mutual agreement 
following allegations of misconduct, left a job by mutual agreement following allegations 
of unsatisfactory performance, or left a job under unfavorable circumstances. In section 
23.e he answered “no” when asked if he had any disciplinary proceedings under the 
 
7 
 
UCMJ including non-judicial, Captain’s Mast, etc. He answered “no” to the question in 
section 23.d, which asked if he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offense 
related to alcohol or drugs. He did not list his 1992 wet and reckless charge because he 
considered it a traffic violation and not an alcohol incident. (Tr. 92)  
 
 The SOR alleges under SOR 1.f.(1) that Applicant failed to list the action under 
Article 15, non-judicial punishment, in response to question 13.d in the e-QIP dated 
October 2008, which asked if he had ever been charged with or convicted of any 
alcohol-related offenses. He answered “no” to the question. According to Rules of Court 
Martial 306(c), offenses dealt with under non-judicial punishment are neither a charge 
nor a conviction. As such, his answer to that question was not a falsification.  
 
He acknowledged that in reviewing the 2008 questionnaire, he made “some 
errors . . . in reporting information.” (Tr. 59) He asserts his errors were without malice or 
forethought and that he was not trying to deceive. (Tr. 67)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
8 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or administrative 
termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 provides four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in regard to falsification of Applicant’s security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
9 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
 In February 2005, Applicant was relieved of command and subsequently, in April 
2005, received non-judicial punishment under Article 15 of the UCMJ. In October 2005, 
he tendered a resignation in lieu of administrative separation. In February 2006, he 
received a general discharge from the U.S. Navy for Misconduct Serious Offense. The 
misconduct was sufficiently serious that he separated from the Navy after 15 years 6 
months. Being relieved of command for misconduct and being separated from the U.S. 
Navy for misconduct is not something an individual is likely to forget. With respect to the 
personal conduct concerns involving Applicant’s misconduct while in the U.S. Navy, the 
pertinent disqualifying conditions is AG ¶ 16(d)(3), a pattern of rule violations. The 
 
10 
 
conduct giving rise to the non-judicial punishment occurred more than seven years ago. 
The mitigation in AG ¶ 17(c) applies in that so much time has passed or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I find for him as to SOR 
1.a., 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d.  
 
 However, two-and-a-half years later, when he completed an e-QIP, he failed to 
indicate he had left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct, 
following allegations of unsatisfactory performance, or left for other reasons under 
unfavorable circumstances.  
 
 On that same e-QIP, he failed to indicate he had ever been charged with or 
convicted of any alcohol-related offense. Even though the Article 15 listed the offense of 
being intoxicated, non-judicial punishment under Article 15 does not involve being 
“charged” and is not a “conviction.” He was not required to list the Article 15 in response 
to this question related to alcohol-related offenses. I find for him on SOR 1.f (1). He 
should have listed the 1992 DUI charge that was amended to “Wet and Reckless.” 
However, that offense occurred more than 16 years before he completed his e-QIP and 
he had listed it on previous security questionnaires. The conduct itself occurred almost 
20 years ago and has not been repeated. I find for him on SOR 1.j. I find for him on 
SOR 1.f (2). 
 
 In 1992, almost 20 years ago, he was charged with two counts of making 
annoying phone calls. He was evaluated by the U.S. Navy and found fit for duty. The 
conduct has not been repeated and he listed it on security questionnaires. I find for him 
as to SOR 1.k.  
 
 His 2008 e-QIP also asked him if he had been subject to any disciplinary 
proceedings under the UCMJ to include non-judicial punishment. He provided a false 
answer when the answered “no” to that question. I find against him as to SOR 1.g. 
 
 In January 2008, he completed a FORM 306 on which he indicated he had 
served in the Navy since 1990 and his discharge was in progress, but he had not yet 
received his DD Form 214. He had tendered his resignation and later received a 
general discharge for Misconduct Serious Offense. When an individual submits a 
resignation in lieu of administrative separation they hope to receive an honorable 
discharge, but due to the nature of the procedure, realize a general discharge is 
possible. However, his answer to question 8 was correct and the question did not 
require him to provide information as to his resignation. I find for him as to SOR 1.h. 
 
 That same form asked if he had been fired from any job for any reason or if he 
left a job by mutual agreement because of a specific problem. He provided a false 
answer to that question. Submitting a resignation in lieu of administrative separation and 
being fired are not exactly the same, but sufficiently close for him to answer “yes” to the 
question. And he did leave because of a specific problem. SOR 1.i is resolved against 
Applicant. 
 
11 
 
 In 1989, more than 22 years ago, he was investigated for taking his father’s car 
without permission. I find for him on SOR 1.n due to the passage of time, his conduct 
has not recurred, and is not likely to ever recur. 
 
 From 1983 to April 1987, Applicant used marijuana and cocaine with varying 
frequencies. The use of neither drug was extensive. His cocaine use was once or twice 
a year at parties until the spring of 1987, when he was a junior in college. All use of 
illegal drugs ended in 1987. On his 1997 SF 86, he indicated he had used cocaine six 
times and marijuana once between April 1983 and June 1987. However, on a 1990 
personnel security questionnaire, he indicated he had never used marijuana or any 
narcotic, depressant, stimulant, or hallucinogen. In February 1991, he made a signed, 
sworn statement that he had tried, but failed, to use marijuana and cocaine at a 
fraternity party in 1983. His U.S. Navy recruiter advised him not to mention his drug use 
when he joined the Navy.  
 His falsifications concerning his illegal drug use are more serious because he 
was aware of the government concern about illegal drug use. In 1988, he was denied 
employment with the FBI because of his marijuana and cocaine use. He did not 
acknowledge the full extent of his illegal drug usage on the 1990 form because he had 
“put the matter behind” him and was afraid of the consequences of his mistakes. During 
the 1991 interview, when he made the statement, he was surprised and made his 
comments in an attempt to protect himself.  
 The falsifications concerning his illegal drug use occurred on two forms more 
than 20 years ago. The matter is mitigated by the passage of time. AG ¶ 17(c) applies. I 
find for him as to SOR 1.l, 1.m, and 1.o.  
 All of the personal conduct security concerns have been mitigated with the 
exceptions on his falsification on his 2008 e-QIP (SOR 1.e and g) and on his declaration 
for federal employment form (SOR 1.h). Applicant’s concealment of relevant and 
material information demonstrates a lack of candor required of cleared personnel. 
Applicants are expected to give full and frank answers during the clearance process. 
The Government has an interest in examining all relevant and material adverse 
information about an applicant before making a clearance decision. The Government 
relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a timely fashion, not 
when they perceive disclosure to be prudent or convenient. Further, an applicant’s 
willingness to report adverse information about himself provides some indication of his 
willingness to report inadvertent security violations or other security concerns in the 
future, something the Government relies on to perform damage assessments and limit 
the compromise of classified information.  
 
 Applicant left the U.S. Navy after more than 15 years of service. He knew he had 
resigned in lieu of administrative separation and knew he had received a general 
discharge for misconduct of a serious nature. One cannot forget a resignation under 
such conditions or fail to remember receiving non-judicial punishment. He knew the true 
answers to the questions and answered them falsely. None of the mitigating conditions 
 
12 
 
apply to his answers on these two forms. The personal conduct concerns pertaining to 
Applicant’s falsification of his 2006 declaration and 2008 e-QIP are not mitigated at this 
time.  
 
Guideline M, Misuse of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 articulates the security concerns relating to misuse of information 
technology systems: 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, and 
protection of information.  
 
 Applicant violated DoD directives when he placed nude photographs of himself 
on a government computer. He acknowledged he moved files, photographs, and 
documents from a CD-ROM and from his camera onto the government computer. 
Disqualifying Conditions ¶ 40(e), “unauthorized use of a government or other 
information technology system,” applies.  
 
 Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual=s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one=s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor.  
 
 The photographs were placed on the computer more than six years ago and it is 
unlikely that such an event is likely to recur. AG ¶ 41 (a) applies. AG ¶ 41 (b) does not 
apply, because having nude photo on a government computer is not a minor misuse. 
 
Applicant asserted he was unaware he was placing the photos on the 
government computer. His statements are relevant and material, but not conclusive. 
 
13 
 
Although there was no prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation because he was 
unaware of their existence on the computer until so informed during the non-judicial 
punishment proceedings, I find his actions to be unintentional or inadvertent. As the 
ship’s commanding officer, he was well aware that placing nude photographs of himself 
on a government computer would not be tolerated. It is unlikely he would have 
intentionally transferred such photographs from his camera to the computer. It is more 
likely he would have left the photos on his camera and the transfer was inadvertent and 
unintentional. I find for him regarding the misuse of information technology systems 
considerations security concerns, SOR 2. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He has had to resort to bankruptcy 
protection two times. In October 2008, he filed for Chapter 13, Wage Earners’ Plan, 
bankruptcy protection listing assets of $819,000 and liabilities of $935,000. (Exs. 13, 14) 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG 
¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
Shortly before and after leaving the Navy in 2006, Applicant purchased six real 
estate properties that have now all gone to foreclosure. Additionally, the lack of tenants, 
the decline in the real estate market, and his and his wife’s financial irresponsibility 
resulted in financial problems. In October 2008, he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection and started making his monthly payments to the plan in November 2009. The 
plan continues until October 2013. He is current on his payments and as of December 
 
14 
 
2011, had paid $7,753.92 that year into the plan. Having made his monthly payments 
for two years, I am confident he will continue making the monthly payments for the next 
two years, until the plan is completed.  
 
His current annual income is in the mid $90,000’s. He is not living beyond his 
means. He is current on his child support obligation, has no car loan or credit cards, and 
is in good standing on all of his accounts. He has recently moved into a smaller, less 
expensive home to save money and has obtained a second, part-time job, which 
generated $8,000 last semester. Someone who seeks additional part-time employment 
to address his financial obligations shows an individual acting in a responsible manner.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The mitigating factors in AG ¶ 20(a) have limited applicability. The debts are 
recent and extensive; he had more than $900,000 in liabilities. However, the six real 
estate properties are gone and the factors leading to those foreclosures are unlikely to 
repeat themselves. The debts are being addressed and his current financial status does 
not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to 
circumstances outside his control, I must still consider whether Applicant has since 
acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case 
No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. January 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 
 
15 
 
(App. Bd. November 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); 
ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). 
 
 Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced financial problems based in part on the 
economic factors of the recent housing market. He has recently been divorced along 
with the financial burden associated therewith. He had limited periods of unemployment. 
These are factors beyond his control and he is acting responsibly to have his delinquent 
accounts addressed. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
Good-faith requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he relied on a legally available option 
(such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of the good-faith mitigating condition. 
ISCR case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-
9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001).  
 
While bankruptcy is intended to provide a person with a fresh start financially, it 
does not immunize an applicant's history of financial problems from being considered 
for its security significance. See, e.g., DISCR Case No. 87-1800 (February 14, 1989) at 
p. 3 n.2. His act of filing for bankruptcy did not preclude consideration of his overall 
history of financial problems. His financial problems were caused in part by the real 
estate market and other factors beyond his control. He has acted reasonably in 
addressing his delinquent debt. A Chapter 13 may not qualify for a “good-faith effort to 
repay creditors,” but it is a means to “otherwise resolve debts. Additionally, he has 
received consumer credit financial counseling. AG & 20 (c) and & 20 (d) apply. I find for 
him on the financial considerations security concerns, SOR 3. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
16 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served more than 15 
years of service to the U.S. Navy. His duty performance during the majority of that time 
was nothing less than outstanding. However, his career ended with him being relieved 
of command, receiving non-judicial punishment, and tendering a resignation in lieu of 
administrative separation. The action of placing the photographs on the government 
computer was an unintentional, inadvertent act. He had to resort to bankruptcy 
protection twice, once in 1990 and again in 2008. He is currently half way through his 
wage earners plan, is current on his monthly payments, and the amount of payments he 
had made gives assurance that he will compete the plan. He has no credit card debt, no 
vehicle loans, and is living within his means. 
 
The concern is that he gave false answers on a 2008 e-QIP and declaration for 
federal employment. The e-QIP specifically asked if he had been subject to disciplinary 
actions under the UCMJ specifically to include non-judicial punishment. His answer to 
the question was false. Additionally, each form asked if he had left a job by mutual 
agreement because of a specific problem. Having been relieved of command for 
misconduct, having received non-judicial punishment, and having had to leave the Navy 
after 15 years with a general discharge for misconduct serious offense are so serious 
one cannot have inadvertently overlooked them when completing the questions.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his falsifications. 
He mitigated the security concerns arising from information technology and his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f (1) and (2): For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1i:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.j – 1.o:  For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Information Technology:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
17 
 
   
 Paragraph 3, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b: For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
