 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09634  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement and personal conduct security 
concerns security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an undated 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that was received by Applicant on September 12, 2011. 
The SOR detailed security concerns under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E 
(personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 21, 2011, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel exercised 
the Government’s option to request a hearing before an administrative judge. See 
 
2 
 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. On November 9, 2011, Department Counsel amended the SOR, 
adding an additional allegation under Guideline H. Applicant received the amendment, 
but he did not respond to the amendment. See HE III. The case was assigned to me on 
December 12, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 3, 2012, scheduling 
the hearing for January 12, 2012. See HE II. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant timely submitted documents that were marked AE B through E and admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked HE IV. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 22, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 1992. He seeks to retain a security clearance that he has 
held since the mid 1990s. He was honorably discharged after serving two years in the 
U.S. military in the 1970s. He is a high school graduate. He is married for the second 
time. He has two adult children and two adult stepchildren.1 
  
 Applicant smoked marijuana when he was an adolescent and a young adult. He 
did not smoke marijuana for several decades until mid 2009. Applicant’s mother passed 
away in June 2009. Applicant had a difficult time coping with the loss of his mother. 
Applicant turned to marijuana as a means of dealing with his grief. He estimated that he 
smoked marijuana several times a week. He bought the marijuana from various people 
on the street. Applicant held a security clearance when he was using the marijuana.2 
 
 Applicant’s company had annual drug tests. In February 2010, Applicant tested 
positive on a drug test, indicating the use of marijuana. Applicant attended counseling 
through his company’s employee assistance program. As part of the program, he was 
diagnosed by his therapist as marijuana dependent.3 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in July 2010. He told the investigator that he had smoked 
marijuana for the first time at a party before the drug test. He stated that was the only 
time he had ever used marijuana. On the same day as the interview, Applicant called 
the investigator on the telephone. He told the investigator that he provided false 
information during the interview, and he wanted to provide the correct information. The 
                                                          
 
1 Tr. at 26, 32-34; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-29; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4. 
 
3 Tr. at 21-22, 29-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE A. 
 
 
3 
 
investigator interviewed Applicant again on the same day. Applicant provided accurate 
information, detailing the full extent of his marijuana use.4 
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana or any other illegal drug since the positive drug 
test. He is remorseful for his actions and acknowledges that he exercised poor 
judgment. His completed his counseling program, which consisted of six therapy 
sessions in March and April 2010. Applicant stated that the therapy taught him valuable 
lessons.5 His therapist noted: 
 
[Applicant] was cooperative and open during treatment. He demonstrated 
a sincere desire to improve and sustain positive life changes. He did NOT 
demonstrate at any time behaviors or traits that would be a risk to others. 
He was honest about his mistake. His behaviors did not appear to indicate 
a risk for security or liability at work. (emphasis in original)6 
 
Applicant submitted a number of letters stating that he is honorable and 
trustworthy.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 22-23, 26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 22, 27-32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A. 
 
6 AE A. 
 
7 AE B-E. 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;8  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;  
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; and 
                                                          
8 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
5 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant possessed and smoked marijuana while he held a security clearance. 
He tested positive for marijuana use. Applicant was diagnosed by his therapist at his 
company’s employee assistance program as marijuana dependent. The Appeal Board 
has stated that an administrative judge should take an expansive view of what 
constitutes a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug 
treatment program. See ISCR Case No. 07-00558 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2008). All of the 
above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(c) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Distraught with grief over his mother’s death, Applicant resumed smoking 
marijuana in mid 2009 after decades of abstinence. He held a security clearance at the 
time. He completed counseling and his therapist provided a favorable endorsement for 
his security clearance. He has not used illegal drugs since his positive drug test, and he 
stated that he does not intend to use illegal drugs again. 
 
 There is no bright-line rule for when conduct is recent. Applicant has not used 
illegal drugs in about two years. He appears sincere in his desire to remain drug-free. 
However, he went decades without using illegal drugs, and then smoked marijuana on 
numerous occasions with full knowledge that illegal drug use is inconsistent with holding 
a security clearance. I am unable to conclude that illegal drug use is completely in his 
past. His drug use continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a), 26(b), and 26(c) all have some applicability. Notwithstanding, I 
conclude that security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
6 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information about his drug use to an OPM 
investigator in July 2010. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable. His illegal drug use created a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is also applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant called the investigator on the same day as the interview, told him that 
he provided false information during the interview, and, during another interview on the 
same day, he provided accurate information, detailing the full extent of his marijuana 
use. AG ¶ 17(a) is applicable. 
 
 Applicant has not used illegal drugs since February 2010. He completed therapy, 
and he has corrected any misstatements about his drug use. He has taken positive 
steps to reduce his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. However, I 
am unable to conclude that illegal drug use is completely in his past. His drug use 
continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
17(e) is applicable, and AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) have some applicability. With unresolved 
doubts about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment, I conclude 
that personal conduct security concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his favorable character 
evidence. However, Applicant’s illegal drug use while holding a security clearance, 
knowing it was illegal and counter to DoD policy, raises doubts about his current 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Two years of abstinence is not enough to 
mitigate his incidents of extremely poor judgment, disregard for the law, and violation of 
the trust instilled in him while holding a security clearance.  
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
