 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 10-03924 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 6, 2009, Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On June 3, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 10, 2011. She answered the 
SOR in writing on June 29, 2011, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. DOHA received the request on July 7, 2011. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on October 3, 2011, and I received the case assignment on October 6, 2011. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on November 21, 2011, and I convened the hearing 
 
2 
 
as scheduled on December 7, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A 
through E, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 19, 2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.d to 1.i., and 1.k of the SOR, with explanations. She denied the factual allegations in 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.j, and 1.l of the SOR. She also provided additional information to support 
her request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 54 years old, divorced since 2007, and has two adult children. She 
works for a defense contractor in a logistical position. (Tr. 32, 34; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant has 12 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. They total $35,264. Three 
debts are paid, eight are being paid in a commercial installment payment plan operated 
by a private debt management firm hired by Applicant in October 2009, and one debt is 
disputed and remains unpaid. Applicant pays $967 automatically into the plan monthly. 
The debt management company’s fee is $7,208 to date. Applicant has paid $23,208 to 
date in this plan. (Tr. 19-31, 45, 59-61; Exhibits 2-6, A-E) 
 
 The first delinquent debt is an apartment lease which Applicant had with her 
daughter (Para. 1.a). Applicant got a job overseas and departed in 2008. Her daughter 
remained in the apartment until she decided to leave before the lease expired. This debt 
for $2,672 is in the payment plan and being paid. (Tr. 19; Exhibit 2-6, B) 
 
 The second delinquent debt is owed on a medical procedure for $1,369 (Para. 
1.b). This debt is included in the payment plan and is being paid. (Tr. 20; Exhibits 2-6, 
B)  
 
 The third delinquent debt is for $657 (Para. 1.c). Applicant paid this debt and it is 
resolved. The collector submitted a document showing the debt was paid in June 2011. 
(Tr. 23; Exhibits 2-6, E) 
 
 The fourth delinquent debt is owed on a credit card for $11,000 (Para. 1.d). 
Applicant included it in her debt repayment plan. It is being resolved by the installment 
payment plan. (Tr. 23; Exhibits 2-6, B) 
 
 The fifth delinquent debt is owed on a loan for furniture in 2004 in the amount of 
$7,288 (Para. 1.e). Applicant claims her former husband is responsible for this debt. 
This debt is included in Applicant’s debt repayment plan. (Tr. 23, 24, 39; Exhibits 2-6, B-
D) 
 
 
3 
 
 The sixth delinquent debt is for $1,133 owed on a credit card (Para. 1.f). This 
debt was in the debt repayment plan and is shown as paid by that plan. This debt is 
resolved. (Tr. 25, 26; Exhibits 2-6, B-D) 
 
 The seventh delinquent debt is for $606 owed to a clothing company (Para. 1g). 
This debt is being paid in the installment debt repayment agreement. (Tr. 26; Exhibits 2-
6, B-D) 
 
 The eighth debt is owed on a credit card for $105 (Para. 1.h). Applicant’s ex-
husband used her card to make this purchase and did not pay her for it. It is included in 
her debt repayment plan. (Tr. 26; Exhibits 2-6, B-D) 
 
 The ninth debt is owed for a telephone bill in the amount of $160 (Para. 1.i). This 
debt is included in Applicant’s debt repayment plan. (Tr. 27; Exhibits 2-6, B-D) 
 
 The tenth debt is owed on a credit card for $128 (Para. 1.j). The debt is disputed 
and is not in the debt repayment plan. Applicant claimed she contacted the collection 
agency who stated this debt is paid. It is resolved. (Tr. 29; Exhibits 2-6, B-D) 
 
 The eleventh debt is owed to a timeshare operator. The amount owed is $10,098 
(Para. 1.k). Applicant contends her former husband is responsible for this debt. This 
debt is included in Applicant’s debt repayment plan. (Tr. 30, 39; Exhibits 2-6, B-D) 
 
 The twelfth and final debt listed in the SOR is $48 owed on a bank checking 
account (Para. 1.l). Applicant denied this debt and disputed it. It has not been paid. (Tr. 
30, 31; Exhibits 2-6) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
4 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG  18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
 
5 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $35,264 in delinquent debt from 2004 to the present time 
that was unpaid.  Applicant has 12 delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable:   
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e)  the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue 
 
 Applicant was divorced in 2007. Her former husband incurred several of the 
debts listed in the SOR, including the timeshare debt for $10,098, the $105 credit card 
debt, and the $7,288 furniture loan debt, all of which Applicant contends he should pay 
or contribute to the payment of these debts. Applicant has kept herself employed and 
tried to repay the debts. She hired a debt repayment firm in October 2009 to handle the 
resolution of these debts for her. AG ¶ 20 (b) applies.  
  
Applicant is currently paying her debts in an orderly manner. Therefore, there are 
clear indications from the evidence she presented that the financial problems are under 
control and being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) applies.  
 
Applicant entered a debt repayment plan with a commercial firm. That company 
has paid some debts and is making regular payments on the remaining obligation. 
Three debts are paid. Eight are being paid and a $48 disputed debt remains unpaid.  
AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to repay her delinquent 
debts.  
 
Applicant disputes two debts. Debts #10 and #12 have a reasonable basis for her 
to dispute their amounts and obligation by her to pay them. She contacted the creditor 
in debt #10 and contends she was told the debt was paid. Debt #12 Applicant does not 
 
6 
 
recognize as being owed by her. Applicant showed the actions she took to determine 
the legitimacy of the debt disputes. AG ¶ 20 (e) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was a mature working 
adult when she incurred these 12 delinquent debts. She let them languish unpaid for at 
least four years, during which time she was divorced. She attempted to pay them 
through her own efforts, but realized it would be more reliable if she hired a debt 
repayment firm to handle the debts for her. She pays $967 monthly into the plan and to 
date has paid about $23,208 in the plan. Her debts are being paid. Applicant has 
changed her situation by paying these debts. There does not appear to be any 
possibility of recurrence because Applicant is divorced and her children are adults and 
on their own. Applicant is responsible only for herself. With a majority of the debts being 
paid to date in the plan there is no likelihood of pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept for Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.l:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
