 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01736 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 23, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  
adjudicative guidelines (AG) which were effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 9, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested that his 
case be decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) on October 31, 2011. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on 
November 1, 2011. Applicant received the FORM on November 8, 2011. He had 30 
days to submit a response to the FORM. He did not submit additional matters in 
response to the FORM. On January 13, 2012, the FORM was forwarded to the hearing 
office. The FORM was assigned to me on January 18, 2012.   
  
 
2 
 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the SOR allegations. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed with the company since July 
2004. He has two years of college credit. He is married and has a three-year-old child.   
(Item 5)   
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed 14 delinquent 
accounts, a total approximate balance of $28,071. (Items 6, 7, 8 and 9)  
 
On January 11, 2010, Applicant was interviewed as part of his background 
investigation. He admitted the delinquent accounts which were listed in his credit report. 
Three student loan collection accounts that were listed in the credit report were not 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant stated that his financial problems began after he was 
hired by his current employer in July 2004. He incurred too much credit for what he 
could afford to pay. When he married in 2006, he forgot to put his wife on his medical 
insurance. His wife had to go to the emergency room three times during the first six 
months of their marriage. She also made several visits to medical doctors. Applicant 
added his wife’s name to his medical insurance in early 2007. He estimates that he 
incurred $5,000 in medical bills as a result of not adding his wife to his medical 
insurance. (Item 6) 
 
Applicant relied on overtime to help pay his bills. In July 2007, Applicant’s 
company reduced overtime, which caused Applicant to get further behind in his bills. 
Applicant missed three weeks of work in March 2008 after injuring his wrist. When 
Applicant’s daughter was born in 2008, he had to stay home from work for five weeks to 
assist his wife because it was a complicated birth. His financial situation was further 
complicated when he was injured and placed on restrictive service and long-term 
disability between October 2008 to May 2009. During this time, he received only 65% of 
his income. When he returned to work in May 2009, he injured himself again and was 
placed on short-term disability from May 2009 to August 2009. He received 75% of his 
income. (Item 6)  
 
In May 2009, 15% of his pay was garnished by his student loan servicer. In 
November 2009, the garnishment was reduced to 5%. Before the SOR was issued, 
Applicant’s student loans were resolved. (Item 7; Item 8 at 2-3) 
 
As of January 11, 2010, Applicant’s net monthly income was $2,084. His wife 
does not work. His monthly expenses include: rent $550, food $700, 
electricity/water/garbage/cable $200, cell phone $190, medical bills $75, car insurance 
$73, gas $150-$200, internet $50, fast food $80, medical copayments $100, and 
 
3 
 
 
medications $150. His total monthly expenses were $2,368, leaving a negative monthly 
balance of $288. Applicant’s assets include a $25,000 401K account and $11,000 in 
company stock. (Item 6)  
 
In response to interrogatories, dated July 6, 2011, Applicant indicated that while 
he resolved his student loans, he took no action to resolve the remaining delinquent 
accounts. He provided an updated personal financial statement. His net monthly income 
was $2,461.84. His total monthly expenses were $2,515.13, leaving a negative monthly 
balance of $53.29. (Item 7)  
 
In his response to the SOR, on September 9, 2011, Applicant did not provide 
additional information explaining the status of his delinquent accounts. His delinquent 
debts remain unresolved. (Item 4)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c), 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
incurred numerous delinquent debts. The SOR alleged 14 delinquent accounts, an 
approximate total of $28,071.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment) does not apply. Applicant’s finances became more complicated when he took 
out too much credit after accepting his full-time job with his current employer. Aside 
from his student loans, he has not resolved any of his debts. His financial problems 
continue.   
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, in part. Applicant’s income was 
 
5 
 
 
reduced during the periods that he was on disability. His wife’s medical issues were a 
factor beyond his control. However, he should have been more proactive in enrolling her 
on his insurance plan. Applicant’s financial problems started when he accepted his full-
time job. He overextended himself by purchasing items that he could not afford. While 
there were some factors that were beyond his control, he made poor financial decisions 
even before he encountered these circumstances. I cannot conclude Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
     AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling. It would be helpful for 
him to do so in order to learn how to create a budget and manage his finances more 
effectively. While he paid his student loan accounts, all of the debts alleged in the SOR 
are unresolved. Considering his monthly expenses exceed his monthly income, 
Applicant’s financial situation is unlikely to be resolved in the near future.  
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. None of the debts alleged in the SOR are 
resolved.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has not resolved any of 
the delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, which creates doubts about his judgment, 
reliability, and ability to protect classified information. Mindful of my duty to resolve 
cases where there is doubt in favor of national security, I find Applicant failed to mitigate 
the concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.n:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
  
                                         
     _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
