                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-06218
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
February 29, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire For Investigations Processing
on April 13, 2010.  (Government Exhibit 1.)  On August 9, 2011, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline C for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense after September 1,
2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on September 13, 2011, and he requested
a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on November 30, 2011.  A notice of hearing was issued on December 7,
2011, scheduling the hearing for January 19, 2012.  At the hearing the Government
presented four exhibits, referred to Government Exhibits 1 through 4 that were admitted
without objection.  The Applicant presented four exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s
Exhibits A through D that were admitted without objection.  He also testified on his own
behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on February 2, 2012, to allow
the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional documentation.  The Applicant
2
submitted one exhibit, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A that was
admitted without objection.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on January 27,
2012.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The following Findings of Fact are based on Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the
testimony and the exhibits.  The Applicant is 57 years of age and has completed two
years of community college.  He is employed as a Machinist/Programmer for a defense
contractor.  He seeks a security clearance in connection with his employment in the
defense industry.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has acted in such a
way as to show a preference for another country over the United States.
The Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.
(See Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  He began working for a defense contractor in July
2009.  
  
The Applicant was born in the United Kingdom and is the only child of British
parents.  He moved to the United States in 1982, and has lived here since then.  In
1989, he got his green card.  He became a naturalized citizen of the United States in
2008, and renewed his British passport in 2011.  He is a dual citizen of the United
Kingdom.  He is married with two adult children. 
His parents, who reside in the United Kingdom, are now 86 and 91 years old.
(Tr. p. 40.)  His father’s heath is going downhill rapidly.  The Applicant is expecting to go
back to the United Kingdom this year in regards to his father.  At that point, his mother,
whose health is also not good, may need him to take care of her.  The Applicant may
need to live in the United Kingdom for three to six months should something happen to
one of his parents.  The Applicant will need to work to support himself and therefore he
will need his British citizenship.  He explained that his parents in the United Kingdom
own a house worth about $220,000 that he will ultimately inherit.  Given his
circumstances, the Applicant clearly indicates that he is not willing to renounce his
British citizenship. 
The Applicant has a valid British passport that is good from 2011 to 2021.
(Applicant’s Exhibit D.)  He also has a current United States passport that was issued in
November 2008.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)  The Applicant indicates that he is willing to
give his passport to his security office for safekeeping that will be returned to him upon
termination of his employment.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit
A, indicates that the Applicant’s British passport was received by the Applicant’s
company corporate office on January 31, 2012, and is being stored in the safe and will
be returned to the Applicant upon termination of his employment.          
3
The Applicant has resided in the United States for almost thirty years.  His net
worth in the United States is close to one million dollars.  (Tr. p. 41.)  He has no
financial assets in the United Kingdom.  When he has traveled to the United Kingdom in
the past, he has always used his United States passport.  (Tr. p. 44 - 45.)
As an example to convince the court that he can be trusted, the Applicant stated
that in the 70's, he worked for two and a half years for the Israeli Defense Department
and has never told anyone what he did on that job.  (Tr. p. 43.)      
A letter dated January 18, 2012, from the Applicant’s superintendent whom he
reports to on a daily basis indicates that the Applicant’s work performance is flawless,
highly specialized and valuable to the company.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  
POLICIES
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  Accordingly, the
Department of Defense, in Enclosure 2 of the 1992 Directive sets forth policy factors
and conditions that could raise or mitigate a security concern, which must be given
binding consideration in making security clearance determinations.  These factors
should be followed in every case according to the pertinent criterion.  However, the
conditions are neither automatically determinative of the decision in any case, nor can
they supersede the Administrative Judge’s reliance on her own common sense.
Because each security clearance case presents its own unique facts and
circumstances, it cannot be assumed that these factors exhaust the realm of human
experience, or apply equally in every  case.  Based on the Findings of Fact set forth
above, the factors most applicable to the evaluation of this case are:
Foreign Preference
9.  The Concern.  When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for
a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
10.(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member; This
includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport.  
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
11(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security
authority, or otherwise invalidated.
4
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
 c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which the participation was voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
eligible for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence, which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant
concerned.”
The Government must make out a case under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference)
that establishes doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  While
a rational connection, or nexus, must be shown between Applicant's conduct and his
5
ability to effectively safeguard classified information, with respect to sufficiency of proof
of a rational connection, objective or direct evidence is not required.
Then, the Applicant must remove that doubt with substantial evidence in
refutation, explanation, mitigation or extenuation, which demonstrates that the situation
has been resolved and that the Applicant presently qualifies for a security clearance.
An individual who has foreign connections may be prone to provide information
or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.  The
Government must be able to place a high degree of confidence in a security clearance
holder to abide by all security rules and regulations, at all times and in all places.
CONCLUSION
Having considered the evidence of record in light of the appropriate legal
standards and factors, and having assessed the Applicant's credibility based on the
record, this Administrative Judge concludes that the Government has established its
case as to all allegations in the SOR.   
Under Foreign Preference, Disqualifying Condition 10.(a) exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the
foreign citizenship of a family member.  This includes but is not limited to: (1)
possession of a current foreign passport applies.  However, Mitigating Conditions 11(b)
the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship, and 11(e) the
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or
otherwise invalidated also applies.
The evidence shows that the Applicant exercised dual citizenship after becoming
a citizen of the United States by possessing a valid passport from the United Kingdom.
When he learned of the Government’s concern, he turned over his foreign passport to
his corporate office that will be returned to him only upon termination of his employment.
He credibly testified that he would never jeopardize the national security of the United
States under any circumstances.  The Applicant has lived in the United States for
almost thirty years.  He is married and has two adult children.  His net worth in the
United States is about one million dollars.  He has no financial assets in the United
Kingdom at this time.  When he does inherit his parent’s house its value is far less than
his assets in the United States.  He has demonstrated that there is no situation that
could potentially cause the Applicant to become subject to foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion against the interests of the United
States.  Therefore, there is no possibility of foreign influence that exists that could
create the potential for conduct resulting in the compromise of classified information.  I
find that the Applicant is not vulnerable to foreign preference.  Accordingly, I find for the
Applicant under Guideline C (Foreign Preference).
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is a 57 year old
Machinist/Programmer who has lived the American Dream.  He is an immigrant from
another country who has made the United States his own.  Under the particular facts of
6
this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgment, trustworthiness,
reliability, candor, a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may properly safeguard classified information.
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is sufficiently trustworthy, and that he
clearly meets the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.
Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under Guideline C (Foreign Preference).     
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal Findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
Subpara. 1.a.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.b.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.c.: For the Applicant
Subpara. 1.d.: For the Applicant
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
 
7
