KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: There is no presumption of error by a Judge, and a party’s ability to argument for a
different interpretation of the evidence is not sufficient to demonstrate error.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASE NO: 10-00354.a1
DATE: 02/09/2012
DATE: February 9, 2012
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for a Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 10-00354
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant eligibility
for a public trust position.  On December 9, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
November 30, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean declined to grant
1The Judge’s adverse decision is based solely on findings and conclusions under Guideline F.  The Judge found
in Applicant’s favor regarding the allegations under Guideline E.  Those favorable findings and conclusions are not at
issue on appeal.
 
Applicant eligibility for a public trust position.1  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse trustworthiness
determination is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board
affirms the Judge’s unfavorable trustworthiness determination. 
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant is 40 years old and is a high school
graduate.  He is separated from his wife and has four teenage children.  Two of the children are out
of the house and on their own.  Applicant provides support for the other children and helps support
two grandchildren.  Depending on the amount of overtime, Applicant’s discretionary income each
month runs between $500 and $1,400.  A credit report dated June 2010 shows 20 unpaid medical
debts, an unpaid phone debt, and two debts remaining from car repossessions.  The face amount of
the 20 medical debts is approximately $30,000, but some of the debts are duplicates.  Two car
repossessions resulted from delinquencies that arose when the amount of overtime he was earning
was cut.  Since the repossessions, Applicant has not inquired about the amount of the debt or made
any payments or arrangements to pay the loans.  Applicant acknowledges the telephone debt, but
believes the debt has been paid.  However, he has not made any inquiries of the creditor to determine
if it has been paid.   Applicant intends to pay his medical debts, but he has not made any payments
on the debts.  His daughter recently broke her back and paying the bills not covered by insurance
has kept him from paying his past-due medical bills.  Applicant has not checked with the medical
providers to determine the amount of debt he may owe.  A review of the debts show that some of
the delinquent debts were incurred in the last few years before the SOR was issued.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant’s delinquent debts, as established
by a credit report and admitted by Applicant are a security concern.  The delinquent debts show a
history of not meeting financial obligations because of an inability, and not an unwillingness, to
satisfy debt.  Applicant did not have health insurance to cover his family medical expenses when
he incurred the majority of the delinquent medical debts.  The medical debts are ongoing since they
have not been paid.  The medical debts were incurred by conditions beyond his control since he did
not have medical insurance to cover his medical expenses.  He now has adequate health insurance
so medical debts are unlikely to recur.  However, he has not mitigated the public trust concerns since
he has not adequately inquired about or made any payments on the debts.  He has not acted
responsibly under the circumstances.  Applicant was making good pay because of overtime when
he contracted for the purchase of two cars.  He overextended himself because he was receiving
overtime pay.  Overtime is not a guaranteed salary and can provide a false impression of income.
The conditions leading to the car loans were not beyond his control.  Also, he has not acted
reasonably or responsibly toward his remaining delinquent telephone debt.  He has not made any
payments toward the debts and has not inquired of the lenders or providers of services of the amount
of the debts and means to pay them.  These failures do not show good faith.  Applicant has not
shown a “meaningful track record” of debt payment since he is not paying his debts and there is no
systematic method of debt payment.  His management of his past financial obligations does not show
reasonableness, prudence, and a good-faith effort to repay his creditors and resolve debts.  He has
not mitigated public trust concerns based on financial considerations.
Applicant argues that he has been doing his best to rectify his outstanding indebtedness,
including obtaining health insurance and paying diligently on the bills resulting from his daughter’s
accident.  He states that he has refrained from taking on new debt, has taken a course on financial
management, and is up to date on his current bills.  Applicant denies that he has walked away from
his debts, and that he enjoys a reputation for hard work, honesty, reliability and trustworthiness.  He
asserts that under the whole person concept, the financial misfortunes he has suffered should not
dictate against his eligibility for a position of trust.   Applicant has failed to establish error on the
part of the Judge. 
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 09-
04275 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 18, 2011).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 10-01100 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 13, 2011).
There is no presumption of error below.  The Judge’s findings and conclusions regarding
Applicant’s financial difficulties and the absence of mitigation sufficient to overcome the
Government’s concerns provide a reasonable basis for his ultimate unfavorable trustworthiness
determination.  
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ADP Case No. 10-02010 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).
Order
The decision of the Judge declining to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position
is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                   
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
