 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 10-08310
)
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his use of illegal drugs, a
deliberate falsification of his security clearance application, and other adverse personal
conduct. His request for a security clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
After reviewing the results of Applicant’s background investigation, adjudicators
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a
preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to1
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. On June 10, 2011, DOHA issued
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
 His request is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I.3
 Department Counsel provided an index of its documents. It is contained in “Government’s Proposed Exhibits”4
and included in the record as Hx. II.
2
addressed in the adjudicative guideline (AG)  for drug involvement (Guideline H) and2
personal conduct (Guideline E).
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.
However, on September 30, 2011, Applicant requested a hearing.  The case was3
assigned to me on October 24, 2011. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on
November 3, 2011, I convened a hearing in this matter on December 1, 2011. The
parties appeared as scheduled. The Government presented nine exhibits, which were
admitted without objection as Government’s Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 9.  Applicant testified and4
presented two witnesses. DOHA received a transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on December
9, 2011. I left the record open to receive additional relevant information from the
Applicant. The record closed on December 16, 2011, when I received Applicant’s timely
post-hearing submission. It is included in the record, without objection, as Applicant’s
Exhibit (Ax.) A.
Findings of Fact
The Government alleged under Guideline H that Applicant used marijuana from
May 2006 until February 2010 (SOR 1.a); that he has purchased marijuana (SOR 1.b);
that he used marijuana after being granted a security clearance in 2007 (SOR 1.c); that
he was arrested in 2008 for possession of marijuana, drug paraphernalia, and obtaining
alcohol with a false driver’s license (SOR 1.d); and that in February 2010, he tested
positive for marijuana in a workplace drug screening, and completed a drug
rehabilitation program as a condition of keeping his job (SOR 1.e).
The Government also alleged under Guideline E that Applicant deliberately made
a false statement to the Government when he answered “no” to question 24.a (Your
Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years,
whichever, is shorter, have you illegally used a controlled substance, for example,
marijuana...) of an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (eQIP) he
submitted on November 8, 2006 (SOR 2.a); and that in March 2007, he was charged
with speeding and possession of a fake identification card (SOR 2.b). The Government
also cross-alleged the illegal drug involvement addressed in SOR 1.a and 1.d (SOR
2.c).
Applicant admitted all of the allegations. His admissions are incorporated in my
findings of fact. Having reviewed the response to the SOR, the transcript, and exhibits, I
make the following additional findings of fact.
3
Applicant is 24 years old and employed by a defense contractor in a position that
requires a security clearance. His work site is a private shipyard engaged in the
construction, maintenance and overhaul of nuclear-powered U.S. Navy aircraft carriers
and submarines. Applicant has worked for his current employer since March 2006,
when he was 18 years old. His secret-level security clearance was granted after a
background investigation completed in February 2007. Applicant grew up in a different
state than the one in which he now lives and works. A high school graduate with a 3.5
grade point average, Applicant was recruited by his employer to work and study in the
company’s apprentice program, and to play on the company’s industrial league football
team. His participation in the apprentice program also allowed him to pursue an
associate’s degree in mechanical engineering technology as part of his daily work
schedule. He recently completed those studies, and he has been accepted to a nearby
four-year university to complete his bachelor’s degree in that field.(Gx. 1; Gx. 9; Tr. 6, 9,
32 - 33, 41)
Applicant started using marijuana in May 2006. He estimates he had used the
drug about two or three times before he submitted his eQIP in November 2006.
Applicant knew after he submitted the eQIP that his answer to question 24.a was false
and he should correct it. But he was afraid that doing so would cost him his job. (Gx. 7;
Tr. 34) 
The frequency of Applicant’s marijuana use varied from little or no use during
football season (August to December) to regular use on weekends the rest of the year.
Applicant averred that when he moved to the area where he works, he rented an
apartment near the shipyard in an area where, he later learned, drug use was
commonplace. He did not know anyone in the area and began using marijuana with
some of his neighbors. He later started buying small amounts for personal use, and
spent an average of $30 weekly for his marijuana. Applicant moved to a different
apartment in January 2007, but most of his new neighbors were college students, and
marijuana use was commonplace there as well. (Gx. 7)
On March 9, 2007, Applicant was stopped for speeding. During the traffic stop, in
addition to his regular driver’s license, he was found to have a false identification card
he had obtained to buy alcohol (he was 19 years old at the time). Applicant was issued
a summons and later appeared in court as required. Although he pleaded guilty, both
charges were dismissed because the police officer did not appear in court. (Gx. 2; Gx.
3; Gx. 7)
On May 24, 2008, Applicant was issued a citation charging him with possession
of less than ½ ounce of marijuana, possession of drug paraphernalia, and obtaining
alcohol as a minor through false pretenses (he was still a minor and had obtained
another fake identification card). All three misdemeanor charges were dismissed after
Applicant paid a fine and completed community service. (Gx. 4; Gx. 7; Tr. 37 - 38)
In February 2010, a worker at the shipyard was caught using marijuana on the
job. A subsequent investigation resulted in Applicant being implicated as one of
numerous other employees who also used illegal drugs, but not necessarily in the
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive. 6.3.6
4
workplace. Applicant was ordered to submit to a urine test, the results of which were
positive for marijuana. Applicant was told that if he completed a six-week intensive
outpatient drug treatment and counseling program, he would be able to keep his job.
Additionally, Applicant lost his advanced standing in the apprentice program and the
allowances for his college studies, was kicked off the football team, and lost about $4
from his hourly wage. Nonetheless, he acknowledged that he was “lucky” to still have a
job. (Gx. 7) 
Applicant successfully completed the outpatient treatment in April 2010. The
licensed clinical social worker (LCSW) who issued his discharge summary did not
provide a clinical diagnosis about his drug use, but listed Applicant’s prognosis as
“guarded” and recommended continued participation in a 12-step program. Applicant
has been randomly tested at least three times since completing the program. All of the
drug tests were negative. He is no longer subject to testing in connection with the prior
drug use and treatment. (Gx. 5; Gx. 6; Gx. 7; Tr. 31 - 32, 44 - 46)
Applicant has an excellent reputation at work. This is likely one of the reasons he
was retained after he tested positive for marijuana. His coworkers and friends hold him
in high regard for his honesty, hard work, professionalism and reliability. He has no
record of mishandling sensitive information, and his coworkers describe him as a
stickler for adhering to proper procedures, both in their engineering procedures and in
the handling and storage of sensitive information. (Tr. 48 - 65) 
Applicant now lives in an area where drug use is uncommon. He is in a
committed relationship with a woman who is a lawyer and does not tolerate drug use.
Applicant occupies his free time with his girlfriend and other friends who share his
interest in motorcycles, working on cars, and various outdoor sports. Applicant has
regained the pay and apprentice program status he lost after his positive drug test. He
has excelled in the apprentice program, and his performance has shortened by two
months the time it will take to complete the program. As of the hearing, he had
completed his associate’s degree studies on his own time, and he expected to begin his
bachelor’s degree studies in the spring 2012 semester. (Ax. A; Tr. 29 - 35, 36, 40)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies6
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
5
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.8
Analysis
Drug Involvement
The Government presented sufficient information to show that Applicant illegally
used marijuana with varying frequency between May 2006 and February 2010, when he
tested positive for the drug in a workplace urinalysis. While there is no indication that he
used drugs in the workplace, after February 2007 he did so while holding a security
clearance. Applicant also bought and possessed small amounts of marijuana for his
personal use, and he was charged with possession of less than ½ oz. of marijuana and
possession of drug paraphernalia in 2008.  Applicant admitted these facts, which raise a
security concern addressed in AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
6
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that
deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, the Government established applicability of the disqualifying
conditions listed at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse...); AG ¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or
possession of drug paraphernalia); and AG ¶ 25(g) (any illegal drug use after being
granted a security clearance).
By contrast, Applicant’s changed residence, his committed relationship, and the
positive information about his workplace performance and academic pursuits, support
application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 26(a):
the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Applicant’s abstinence since February 2008, his completion of an outpatient drug
treatment and counseling program, and the general improvement of his professional
and personal circumstances, all support application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶
26(b):
a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
dissociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation.
When compared to his period of drug use between ages 19 and 23, Applicant’s non-use
of marijuana for the 22 months from February 2010 through at least the hearing date,
together with his changed circumstances, constitutes a sufficient period of abstinence.
Finally, Applicant completed a drug treatment and counseling program. The
LCSW did not provide a diagnosis of abuse or addiction; however the LCSW also
provided a “guarded” prognosis with a recommendation of continued 12-step program
participation. Applicant did not establish that he continued with a 12-step program, but
the record supports a conclusion that he has remained drug-free since February 2010.
7
Accordingly, although Applicant’s completion of the program warrants some applicability
of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 26(d) (satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug
treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical
professional), that benefit is limited by the prognosis. 
Based on all of the foregoing, I conclude Applicant presented sufficient
information to show that he is not likely to use illegal drugs again. He has mitigated the
security concerns about his drug involvement.
Personal Conduct
The Government presented sufficient information to show that Applicant
deliberately omitted relevant and material information from his November 2006 eQIP.
The Government also established that Applicant was cited for speeding and for
possession of a fake identification card in March 2007, as alleged in SOR 2.b. However,
available information showed that the charges were dismissed and that Applicant did
not, as alleged, have to pay a fine or perform community service. The Government
information also established the factual allegations of drug use, alleged in SOR 1.a and
1.d, and cross-alleged under this guideline at SOR 2.c. 
The security concern about Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness is
expressed at AG ¶ 15 as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, information about Applicant’s adverse personal conduct supports
application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a):
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Applicant knew his answer to eQIP question 24.a was false because he had already
used marijuana a few times before completing the questionnaire. 
This conduct can be mitigated by establishing one or more of the following
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17:
8
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the
facts; 
AG ¶ 17(b): the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate
advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply, because at the time he
submitted the eQIP, Applicant knew  his answer was false and that he should correct it.
However, he did not correct his answer out for fear of losing a job he had just started.
Further, the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply for these reasons, and
because Applicant did not establish he was advised by anyone regarding his eQIP
answers. 
Applicant’s falsification is mitigated through application of AG ¶ 17(c). Although
his conduct in this regard was not minor (knowingly making a false statement to the
Government is fundamentally at odds with the industrial security program and is a
potential violation of federal law), it was isolated and is not likely to recur. Applicant’s
eQIP was submitted more than five years ago, when he was 19 years old. His
straightforward testimony and acceptance of responsibility for his actions, his record of
performance in the apprenticeship program, his change of personal circumstances, and
the strong recommendations of his coworkers support a conclusion that the false
statement made for fear of losing his job is no longer a reliable indicator of his judgment
and reliability.
I also conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) applies to Applicant’s 2007 citation for speeding
and possession of a fake identification card, as well. Applicant admitted to this conduct
even though the charges were dismissed. The event occurred four years ago, when he
was about 20 years old, and there is no indication of similar conduct since then. Indeed,
even though his possession of a fake identification was illegal, he is now of legal age to
consume alcohol and has no incentive to engage in such conduct again. Overall, this
conduct was minor, infrequent, and not likely to recur.  
As to Applicant’s use of illegal drugs, in light of my conclusions under Guideline
H, above, available information requires consideration of the disqualifying condition at
AG ¶ 16(c):
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
9
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.
The record also supports application of AG ¶ 16(e):
personal conduct or concealment of information about one's conduct, that
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1)
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal,
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country,
engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or
other group. 
Applicant falsified his eQIP in November 2006 because he was concerned that his drug
use, if known, would cost him his job. He then continued that conduct, while holding a
security clearance, until February 2010, when he tested positive for marijuana.
Applicant cannot reasonably argue he was unaware that his drug-related personal
conduct could affect his professional standing.
By contrast, the record supports application of the following mitigating conditions:
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
AG ¶ 17(f): association with persons involved in criminal activities has
ceased or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply
with rules and regulations.
Applicant has admitted to his falsification and his use of marijuana since 2006. These
facts are known to his colleagues and are not likely viable as a basis for manipulation.
He has completed counseling for his drug use and accepted responsibility for all of his
adverse conduct since 2006. Further, his personal and professional circumstances have
changed significantly. He no longer lives near or associates with illegal drug users. He
has demonstrated, through his outpatient treatment and subsequent negative
urinalyses, that he will not use illegal drugs in the future. Overall, Applicant’s adverse
personal conduct is not likely to recur and no longer reflects poorly on his judgment and
reliability. I conclude, based on all of the available information bearing on Applicant’s
10
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness, that the security concerns about Applicant’s
personal conduct are mitigated. 
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and H. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). I further note that
Applicant is 24 years old. He has been employed by the same company since he was
18 years old. He has steadily sought to improve his circumstances throughout his time
with his employer. He no longer lives near or associates with drug users. He has earned
his associate’s degree, and recently matriculated at a nearby university to complete his
bachelor of science degree. He now has a more stable lifestyle centered around his
relationship and his friends who do not use illegal drugs. After losing pay and benefits,
such as his advanced apprentice status and academic allowances, Applicant has
regained his previous standing. His performance in his company’s apprentice program
has been exemplary. Finally, Applicant has acted responsibly regarding procedures to
protect sensitive information, as well as insisting that he and his coworkers adhere to
proper procedures on the job. 
My assessment of his demeanor and the straightforward way he has responded
to the Government’s information leads me to conclude that Applicant understands the
severity of his past conduct. Further, he has matured sufficiently that he will not engage
in such conduct again. I am also confident he will be candid with the Government at all
times about information required to protect classified information. A fair and
commonsense assessment of all available information about Applicant’s past and
current circumstances shows that he has satisfactorily addressed the doubts about his
ability to protect the Government’s interests as his own.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c: For Applicant
11
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance is
granted.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
